




















































Hansard: December 06, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 22A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6369 

 December 6, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to inform members that Mr. Speaker is not 

present to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly and our guests, some guests that have 

joined us as a result of an announcement that was made this 

morning here in the Legislative Assembly Building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll begin with Miranda Biletski who’s seated on 

the floor of the Assembly today. Miranda was born in Regina. 

She’s an outstanding rugby player on the Canadian Wheelchair 

Rugby team and a Paralympic hopeful for 2012. She has proven 

herself time and time again by meeting challenges that we can 

only hope that we could meet, each of us in this Assembly, with 

as much courage and effort and grace as she has met. 

 

This year Miranda placed fifth at the World Championships in 

Richmond, BC [British Columbia], second at the Canada Cup in 

Montreal, the Four Nations Cup in Sydney, Australia, and the 

American Zonals in Buenos Aires, Argentina. 

 

In between training and competitions, she’s squeezing in some 

business courses at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s 

a pleasure to have her in her Assembly today. 

 

Joining Miranda today is another athlete of note from our 

province. Seated in your gallery is Saskatchewan-born gold 

medallist from the Vancouver Olympics, Lucas Makowsky. Mr. 

Speaker, Lucas was also born and raised here in Regina. He was 

on skates by the age of 6 years old. He’s 23 years old now and 

has an Olympic gold medal, as we are all very aware in terms of 

his efforts and the efforts of the team pursuit, Canadian team 

from the Vancouver Olympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lucas and Miranda are joined by some friends 

that are here today. They’re also joined by officials with Sask 

Sport. We have Audra Young that’s here, the volunteer 

president; Rob Kennedy who’s the manager. And then also in 

terms of the high performance development, well Rob does the 

high performance development for Sask Sport. And Michelle 

Dezell is also here. She’s the program coordinator for the 

accessibility program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very quickly I want to thank everyone who’s 

joined us today. They helped us launch a sports participation 

initiative to support our athletes, carded, and developmental 

athletes, carded, to help support those who have disabilities that 

want to get involved to a greater extent in sport and recreation, 

and also to help at-risk youth through groups like Take the Lead 

and KidSport. 

Mr. Speaker, we ask all members of the Assembly to join with 

us in welcoming Miranda and Lucas and all those who’ve 

gathered to mark this important day in the support for amateur 

sport and athletes right across this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, it gives me great pleasure to welcome 

. . . We’ve got Miranda and Lucas, Audra, Rob, and Michelle 

here to their Legislative Assembly. I know the athletes, Miranda 

and Lucas, we live vicariously through you as Saskatchewan 

residents. And we couldn’t be more proud of you when you are 

on the world stage and show what it is to be a Saskatchewanian. 

So thank you very much, and on behalf of the official 

opposition, welcome. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly today a number of livestock 

producers from northeastern Saskatchewan who’ve had a very 

trying year, to say the least, out there with the flooding that’s 

gone on right across the province. 

 

I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to meet with Mark van 

Haastert and Dennis Brown, representatives of the group here. 

And we had a very good meeting, Mr. Speaker, and some very 

good recommendations and suggestions of how we may be able 

to alter some of the programming that we’ve come out with or 

maybe programming into the future to help deal with the 

situation that they’re in. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome 

them here today to their legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Minister of Agriculture in welcoming a number of livestock 

producers’ families who are here today. As the minister 

indicates, a very trying year in the northeast part of the 

province, but in many areas around the province, where beef 

producers are struggling to keep their cattle herd together. We 

want to say that we understand and want to do what we can here 

in the Legislative Assembly to try to protect families and also to 

protect the very important industry, the cattle production in this 

province. So I welcome you here today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature someone that obviously needs little introduction 

that’s seated behind the bar, is a former farmer and a former 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], former Deputy 



6370 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

Speaker of this very legislature, former member from Indian 

Head — pardon me, Last Mountain-Touchwood; a Freudian 

slip there — a very good friend of mine that I’m always 

delighted when I can bump into Dale and Georgina Flavel. 

Georgina is not here today, but Dale Flavel is seated behind the 

bar. I invite all colleagues to join me in welcoming Dale to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming Dale Flavel to the 

legislature. We had a chance to visit very briefly last week at 

the CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] dinner. 

It’s always a pleasure to exchange comments and catch up on 

the goings-on in each of our lives. And I would ask all members 

to join with me in welcoming Dale to his legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the House my granddaughter, Emma Bradley, 

who is sitting up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Emma, whenever 

she travels out, she always takes support staff with her. So 

today she brought her grandmother — my wife, Carol — to 

offer that support. 

 

And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the members are all straining to 

get a good glimpse at Emma, but I can assure all the members 

that she is the prettiest and the smartest 5-year-old they’ll ever 

meet. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to offer Emma and Carol 

a warm welcome. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the deterioration of our highways. This 

particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is on Highway 35, which runs 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, which is a gravel 

road which is presenting both a safety hazard as well as a health 

hazard. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to pave 7 kilometres of 

Highway 35 through the community of Pelican Narrows 

as committed to on August 24th, 2007. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Pelican Narrows, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m presenting a petition 

today on behalf of residents who want to bring to our attention 

that the Saskatchewan Seniors Association has approximately 

180 senior centres throughout the province with the vast 

majority of them located in rural Saskatchewan; and that these 

centres provide much-needed recreation and social activities as 

well as important health clinics and workshops which 

contribute to an enhanced quality of life for many for many of 

the seniors who use them; and that due to the skyrocketing costs 

of utilities, insurance, etc., approximately one-quarter of these 

centres will close within the next few months. The closure of 

these centres will lead to the deteriorating mental and physical 

health of seniors, which will lead to an additional stress on 

long-term care facilities and hospitals. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And I present, there are 60 signatures from communities like 

Allan, Grandora, Big River, and Warman. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know in Saskatchewan the income gap between the rich and the 

poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people signing this petition come 

from the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition calling on the provincial government to 

expand hospice and palliative care here in the Saskatchewan. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system, including residential 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6371 

hospices, would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition from the residents of Furdale who 

are seeking a permanent solution to their situation and not just 

some off-setting of dates, Mr. Speaker. A government ministry 

has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies of water for domestic 

use to Furdale customers. The same government ministry has 

directed that customers may no longer treat non-potable water 

using methods approved by Sask Heath. 

 

These Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as 

for livestock and irrigation lines. The alternative water supply 

that’s been referred to by the government ministry is a private 

operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost 

with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

North Battleford, Furdale, Saskatoon, and Dundurn. I so 

present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They 

reference the two consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of 

dollars of debt growth under this government — $4.2 billion, 

Mr. Speaker, 44 per cent over just the . . . 55 per cent over just 

the next four years, Mr. Speaker, all at a time we’re at record 

highs in revenues. And of course this kind of mismanagement 

comes at a cost to Saskatchewan people, communities, and 

businesses as it relates to our power bills, our health care, our 

education, and cuts to agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners here today and these petitions are signed by 

concerned citizens of Carnduff, Carlyle, and Lampman. I so 

submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Estevan. 

 

National Day of Remembrance 

and Action on Violence Against Women 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, today marks a solemn occasion. On this day 21 years 

ago, 14 women were murdered on the campus of Montreal’s 

École Polytechnique. This was an act of terrorism and an 

extreme form of violence against women. This event was 

absolutely horrifying to the nation due to the fact that 

Canadians pride themselves on being a peaceful nation as well 

as a country that recognizes gender equality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this day gives us an opportunity for Canadians to 

reflect on the phenomenon of violence against women in our 

society. But first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, our thoughts 

should be with the families and friends of the victims whose 

sudden and shocking death rendered a profound loss for all 

Canadians. Today and together we can say no to violence and 

collectively empower women with the strength and courage to 

change their lives. I sincerely hope that those still carrying the 

burden of this day find the hope and strength to conquer their 

grief. 

 

On this day, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

taking a moment to think about Canadian women who have 

been affected by violence, especially those taken from their 

loved ones way too early that day in Montreal. Thank you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, today I stand in my place to 

remember a very tragic day in Canadian history — December 

6th, the day on which we remember the 14 young women 

whose lives were cut short during a massacre at École 



6372 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

Polytechnique. These young women, Mr. Speaker, are the 

daughters of all Canadians. Their lives were tragically cut short 

by an act of violence by a man, Marc Lépine, who was 

motivated by the hatred of women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a murderer tried to silence these young women, 

but they will never be forgotten. In reading out their names each 

year, we deny Lépine and all the misogynists their victory, and 

we pay tribute to women everywhere who carry on the struggle 

for an end to violence against women and full equality for all. 

 

They are, Mr. Speaker: Geneviève Bergeron, Hèléne Colgan, 

Nathalie Croteau, Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward, 

Maud Haviernick, Maryse Laganière, Maryse Leclair, 

Anne-Marie Lemay, Sonia Pelletier, Michèle Richard, Annie 

St-Arneault, Annie Turcotte, and Barbara 

Klucznik-Widajewicz. 

 

It is in naming these young women, Mr. Speaker, that we 

remember and carry on the struggle for all for an end to 

violence and for a society in which all people are truly equal. It 

is fitting that we do this, Mr. Speaker, not only in this case, the 

season of the White Ribbon campaign, but in each and every 

day throughout the year. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Cannington. 

 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On December 

the 3rd, people throughout the world took time to recognize the 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities. This day aims to 

promote a better understanding of disability issues with a focus 

on the rights of persons with disabilities and the inclusion of 

persons with disabilities in every aspect of political, social, 

economic, and cultural life of their communities. 

 

Canadians living with disabilities have gone on to do many 

remarkable things. Terry Fox’s Miracle of Hope has raised tens 

of millions of dollars for cancer research. And to this day we 

are still benefiting from the remarkable breakthroughs in the 

field of cancer research these contributions helped finance. 

Terry truly was a catalyst to spur on the amount of cancer 

research being conducted today. 

 

Canada’s Rick Hansen has made remarkable contributions to 

those living with spinal cord injuries. His success as an 

advocate for spinal cord research led him to working with a 

Jerusalem-based university as they expand an international 

registry of data on spinal cord injuries and treatments. The 

agreement between the Vancouver-based Rick Hansen Institute 

and the Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada at Hebrew 

University in Jerusalem is a shining example of international 

co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 

me in recognizing the truly remarkable accomplishments of all 

peoples with disabilities. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mamawetan Churchill River Health Authority 

Conducts Facilities Assessment 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, communities of Cumberland 

constituency are provided health services by Mamawetan 

Churchill River Regional Health Authority. The board of the 

regional health authority determined that in order to be 

considered for capital financing from the Ministry of Health, 

they need to build a business case for any further capital 

projects that they would need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the summer of 2009 the regional health 

authority commissioned the services of Croft Planning & 

Designing to do a review of the current health facilities in the 

region and to do a needs assessment based on a projection of 

the anticipated changes in demographics and population 

growth. Mr. Speaker, that work has been completed, and the 

Croft report on the facilities and infrastructure has been 

provided to the Ministry of Health and is available for review 

by the public on the RHA [regional health authority] website. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the needs of the RHA are great. But now that the 

board has the evidence they need to support their request for 

increased funding for the region, the RHA is in a better position 

to request the necessary capital support to upgrade and maintain 

their current facilities but also to address the future needs of the 

aging and growing population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

board and staff of Mamawetan Churchill River Regional Health 

Authority on completing this study and doing this good work. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

International Volunteer Day 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Since 1985, 

December 5th has been designated as International Volunteer 

Day by the United Nations. The day was declared to thank all 

volunteers for their efforts and to increase the public’s 

awareness on volunteers’ contributions to society. 

 

Our government values the commitment of the many volunteers 

of our province along with the millions who generously give 

their time worldwide. Their tireless work and priceless 

contributions in collaboration with not-for-profit organizations 

support the well-being of individuals, families, and 

communities and help create a stronger global community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to the most recent survey taken 

from the Canada Survey of Giving, Volunteering and 

Participating, 12 million Canadians or almost half the 

population of our country volunteer their time to charitable and 

not-for-profit organizations. Their contributions totalled almost 

2 billion hours or the equivalent of 1.1 million full-time jobs in 

a year. 

 

I would like this Assembly to applaud all volunteers 

provincially, nationally, and internationally who devote their 

talents, skills, and resources to helping others in communities 

across the globe. Those who choose to volunteer make a 

valuable contribution to our society and enable others to live 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6373 

more productive and fulfilling lives. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

India Night 2010 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, along with the Leader of 

the Opposition New Democrats, who made an address and 

politicians from all levels of government, it was my pleasure to 

attend India Night 2010. The event was packed with over 500 

people in attendance to share in an evening of dance, music, 

speeches, and a fashion show for which my wife Stephanie and 

I were models in traditional Indian attire, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The guest speaker, journalist Murray Oliver, was engaging and 

thought-provoking. We were honoured by the presence of 

Consul General of India, Mr. Ashok Das. India Canada 

Association showcases India culture and cuisine at this event 

while raising money for the community. It has raised more than 

$350,000 over the years, all going back into the community. 

This year’s dinner alone raised $28,000 for Ehrlo Community 

Services. India Night is a special event, one that assists our 

community. 

 

ICA [India Canada Association] Saskatchewan has a proud 

history of leadership and, I am certain, a bright future of 

enriching our province, the lives of our citizens, and our 

important relations with India. I ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me to thank and to recognize the India 

Canada Association of Saskatchewan, its leadership, and 

members, but specifically to graciously thank India Night 

Chair, Ms. Renu Kapoor, the dedicated organizing committee, 

and the countless volunteers. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Biggar Team Wins Cross-Country Championships  

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Biggar 

Blazing Saints cross-country team ended their season on 

Saturday, October 16th, bringing home their fourth consecutive 

2A provincial team championship at the SHSAA 

[Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association] 

cross-country championship at Canada Games Athletic 

Complex at Douglas Park in Regina. 

 

This is the first time a 2A team has won four consecutive team 

titles. Two graduating members of this year’s team, Katja 

Meszaros and Brandon Carruthers, have been members of all 

four of these team championships. The team included 19 

members from both BCS 2000 [Biggar Central School] and St. 

Gabriel’s schools. The coaching staff of seven and a handful of 

parents and supporters, and old faces were there to cheer on the 

team and individual athletes. 

 

It was a great way to end the season, and thanks must be given 

to the coaches, Mr. and Mrs. Carruthers, Mrs. Newton, Mrs. 

Hollman, Mrs. Shutz, Mr. Wright, and Mr. Garshinski, for the 

commitment, enthusiasm, and support they shared with all their 

athletes. Also to the many parent volunteers as extra drivers, 

officials of Biggar’s two meets, and the support that they 

provided to the entire Blazing Saints cross-country team of 

60-plus members. Thanks. 

 

A final thank you needs to go to the administration of both BCS 

2000 and St. Gabriel for supporting this season and all the 

challenges that a team of this size adds to the school day. 

Congratulations on another successful season. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the 

Premier and it deals with the number of livestock producer 

issue that they have come here to the Legislative Assembly 

today to ask members of the legislature around the issue of the 

three or four years of very bad financial situation they find 

themselves in, in large part due to BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy], the Canadian dollar, the drought, and now this 

year traditional areas that produce large crops and very good 

cattle are flooded out. 

 

What these producers are calling for is $150 a head for each 

breeding stock, for each cow that they have on their farm or 

ranch, and $75 a head for the yearlings so they can keep their 

breeding stock in place and can go on farming so when things 

turn around they’re in good shape and their family can make a 

living. 

 

My question to the Premier is: has a request been made of the 

federal government for this payment of $150 a head for 

breeding stock and $75 for yearling animals? And if so, can he 

table the documentation that he has sent to Ottawa requesting 

this funding? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said in introductions, I had the opportunity to meet 

with some representatives of the group that’s here today, Mark 

van Haastert and Dennis Brown, and I thought we had a very 

good meeting. They had some recommendations of how we 

could improve the program that we come out with. Have we 

asked the federal minister to do an AgriRecovery assessment? 

We certainly have. 

 

We’ve been ongoing for the last couple of months, Mr. Speaker, 

whether through myself or through staff, have been in contact 

continually with the federal minister. And to date we don’t 

know exactly where the federal government is going. One of the 

reasons that we brought out the livestock support program, the 

Sask feed and forage program, Mr. Speaker, was because we 

felt producers couldn’t wait. They needed to know what we 

were going to do provincially. And at this date, as I said, we’re 

still waiting hopefully that the federal government will come to 

the table with some sort of assistance also. 

 

The Sask feed and forage program of course, Mr. Speaker, is 



6374 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

for feed and livestock transportation, and also $30 an acre to 

reseed damaged hay and forage pasture and coverage like that. 

And some of the recommendations that we got from the group 

today I think can make improvements to that program and we’ll 

certainly take a good look at that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear to 

the minister, I wasn’t asking about AgStability because these 

producers know that AgStability doesn’t work. That’s a fact. 

Every farmer in the province knows that AgStability doesn’t 

work. And the minister’s comment in The Western Producer 

recently where he said, and I quote, “This might be a good time 

to see just how well AgStability is going to work. If it doesn’t 

work this year, it never will.” 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, these agricultural producers, these livestock 

producers know that AgStability doesn’t work. We don’t need 

another review of that program, as you suggested in your 

previous answer. What we need and what the producers are 

asking for is $150 per head of breeding stock and $75 for the 

yearlings to see the farmers and beef producers through the 

winter. 

 

Have you made a request to the federal government for this 

payment of $150 a head for breeding stock and $75 for the 

yearling animals? Have you made that request? And if you 

have, will you table the documentation so that the farmers and 

ranchers, the beef producers know that you’re sincere in going 

to Ottawa on their behalf? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I find it somewhat amazing and hypocritical of the 

Leader of the Opposition. He was one of the ones, his 

government, that helped design the program. They designed the 

AgriStability program and now he says, well it doesn’t work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, we will be watching to see if AgriStability 

works this year because we’ve had a trying year right across the 

province. But, Mr. Speaker, let me remind the Leader of the 

Opposition there was a drought in the Southwest for four years 

under his government. And nobody even went out there and 

they did absolutely nothing. So for him to come to the table 

today and say we need $150 per head, I find it very 

hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

On the AgriRecovery file, yes, we have asked the federal 

minister. And the way the process works is you ask him to do a 

reassessment and see if there’s something for Saskatchewan in 

that program. To date we haven’t received anything from the 

federal government and are waiting. 

 

[14:00] 

 

That’s why we did the livestock program, the feed and forage 

program, Mr. Speaker, because we couldn’t wait on the federal 

government. Mr. Speaker, we’re doing our share, including the 

$40 per head that we did last year for every livestock producer 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, something that the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government neglected to do in all . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired. I recognize the 

Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister indicates that 

I’m bringing the request for $150 a head. Well I want to make it 

clear to the minister that it’s the people in the gallery, the 

families in the gallery who are asking for the $150 a head. And 

you can laugh and make fun of that if you like. But I’ll tell you 

this: we need and the farmers in this family need $150 a head 

for breeding stock so that the many sales that are going on . . . If 

you look in The Western Producer, the paper is full of dispersal 

sales. And we are going to see a 10 or 20 per cent reduction in 

the cattle herd if we don’t get this kind of a payment from 

Ottawa and from our provincial government. 

 

Again the minister has said that he has made the request. Will 

he table the request that he has made to the federal government, 

to the Prime Minister of this country, to give support for the 

beef producers in this province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition knows full well . . . In estimates the other night I 

explained to him how we’ve paid out over half a billion dollars 

already, Mr. Speaker, with the excess moisture program in 

which some of the producers in the gallery today could take 

advantage of. 

 

And he talks about AgriStability. I’m sure some of the 

producers in the gallery today have had the opportunity to work 

through the AgriStability program in the past and have received 

payments out of it. Will we be watching to see if that program 

is responsive to the needs of producers? We certainly have, Mr. 

Speaker, and we will be. We’ve brought that also to the 

attention of the federal government that program changes need 

to be made in that respect, but remembering it takes seven out 

of 10 provinces to agree to those changes, and they don’t 

happen quick, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, finally to the minister. I’ve 

asked three times now if he would table the documentation that 

he has sent to Ottawa requesting the $150 a head for the 

livestock producers. Now it’s not that I don’t believe him, but 

there are many people in the gallery and across the province 

that are beginning to wonder when he says he’s going to let 

AgStability deal with their problem. The people in the gallery 

and the farmers in the province know that program doesn’t 

work. What would work is a payment from Ottawa and the 

province of $150 an acre. 

 

The minister signed AgStability. He’s the minister who signed, 

so let’s get that clear. And let’s not deceive the public by saying 

that the NDP signed it. That minister signed that program. 

That’s the truth. But that’s not the question. The question is, 

will the minister table the request he has made to Ottawa for 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6375 

$150 a head for the beef producers in this province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the Leader 

of the Opposition and I can argue who designed the program, 

and I guess . . . [inaudible] . . . But the Leader of the Opposition 

and the NDP were the one that put that program in place, and 

that’s the one we’re stuck with today until we can get changes 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one thing I think that’s been a positive in the 

whole industry . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the minister and I think the people here would like to 

hear the . . . They asked the question. I think you would like to 

hear the answer. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we fully 

understand because we’ve toured the area out there on a number 

of occasions with a number of the local MLAs right from 

probably June on, right through this whole summer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the producers have had a very trying 

year out there, and it doesn’t quit. They’re still trying to haul 

bales and the ground is soft underneath the snow and the 

problem goes on. That’s why we came out with what we did on 

the feed and forage program, on the reseeding program, which 

we had some suggestions today of how we may be able to 

improve these programs. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll work with 

producers to try and make improvements to the programs that 

we’ve put in place, which we’ve done for the last three years to 

try and help producers such as that right across this province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Contract Negotiation and Supply of Physicians 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Doctor 

vacancies have increased by almost 40 per cent in three years 

under the Sask Party. Doctors have been without a contract for 

19 months and resident physicians and interns have been 

without a contract for two years. Last week when questioned 

about his government’s failure to manage health care and 

failure to protect Saskatchewan families by providing doctors 

with a contract, the Premier said, and I quote, “We’ll have a 

settlement soon.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister and the Premier: is a 

contract in place today with doctors, interns, and resident 

physicians? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier 

mentioned last week and I will also reiterate today, that the 

negotiations are going on, that we think that negotiations are 

getting close to a final agreement. We certainly hope that that’s 

the case, Mr. Speaker, not only through . . . for the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association], for physicians, but also 

through the residents, Mr. Speaker — that an agreement can be 

struck that is good for residents, physicians, the government, 

but most importantly, the patients of this province. 

 

What I will say though, Mr. Speaker, is that in the past three 

years we’ve seen the number of doctors practising in this 

province go up by 6 per cent in rural Saskatchewan, 8 per cent 

in urban Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in Hudson 

Bay, whether it’s in Nipawin, whether it’s in Leader, whether 

it’s in Redvers, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen physicians move to 

those communities. We’ll continue to see physicians move to 

Saskatchewan because it is the place to live right now. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone hopes we can 

stop the hemorrhaging of doctors, but this minister can actually 

fix it. According to a Canadian Institute of Health Information, 

CIHI report released last Thursday, Saskatchewan has the 

lowest rate of doctors per 100,000 population. In response to 

the report, the president of the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association said, and I quote, “Those statistics point to how 

important it is for a new fee contract to be put in place in the 

province before more doctors decide to leave.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister: a CIHI report is telling 

him that we have the lowest rate of doctors per population of all 

provinces. His own website is showing doctor vacancies have 

risen almost 40 per cent in the last three years. Residents and 

doctors and interns are telling him that they’re leaving if they 

don’t get a contract. When is the minister going to listen, get a 

contract in place for doctors, and start protecting Saskatchewan 

people and don’t just rely on hope? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we came to power 

in 2007, we certainly knew there was a shortage in many of the 

human resources, whether it was the registered nurses or with 

the physicians throughout the province. We’ve gone a long 

ways to address some of those problems with nurses. We’re in 

the process of addressing those problems with physicians, 

whether it’s a physician recruitment agency, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it’s a new assessment process. Mr. Speaker, there are a 

number of steps that we’ve taken to ensure that we have the 

proper complement of physicians. Because certainly the 

member opposite identified a problem. We are shorter than the 

national average, and I would say a lot of that stems from their 

previous government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working closely with the physicians to get a 

contract that is good for them, good for the Saskatchewan 

people. But I would note, Mr. Speaker, just recently as of today, 

an Angus Reid poll came out. And I know she wasn’t quoting 

from that, but it says, “Health care delivery praised in 

Saskatchewan,” Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 

satisfaction of people in this province for their health care, it’s 

the highest in Canada. 

 



6376 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Angus 

Reid poll gave us 50 per cent. When I went to school, 50 per 

cent is D minus. Is that what the minister wants to accept, is D 

minus? 

 

All across the province we heard stories this summer about 

emergency services reduction, lab closures, X-ray service 

reductions, long-term care bed closures, and reductions in 

ambulance services. And I could list 55 communities where I 

heard those stories, from one end of the province to the other, 

top to bottom. Many rural families are being forced to travel out 

of their communities to see a doctor. Rural communities are 

spending their resources competing against each other to recruit 

doctors. 

 

According to CIHI, Saskatchewan lost more doctors to 

interprovincial migration than it gained in 2009. That means 23 

doctors moved here and 46 moved out. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

minister has mismanaged the doctor shortage. And the SMA 

doesn’t talk about the last 16 years. They talk about the last two 

years. They have not got a contract, and this minister has failed 

them miserably. When is he going to do something? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the 

negotiations are going on right now. We hope that we can get to 

an agreement relatively soon. I will say that the relationship 

between our government and the SMA is as strong as it ever has 

been. We both realize it is a process to go through, and that’s 

certainly the process we’re going to. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Health critic did mention the issue about 

the latest poll at 50 per cent. Fifty per cent is not satisfactory to 

this government. We’re going to continue to work and increase 

the satisfaction of Saskatchewan people with the health care 

system. I will say though that 50 per cent is the highest mark in 

Canada. It is quite a bit higher than the 17 per cent approval 

rating for their leader. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Last week the Provincial Auditor criticized the Sask Party 

government for failing to protect its children. The auditor said 

the Minister of Social Services didn’t even know how many 

children are in the government’s care, who they are, and where 

they live. In a scrum last Thursday, the minister was asked 

whether the auditor was right or wrong. She said, and I quote, 

“I’m going to have to get a little bit clearer on that one.” 

 

To the minister: she’s had four days to get clearer information 

on how her government is failing to protect children. What has 

she learned? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s report was 

very concerning to everybody on this side of the House. Our 

government is very concerned when we have a foster care 

system that’s been in trouble for 25 years, and we have to . . . 

We can’t fix it overnight. 

 

But we are starting to work on it. And when the Provincial 

Auditor did his report, he didn’t take into account the fact that 

we have a new database that was put into place at the beginning 

of February, so at the end of March not all the findings are in 

place. So we’re very hopeful that there will be some further 

work. We’ve actually reorganized the ministry as well, so we 

have a better chance to make sure that we know some of these 

facts. We have 144 new residential spaces for children. 

 

Is there more work that we have to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

Yes, there is. Are we working on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Yes, 

we are. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been three 

years. It’s been three years. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

auditor didn’t only criticize the Sask Party government for not 

knowing how many children are in its care, let alone who they 

or where they are. The auditor also said that in 40 per cent, 47 

per cent of the cases he sampled, there was inadequate contact 

with children. But last week the minister absolutely denied this, 

that this could be in any way related to staffing levels. Instead 

she blamed the children and the foster parents for not keeping 

their appointments. 

 

To the minister: why is she blaming the children and the foster 

parents rather than focusing on improving the system so that the 

children are actually protected? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is nobody to 

blame when we have children in care. There’s work to be done, 

and I had a number of contacts over the weekend from people 

who agreed that there’s more work that has to be done. 

 

In fact I had an email from one of the First Nations who talked 

about the fact that they believe that there is . . . the Provincial 

Auditor doesn’t have all the necessary information. They talked 

about compliancy and the fact that when some of the workers 

have a chance to go out and visit with some of the families, if 

they aren’t there, they don’t get a chance that there was actually 

a contact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to be done, and that’s why I’m 

very pleased that in a very short time we’re going to have the 

child welfare review report out. It will be brought forward to 

not just the members and the public but to the foster families, 

and we’ll have a chance to review the work that is going on. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly we can’t simply 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6377 

trust the Sask Party government will do the right thing when it 

comes to protecting children in our province, and that’s why the 

opposition thinks that a step in the right direction would be to 

establish a special committee of the Legislative Assembly 

which is focused on the protection of children in care. 

 

This committee could review the upcoming Pringle report, hold 

public hearings, and make recommendations to the government. 

I’ve provided the minister with an advance copy of this motion. 

 

So to the minister: will the Sask Party government agree to pass 

this motion and establish a special committee so that we can 

take urgent steps to better protect children in our care? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the report that was asked 

for by this government last year did exactly that. We have had 

meetings with over 1,200 separate individuals and groups. They 

brought forward recommendations that we are taking very 

seriously. In fact I’ve had the opportunity to talk to the First 

Nations and the Métis leaders. They’re very interested in 

working with us. There has been a report and there is work 

being done. What we have to do is answer some of these 

recommendations and that is the work that’s going to be done in 

a short time. 

 

We don’t have to have a motion from the members opposite to 

talk about it because the Children’s Advocate, in the year 2000, 

identified a serious gap and a major disconnect in the way child 

welfare was being delivered. And do you know what happened? 

Nothing was done. We are working on it and in the next short 

time we’ll be bringing forward recommendations and answers 

to that report. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we see a pattern developing 

with the Minister of Health. First he claimed that a deal to buy 

surgeries from BC was something that was only touched upon 

briefly by the Premier, when an FOI [freedom of information] 

request yielded hundreds of pages of information between the 

two provinces. 

 

Last spring after the minister said he consulted the Privacy 

Commissioner about new health information regulations, the 

commissioner said that wasn’t true, and this led to the first 

ruling in 25 years of a prima facie case of breach of privilege 

against a minister. Now the minister says that his officials told 

him that there was no loan guarantee with Amicus when 

internal emails clearly show they believe something different. 

 

This is a question to the Premier. Given the minister seems to 

lack credibility on this issue, will the government agree to 

release all 1,800 pages of the blacked-out material regarding 

Amicus? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the issue around the 

long-term care facility and the number of beds that we have in 

the Saskatoon Health Region is concerning, absolutely. We 

looked at it just after we came to government and realized how 

many seniors were living in acute care centres. It just didn’t 

happen over the last couple of years under our government. It 

had been going on for a very long time under the previous 

government where seniors were living in acute care centres. 

Absolutely inappropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved forward on a new funding 

arrangement with the Catholic Health Ministry for Samaritan 

Place, Mr. Speaker, that will see 100 new long-term care beds 

into the system, the first new long-term care beds on top of a 

proper complement that we had before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when you look at whether it’s a loan guarantee, again Paul 

Ellis from the Catholic Health Ministry goes on and says that 

the fact that this would be a loan guarantee is false, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is Amicus that has taken out the loan, Mr. 

Speaker. But what is important is, after hearing last week that 

that member opposite would put a stop to 100 new long-term 

care beds, Mr. Speaker, every senior in Saskatoon should be 

concerned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — A couple of points, Mr. Speaker. We need 

long-term care beds, but we think that it should be given to or it 

should be open to everybody, and the contracts should be 

tendered. 

 

Now the government insists there is nothing to see here, but 

they’re very selective about the information they share. They 

provide bits and pieces of information here and there when they 

get backed into a corner, but they censor hundreds of pages that 

would allow people to judge for themselves. 

 

The government says this is a good deal, but the Sask Party 

refuses to admit that the deal came from the Sask Party minister 

and the Premier. So to the minister: will he agree to release 

today all of the information the government censored from the 

response to my FOI request? Will he allow Saskatchewan 

citizens to make judgment themselves? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I find it really quite fascinating, Mr. 

Speaker, that the member opposite just stood in her place and 

says, we want these long-term care beds. They want these 

long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker, but their record speaks to the 

exact opposite. In fact when that member from Nutana and the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview were the minister and 

associate minister, they closed 50 beds, reconsidered another 

40. They closed 90 beds, Mr. Speaker, and said it was going to 

make for better care delivery in that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only would they put the brakes . . . I think she 

said, we would stop this in its tracks now. She said that last 

week, Mr. Speaker. Not only would they do that, but I’m sure 



6378 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

they’d close a whole bunch more long-term care beds, Mr. 

Speaker, throughout the province, like they did 52 hospitals. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister fails to say is 

that they have closed 88 long-term care beds in this year alone 

— 88. 

 

Now the minister can hide behind technicalities all he wants. 

But debt is debt, whatever the definition. Taxpayers are on the 

hook to pay off the Amicus mortgage if Amicus doesn’t want to 

run this facility any more. And they’ve entered into an 

agreement that allows Amicus to go to the bank and get it 100 

per cent financed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, documents make it clear that this deal originated 

in this building. The email from April 14th from the health 

region CEO [chief executive officer] states, and I quote, “Many 

details of this agreement were essentially agreed to by 

government before the region became involved in the 

discussion.” And a legal memo from the region states, and I 

quote, “Jim Rhode [Chair of the board, appointed by the Sask 

Party] spoke with the Premier. This is a deal.” So to the 

Premier: if he’s so sure this is such a good deal, and if the 

government directed this from the very beginning, why have 

they gone to such lengths to distance themselves from this deal? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly knew 

shortly after we came to government that there was a shortage 

of long-term care beds, especially in the immediate area in 

Saskatoon. That’s why we had so many people living in acute 

care centres. 

 

It didn’t take long for the Saskatoon Health Region immediately 

to identify this as a need. We knew it was a need, Mr. Speaker. 

We did a Patient First Review that talks about looking at a 

different funding model. So we took that information along 

with the request and the need from the Saskatoon Health 

Region, Mr. Speaker. And between Saskatoon Health Region, 

the Catholic Health Ministry, and the Ministry of Health, we’ve 

come up with the funding model for Samaritan Place that will 

see 100 new long-term care beds in Saskatchewan, in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, getting people out of acute care centres 

into the appropriate living facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re proud of the deal, Mr. Speaker. They’d put the brakes on 

it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — With leave to introduce guests, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s my great pleasure that I’d ask all members to 

welcome to this Legislative Assembly a good friend of mine, a 

good friend of this government, a good friend I’m sure of all 

members in the legislature, Chief Guy Lonechild, chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indians, Indian Nations . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, you bet. 

 

Guy is a passionate leader for First Nations people. He’s a 

person who wants to make sure that this province is a better 

place for everyone. It has indeed been a pleasure to work with 

him on areas in education, in economic development, in 

gaming. Him and his vice-chiefs had an opportunity to appear 

before the First Nations legislative assembly. And I’m very glad 

that he is here to witness our proceedings, and I have a chance 

to meet with him later. So all members, please help me in 

welcoming Chief Guy Lonechild to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to join in the introduction of Chief Guy 

Lonechild. It’s good to see the chief here in the Legislative 

Assembly, certainly someone who’s not the oldest of legislators 

in this province, of leadership. He brings a youth and a vigour 

but also experience to the job and, as the minister has said, a 

deep passion to improve the quality of life for his people. And 

certainly on behalf of the official opposition, I want to join with 

the minister in welcoming Chief Guy Lonechild to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. 

members. I just want to take a few moments to introduce some 

personal friends of mine who are part of the delegation that was 

down here to meet with the Minister of Agriculture: Andy 

Burym from Danbury, Kirby Mirva from Danbury, Lorne Ball 

from Danbury. I had a difficult time recognizing Lorne because 

he’s grown a beard since the last time I saw him. I must admit, 

Lorne, it is an improvement. Also I’d like to introduce Lionel 

Pearson. Lionel’s from the north prairie or Preeceville, 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6379 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there may be others, but I’m fighting the lights and my 

eyes are getting old, so I’m not sure. So I don’t want to 

misname somebody. But I’d like to welcome my friends to this 

legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carry on with your point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, during question period 

the Leader of the Opposition made reference to the Minister of 

Agriculture “deceiving the public,” which is clearly 

unparliamentary and against the rules of the Assembly. We’d 

ask that the Leader of the Opposition retract and apologize for 

that statement. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, to respond 

to the point of order. Mr. Speaker, during the heated debate of 

questions and answers going back and forth, the minister called 

the Leader of the Opposition hypocritical. In response to that 

there are, as you know, very heated debates and exchanges in 

this Assembly as people are very passionate about issues that 

are important to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you review the entire 

proceedings and exchange, Mr. Speaker, as you look at your 

ruling. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — As the debate carried on, it was very 

hard for me to hear at times with some of the talking that was 

going on. I would review it, but I would also give the member 

an opportunity now, if he feels that he did say something 

inappropriate, if he would wish to remark on it, or I will review 

it and that. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism. 

 

Sport Participation Initiative 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the Vancouver 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter 

Games, along with the months leading up to them, were an 

exciting time for everyone in our country. 

 

The Olympic torch travelled through many Saskatchewan 

communities on its way to Vancouver, and when the flame 

finally arrived in Vancouver, it inspired all Canadians. It also 

helped usher in a new generation of Canadian Olympians, Mr. 

Speaker, like Lucas Makowsky, who was introduced in the 

gallery earlier today. The Government of Saskatchewan and 

Sask Sport announced the sport participation initiative earlier 

today, Mr. Speaker. And Lucas of course was a big part of 

getting it all started. 

The first component of this three-part initiative is the 

Saskatchewan program for athletic excellence. The program, 

funded through the sport section of the Saskatchewan Lotteries 

Trust Fund for Sport, Culture and Recreation, will invest 

$350,000 annually to provide carded athletes with funding of up 

to $6,000 per year. 

 

Now there are about 35 Saskatchewan athletes who are carded 

at the senior level and 25 athletes who hold a developmental 

level card who are now eligible for this funding, Mr. Speaker. 

The funds will help them with training and living costs, training 

camps or competitions, and sport-specific equipment. Mr. 

Speaker, this puts Saskatchewan on a par with the highest level 

of support anywhere in Canada. 

 

The second part of this sport participation initiative is the 

accessibility program. Sask Sport Inc. is investing $250,000 per 

year into this new program. It’s going to help reduce the 

barriers to participation in sport faced by athletes with 

disabilities. It will allow easier access to special equipment, 

coaching, and programs, and it will help to encourage more 

people with a disability to get involved with sport and live an 

active and healthy lifestyle. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 

transferred the remainder of the Saskatchewan 2010 Olympic 

and Paralympic pavilion budget, amounting to $232,000, to the 

Saskatchewan 2010 Legacy Fund, which resides with Sask 

Sport Inc. This contribution will further support Sask Sport 

programs for all youth with a special focus on disadvantaged, 

at-risk youth. Mr. Speaker, this new funding will help programs 

such as KidSport, Creative Kids, and Take the Lead. About 500 

additional disadvantaged youth will benefit from this funding as 

they become involved in sport, culture, and recreation activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that we are now on a new 

road in Saskatchewan. And together with our partners at Sask 

Sport, we’re creating opportunities for everyone to get involved 

and to excel, helping to put Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s 

athletes in the lead. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And thank 

you to the minister for sending over a copy of his statement a 

little bit earlier. I appreciate that. 

 

I’ve just had a brief opportunity to review the government’s 

new sport participation initiative, and at face value it seems like 

a positive initiative. But as we all know, the devil is often in the 

details, especially with this government. 

 

The first component of the program is to provide carded 

athletes with funding of up to $6,000 per year. The carding 

system provides federal funding to elite athletes to ensure those 

identified with international potential are afforded the necessary 

opportunities in order to achieve international success. So not 

only does it take hard work, determination, and skill to become 

an elite athlete, but it also takes money. 

 

In order to achieve, athletes often need to eat, sleep, and breathe 

their respective sports and do not have an opportunity to earn 



6380 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

income through employment. Attending training camps, 

travelling to competitions, and investing in the best 

technologies and equipment is enough to break the bank for 

many. I have no doubt this money will be appreciated and put to 

good use to help develop our elite athletes here for the world 

stage. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So with respect to the second aspect or the second part of this 

initiative, the accessibility program, the minister thus far has 

provided very few details. So clearly reducing barriers to sport 

participation for athletes with disabilities is really an important 

and a laudable goal, but I want to learn a little bit more about 

this program before I can fully comment. 

 

So the third part of the initiative, the $232,000 being transferred 

to the legacy fund, for me this is actually where I think . . . I am 

a firm believer that the grassroots level is where this 

commitment needs to be. So we’ve got $350,000 going to the 

elite athletes thus far and $232,000 which is going to be 

targeted towards the youth. And again in my opinion, the 

grassroots level, investing in our youth is actually where you 

develop elite athletes. You provide all kids with the opportunity 

to have access to sport and to have have access to the 

opportunity to play. And from there, that is really where you 

begin to develop elite athletes by providing all children with the 

opportunity to participate. 

 

So I think an investment in our youth, it goes on to lay this 

foundation for young people doing us proud on the national and 

international stage, but it’s also about providing opportunity to 

set the stage for a lifetime of healthy activity. So it’s not just 

about elite sport. So I just would question that $232,000 is a 

nice chunk of change, but could more money have been 

supported? 

 

I know there’s many children in my constituency and in 

constituencies throughout Saskatchewan who don’t have 

opportunity — whether it’s registration fees, equipment fees, 

transportation to sporting and other, well, cultural activities as 

well. There’s many not for profits doing very good work, but 

I’d like to see this government also look at some policy 

mechanisms to ensure all kids have opportunity to engage in 

sports. So with that, I will leave it at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Protection of Children in Government Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — To seek leave under rule 59 to move a motion 

of urgent and pressing necessity in light of the findings of the 

Provincial Auditor late last week which showed that the 

government is currently failing to adequately protect children in 

its care. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to move a motion that will propose 

the establishment of a special all-party committee to examine 

this important issue. I have provided the government with an 

advance copy of this motion. I’ll briefly read the text of that 

motion now: 

 

That this Assembly immediately establish a special 

all-party committee to review and report on the situation 

of children in care in Saskatchewan, including the 

consideration of the findings of the Provincial Auditor 

and the recommendations of the Pringle report; and that 

the committee have the power to sit during the 

intersessional period. And that the committee have the 

power to send for persons, papers, and records; to 

examine witnesses under oath; to receive representations 

from interested parties and individuals; to engage such 

advisors and assistance as are required for the purpose of 

the inquiry; and to hold meetings away from the seat of 

government in order that the fullest representations may 

be received without unduly inconveniencing those desired 

to be heard; and that the committee be instructed to 

submit its report to the Legislative Assembly on March 

7th, 2011, the first day of the spring period of the fourth 

session of the twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre 

has asked leave to introduce a motion. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Motion denied. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have two 

annual reports to table. In accordance with the provisions of 

section 14.1 of The Provincial Auditor’s Act, I have the 

Provincial Auditor’s annual report for the period ending March 

31st, 2010. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I also have the annual report for the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Library for the period ending March 

31st, 2010. I so table. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am glad 

to be able to rise today and make a few comments on Bill 161, 

The Election Amendment Act. 

 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6381 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very important piece of legislation 

before us. Whenever we talk about rights to vote, whenever we 

talk about how that vote will be carried out, this affects the 

daily lives of all voters in our province and in fact the 

democracy, the state of democracy in our province. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is therefore very important. And coming up 

today to speak on it, to be the first Bill forward, I think we all 

realize the importance of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some, however, very, very 

concerning things about this Bill. It’s concerning, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I would go in 

to make more comments, one of the things that to me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is so concerning about this is actually two 

things: is that it was the Minister of Justice in bringing forward 

this Bill was the same minister who was involved in the 

appointment of the, who is still involved in the appointment of 

the Chief Electoral Officer. And has, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

messed up that issue. And we now are in somewhat of a holding 

position when it comes to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I won’t go 

over all the details of that issue, but I think everybody now 

understands the responsibility that the Minister of Justice 

played in this role, the member from Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

And I’ll be coming back to those points again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But the second point for me is the minister in getting 

up, when he spoke on the Bill, the Minister of Justice speaking 

on the Bill said voters are already required to show approved ID 

[identification] in order to vote in federal elections. This is a 

standard that will be followed during the next general federal 

election. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, going on and saying that you are 

simply doing what somebody else is doing, I’m not certain 

because this minister deems to pick and choose. We had a blind 

voters Act last session. I brought that Bill forward to deal with 

blind voters and to improve voting. And this year in the 

by-elections we just held, the federal government was having 

procedures put forward that would allow blind voters to vote 

and help them to do so, so that they would not have to take 

somebody else with them into the voting booth. This is very 

important. 

 

Now it’s surprising because I guess on those two accounts 

where the members opposite with the Sask Party government, 

where that Justice Minister could have moved and done 

something proactive, done something really positive, they failed 

to do that. They failed to do that. And I guess it’s becoming 

somewhat less than surprising, on hearing earlier on the things 

that the Health Minister was involved in and having to be noted 

by the Privacy Commissioner on that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very concerting and at times even 

disconcerting on this side, that members would so flaunt this 

Legislative Assembly and so flaunt the rules of this Assembly 

because that bodes not so well for democracy. And you would 

therefore see why we would be concerned about when it comes 

to times of voting, and voting and how important that would be 

in terms of elections . . . And here we have members who have 

engaged in these sort of practices now putting forward a Bill 

under The Election Act. 

 

And I will get to those, some points about there. But in just in 

some brief opening comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 

important it is that the public, that we all here in the Legislative 

Assembly have confidence in the people putting forward these 

types of Acts, these types of changes, that we have to have 

absolute confidence that this will be done in an unbiased 

fashion, that it will be done so that people can have confidence 

in those decisions and as they are carried forward. 

 

We have the minister coming out and talking about how he 

would . . . this would be to approve ID — ID identification, like 

the driver’s licence that we have in our province. And the 

minister leaves it at that and then wants us, as I’ve been 

speaking about, wants everybody in this province to simply 

then take him at his word that this is not to cause any concerns 

with the electorate. 

 

We are less than a year away from a provincial election, and 

that is a concern. That is a concern of what they will be doing 

here, how much work has gone into this. Or whether or not in 

fact, even when the minister gets something together, he’ll go 

back and the Premier will overrule him as he did with the Chief 

Electoral Officer, which we went through in this very 

Legislative Assembly, or for that matter, and I mentioned the 

Health minister, before he got a deal with the chiropractors and 

then tore up the agreement. 

 

So this is not by any means . . . We’re getting used to that this is 

not a done deal. All these things that are being said, that the 

minister went on and on about how he was going to do 

everything in his power to make sure that people can vote, 

that’s not . . . In fact we haven’t seen any of that. 

 

I would think that in terms of allowing for transparency, which 

we do see a lack of, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this whole Amicus 

affair that we have before us — 1,800 pages of blacked-out 

documentation. If it is a good deal, I’m not certain. I think the 

public are saying that they should know about this. People out 

there are talking about it. And why would you want to black out 

anything when you come in and you say that it will be a 

transparent government? 

 

So we have these issues that are very . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

find that I have to put these on the record to show there are 

concerns, and the concerns are rooted in a basic, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, basic distrust that this government believes in 

transparency, a basic distrust that they will follow through even 

after they have given agreement. Because we have some, two 

very clear issues, one on the Chief Electoral Officer and the 

other one with the chiropractors, who had a deal and then saw 

that deal just torn up at the last minute. And they are somewhat, 

well I would say stronger than miffed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

let’s leave it at that. 

 

So that’s the foundation on which we bring forward something 

as important as The Election Amendment Act and ask, simply 

say to trust us that we will do the right thing, that nobody will 

be disenfranchised as a result of this action, that everybody will 

have an opportunity to vote, that in fact in some way this will 

be better. But yet there’s nothing, no background here as to the 

consultation process on this issue. 

 

I noticed the other day when the Human Rights Code came up, 

there was a number of people in the gallery. I saw nobody — 



6382 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

and this impacts over quite a number of people in our province, 

everybody of voting age — and yet there was nobody here, and 

nor did we see documentation as to why we should have that. 

The closest thing we have is that somehow that the federal 

government is moving in this direction and this minister wants 

to do likewise. But even no comments regarding what that 

includes — no comments, no overviews, no reviews of how this 

has worked for those places that were there. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we here have to go over this. And 

as an opposition, our role is to question, question carefully what 

is happening here. So we would be doing the due diligence on 

this Bill. In any case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would be doing 

that. But as I laid out, there’s some foundations here that make 

us even more wary than normal because of the actions 

particularly of that minister who also had himself on the SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] and had to 

remove himself and did not with the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. 

 

So we have what are not inconsequential things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We all have to go forward and put forth what we are 

involved in because people want to know that we will come 

here and deal with these issues in a nonbiased manner. And 

here we have somebody that’s being called on, and in terms of 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner saying that he has to 

withdraw from that file because he was in conflict. Now that is, 

you know, you can pass these things over. You can pass all of 

this and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, say that this is nothing. But this 

is serious business when people have to intervene. 

 

In terms of the Privacy Commissioner and the Minister of 

Health, very straightforward. Very disappointing that whole 

affair as well, that you would say that you spoke to someone 

and you never did. I couldn’t believe it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And the same with the member bringing that back, the Chief 

Electoral Officer from the Board of Internal Economy bringing 

that over, and then saying . . . And then having the Premier or 

was it the caucus . . . We’re not sure because this is again 

behind closed doors. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So where’s the transparency when people — when it comes to 

officers of this Legislative Assembly — they expect no less, no 

less, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we would deal with it in a 

nonbiased and an upright, straightforward manner. And I know 

that, I would say all members coming in here would be saying 

that they would deal with these issues in there. 

 

And here we have, in a little less than three years, we have a 

Chief Electoral Officer, an officer of this Legislative Assembly 

. . . The whole process going off the rails. We have that member 

as well on the whole SLGA affair not being upfront to the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is 

it that’s going on here? What is it that’s going on? It’s piling up, 

yet every day we hear pounding of desks over there, and all is 

well and talk of all sorts of polls and stuff. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can be happy with that. Government 

can be happy with that. But I wouldn’t rest on that because the 

truth will out on these issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the 

people of Saskatchewan are not, I wouldn’t be saying that the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to accept this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. People of Saskatchewan will see through this. And 

when they do . . .  

 

And every day we have more and more people in the galleries; 

today, the agricultural producers, the livestock producers who 

are saying they need a certain amount of money. And yet the 

Minister of Agriculture says, well no, it’s the opposition that’s 

calling for that. It’s the opposition. It’s only that NDP that are 

calling for that. Well I don’t think that that was correct. I don’t 

think that that minister was . . . I’m not sure where he got that 

information, and I’m not sure what he was trying to do to the 

House when he said those sorts of things. What was he doing 

that? On what basis did he say that? 

 

We asked for a tabling of a document. Now he said he had that 

document. I’ve still to see it, and perhaps it’s there already. But 

where is that document? And what would we call that? What 

would we call that? What would we call that kind of action if 

. . . Because we had a point of order from that side saying that 

there was some concern over things that were said. What was 

that? What was the issue there, and what were we really talking 

about? We’re talking about the basis of trust, of trust. 

 

And when it comes to something like The Election Act, we need 

that trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need that whole trust. 

People in Saskatchewan need that trust so that they know, when 

we go forward on important piece of legislation like The 

Election Amendment Act, that it will be handled in a way that 

everyone can feel comfortable with and not have nagging 

doubts that in fact somebody might not be saying something, 

telling something like the SLGA story. Even getting the deal at 

the end, saying that this is what I’m going to do with the Act 

because . . . And then coming back and saying whoops. 

 

Well you remember the chiropractor deal. We tore that up and 

there was no great outcry about that. That wasn’t a big problem. 

We could do that. Or the Minister of Health and his little 

shenanigans over there with the Privacy Commissioner, that 

was okay. And so maybe we can just do that again. Let’s go for 

three. Let’s go for three in a row, or maybe four. Well I think 

it’s more than three, pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 

there’s more than three so that maybe we’re up to 10 here of 

issues. And I can talk about those forever. 

 

But I think you understand in these preliminary remarks the 

point I’m trying to make here. The point is for the people of 

Saskatchewan, they must have a trust in their, not only the 

officers of the Legislative Assembly, but as well as the elected 

MLAs because the elected MLAs have to promote that and 

have to show that they are above reproach, that we are above 

that. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so therefore so that people 

can have, when something as fundamental to this place as the 

election amendment election Act, that this is what we will be 

concerned about. 

 

So as I was saying, as the opposition, we have to do our due 

diligence on this Act. And we will be doing . . . [inaudible] . . . 

And I’ll get to those comments in just a minute here. But I 

wanted to make that clear. I wanted to make clear to all people 

in this province that some of the things that we are struggling 

with here, when it comes to dealing with an Act like this, and 

the things that we have to move forward on. 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6383 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear the member from 

Cannington talking about that. I think with the latest issue 

around Amicus, I think perhaps they should be looking at that, 

and they should also be looking at that health care is number 

one out there in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So again these comments that I am making just to give people a 

flavour of what we have to deal with here, and so that they 

should be ever watchful in terms when it comes to changing 

something like The Election Amendment Act as to who exactly 

is changing this. And all the things that we should be watching 

because we don’t even know, even after the Bill would be put 

here, that maybe it could be torn up and say, well we’re not 

going to go ahead with that because we have examples of that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this would be happening. And those 

people will remember that forever. They’ll remember that one 

forever about how they negotiated in good faith and then were 

told that they don’t have a deal. 

 

Now as I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the right to vote 

impacts on peoples’ daily live. Because whatever you might 

think, we live, whatever some members or however some 

members treat that, we are fortunate to live in this province. 

We’re fortunate to live in Canada because of the right to vote, 

because of the right to vote, and because of democracy. And we 

should speak out whenever we can when that is threatened, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, like with the Chief Electoral Officer, and the 

shameful situation that exists around that situation, and how 

that occurred. 

 

So everyone should know that story in the province. Everybody 

should know and understand that story because the Chief 

Electoral Officer will no doubt have to be dealing with these 

issues in here. And what has that done? What has that done to 

that office, and how will they deal with this and the work that 

needs to be done around this? And how will they look at this 

Bill, understanding that that present person doing that sits in 

limbo and never knowing when that’ll change. When that’ll 

change, and the person will not be there. 

 

How do you plan for implementation of a Bill like this? How do 

you plan for implementation and all the things that this Bill 

might bring forward, let alone whether it will even be brought 

forward, but all the things that it might bring forward? And the 

person there not knowing whether tomorrow they will be there 

to deal with this Bill. What do you instruct all the people 

working around The Election Act, and how will they function? 

What things will they do around here to make sure that we have 

a democratic election in Saskatchewan, as I said, make sure that 

we . . . so that we can be proud of being in Saskatchewan here 

because we don’t want this record tarnished, tarnished that we 

have here. 

 

But I am not encouraged by the actions of the Justice minister 

and that, that we should now just be saying, well we’ll just 

rubber stamp this for you again and away you go. Because we 

know that you don’t have, you know, any problems with the 

conflict of interest. We don’t have, you know, we don’t have 

any problems with putting in an important officer of this 

Legislative Assembly. I would say all the officers are important, 

Mr. Speaker, and we know all the officers are important 

because when else would we get a report as we do on foster 

care if we didn’t have those people. 

 

Well what if there was that kind of messing around with any of 

the officers on a continual basis? This pattern that we’ve started 

is very disturbing. It’s very disturbing for not only us here, but 

it’s disturbing for people outside of the Legislative Assembly 

who would look at this and say, what is it that we have started 

here? And why can we not, particularly with officers of this 

Assembly, get it right? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we have almost taken on a dual role 

here, a dual role here for the opposition. Not only do we have to 

go and comb through this Bill and try and make out what it is 

that the changes that are doing. But as well now, we have to be 

very wary of how these members are going to move this 

through, and will they actually do what they’re saying they will 

do, what they will do at the end of the day. 

 

So we shouldn’t have to be doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

now we’re into that. Just a few short years and we are now 

piling up a stack of documentation about actions of this member 

which lend us then to think what will they be saying, and what 

can we read into that, and what will they actually do, even if 

they speak of that they have spoken to people or that they will 

allow this, that this will be an Act that will allow people to vote. 

I guess the issue was there was nothing here as well about who 

was contacted or what were the problems, a clear statement on 

here were the issues that impacted our elections to date. Just 

simply that we will have a Bill and that there will be photo ID 

because we think that other people are doing this. 

 

And again, as I mentioned before, there was The Blind Voters 

Act. It was one chance the Minister of Justice had, had an 

opportunity to do something forward looking. And that was to 

assist, as the federal government did and are looking at doing, 

to do that. But we see nothing about that here, nothing about to 

give a very specific issue . . . It wouldn’t have taken very much 

for that minister to do that. But in fact, no, he turned the other 

way and then put in photo ID, which we never heard anybody 

come here. 

 

At least we had somebody here in terms of representing blind 

voters in this province, somebody who the minister spoke very 

highly of. So I was very disappointed that he didn’t take and 

move forward on that because it wouldn’t have taken much for 

Saskatchewan to take that step and move ahead. 

 

Because again under . . . We’re changing some of the human 

rights. So he’s obviously addressed his mind or directed his 

thinking to the Human Rights Code. But it was not something 

that was on the radar screen. So we wonder why he didn’t do 

that when he could’ve perhaps then moved forward on that 

whole issue. But no, he decided not to. Perhaps he would just sit 

around and smile like the Cheshire cat over there. But, I mean, 

why not do something positive and move on something like 

that? 

 

Instead he brings forward a Bill where he talks about, in his 

press release, it’s just about ID, photo ID, and at that point in 

time has everybody in the long-term care homes talking about 

how is that going to work? How is that going to work? We 

haven’t had, some of us, a licence here for a while, and now 

we’re going to do that. So why, even if he says he’s going to 



6384 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

take care of it now, why did he not even say at that time to not 

cause that sort of consternation, for people to think that, you 

know, it’s just photo ID, and he’s not going to look at it. 

 

But he’s asking a lot of people to just sort of trust me. Trust me 

and, you know, I’ll get this thing through. You know, maybe we 

could . . . I wouldn’t go that far, but maybe if we could do that 

in terms of saying, in terms of saying at that if he even got a 

deal, we’re not certain that he would move it forward and in 

fact that the rest of the caucus would then support it. Or the 

Premier might just say, well we should have a talk about this 

because this isn’t really where we want to go, and what should 

we be doing here? What should we be doing here? 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these comments in terms of The 

Election Amendment Act are important, and I think if we’re a 

democratic society, these are important. And this is not just for 

those of us who still have the photo ID and who go about our 

business. And the cost of the photo ID, is there an added cost 

that will be there? 

 

Every day we hear now, we hear that things are not so well, 

even though those members would like to say that they are. 

We’re hearing more people at food banks, more homelessness. 

And who are those? Those are people all on fixed incomes. 

 

And now with the photo ID, is there a cost? Well just trust us, 

just trust us on that one, trust us like you did on the . . . The 

Minister of Health said, trust me. I talked to him and to the 

Privacy Commissioner. He said trust me with the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner, the SLGA. Just trust us on the electoral 

officer, we’ll get that one through too. I’m sure the internal 

board of economy said, just trust us and we’ll get this thing 

through. 

 

And now comes The Election Act again. And he just said, just 

trust us, just trust us and don’t worry; there’ll be no rising cost. 

Just trust us. The photo ID will be anything you can pick out of 

your cupboard there and just bring it along and do that. If it is 

that easy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why are they changing this? 

Why would you be changing this if it’s to make it easier? And 

then you can say, well, we can just use anything. We can use 

anything out of there. Just grab a photo off of your 25th 

wedding anniversary and bring it along. We’ll use that. That’s 

good enough too and, you know, just trust us on this. And who 

knows what it is that people will have. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And again as I said, we’ve got an electoral officer sitting there. 

We don’t have one. And where are we at on that? Who is going 

to deal with this Act when it comes to this? Who is this going to 

. . . What is this promoting? And who is going to monitor this if 

the Chief Electoral Officer is not in place to start the thinking 

about how this is going to work, to start the regulation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t walk out one day from here and 

pass a Bill and then . . . There are people that need to be trained. 

We’re going to have interpretations out in the field during the 

election, the upcoming election, and people will have to be 

there to answer these questions. And who is that going to be? 

Where is the training? And when will the training start on this 

to have this done? Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a woefully 

inadequate way of proceeding on a Bill as important as this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve talked about people in long-term 

care. We can talk about students. We can talk about people who 

. . . students who are transient. We can talk about actually 

people who are transient, people in apartments who move quite 

often. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rental increases that people have 

had to live with has caused many people, many people on fixed 

incomes . . . We have met with many people on fixed incomes 

to try and deal with this issue, to try and deal because they 

could not afford the rents. And they had to move to another 

place. Some people have moved twice. 

 

They moved during the initial time when apartments were 

bought up, and we know about that issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They moved people in apartments because they’re being 

changed to condos. That seems to have passed now. But now 

they’ve gone into other apartments. The rents went up and those 

people . . . with meeting with people and they were having to 

move again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now for those fortunate to be homeowners or to be farmers or 

whatever to spend your entire life in one place, maybe that’s a 

foreign kind of concept. Maybe it’s a foreign concept to be 

having to move like that. But here were seniors who got evicted 

because they couldn’t pay for condominiums. They moved into 

rental units, and then the rents went up, and they had to leave 

again. People who in the years when they should be visiting 

with their families, doing a little bit of travelling, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, whatever it is that people would want to do, they are 

jumping and now having to move. And now we have that they 

might need more ID than normal, and this is what they need to 

try and deal with this issue. So this is an important issue. 

 

Now we also had another, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

People talked about consultation. We want to talk about 

consultation. Well we heard all about the consultation and what 

happened there in terms of people coming back and the various 

groups coming and saying, we didn’t get consulted with. So 

now again we’re told, well all you have to do is trust us, and 

we’re consulting with all these groups who need the . . . We 

won’t tell you who they are. The minister has not said who that 

they might be doing this consultation with. Who are they doing 

the consultation with? 

 

But we know what happened to the former minister of 

Environment and the consultation she did. That was quite clear 

in this House day after day, when every day somebody would 

come in and would say, well you didn’t consult with us. And 

then next day another group would come and say, you didn’t 

consult with us, when the minister stood here and said here that 

she did this, that she did . . . that she consulted. 

 

So you know, we look over . . . We’re attempting to deal with 

the new Environment minister or the Minister of Environment. 

But again this just seems to be a little rampant. I think it is. 

Rampant is the right word to use, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 

there in terms of all the things, where people’s trust has been 

broken. And people feel that, on that side, they seem to be able 

to say anything that they want, anything that they want. 

 

Minister of Health saying that there is no loan guarantees. And 

then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I read in the paper that perhaps the 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6385 

government could be on the hook for this if this deal goes south, 

as they put it. The government could be on the hook for this. 

And that’s an interesting, developing story that’s coming in.  

 

And people out in rural Saskatchewan particularly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are very interested in the story of how this long-term 

care facility is coming forward. And they have to do bake sales. 

And they have the workers raise money. They have to come 

around, and everybody has to contribute monthly. The RMs 

[rural municipality] have to come up with extra tax dollars to 

build a seniors’ long-term care facility in their area. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that is somewhat of a concern for everybody 

who has to deal with this. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very, very important thing that 

they’re doing, that is being asked of us to pass. Again as I said, 

we have to look at this. I know there’s a number of other people 

who will be wanting to speak on this. We have had other issues 

come up in terms . . . There’s the whole issue in court under the 

funds from the Progressive Conservative Party that are being 

held, where the Deputy Premier and the Premier said that they 

asked be struck off of that, not having to attend court. 

 

Well now we find that they’re having to appear in court and, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this all leads to trust in bringing forward 

this Act, The Election Amendment Act, where they wanted their 

names struck. They weren’t going to be any part of that 

Progressive Conservative fund that’s in court, and they went to 

court on that. And they actually went to court on that, and the 

judge looked at that and said, no, well I think you have to be 

here. You have to be here. And that’s an order from a judge, so 

they’re now going to have to appear. 

 

Now all of this in terms of part of the democratic right, this 

goes to the heart of The Election Act and the democratic right of 

people to vote and the democratic right of parties to exist. A 

democratic right because I know that the members over there 

would . . . Every time they hear that the Progressive 

Conservatives are there, that sends shivers through them or 

sends, as my colleague here says, sends fear through them 

because they understand what that means. They understand 

what that means. 

 

All those little columns in the National Post and stuff on their 

stand on potash, that’s causing them a little grief, and these 

things are starting to mount. They’re starting to mount because 

people are seeing that they’ve lost their way and are losing it 

badly on a number of fronts. 

 

Now again here, they talk about that this will not 

disenfranchise, this will not disenfranchise voters. But all, to 

me, the statements or anything I’ve heard in terms of who they 

have contacted, who they will be talking to are very unclear, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to what it is that is going on here. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m wondering what more surprises lie 

within The Election Amendment Act. What more we will have 

to do? There seems to be something that most of these . . . The 

minister tells us that he’s looked at these things. But I wonder 

how important this really is to him. I wonder how important this 

is or how important it’ll be. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are issues of mobility. There are 

whole other issues that they could have dealt with. They could 

have dealt with the issues around, as I mentioned, the blind 

voters. There are many disenfranchised people; they could have 

looked at making their way easier to vote. That’s what I would 

say that that minister should have done. They could have made 

it easier to vote. Instead he has made this harder, more difficult 

for certain groups in our society to actually vote and participate 

in the democratic process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There are many other discussions we could have had. People, 

instead of being on the cutting edge of moving forward using 

the technology that we have that’s in existence today, we don’t 

see any of that in this Bill. Instead what we have is photo ID. 

And our question is, why did they not look at some of these 

other things? Why did they not look at improving accessibility? 

Why did they not look at some of the other concerns people 

have raised during elections when with the . . . and talk to the 

returning officers in the field about the issues that have come up 

around this Act? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the things I think they should 

have done. Those are the things they should have done. But 

instead people are left with questions surrounding the number 

of issues that I have spoken on. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are . . . We have to 

do the due diligence on this Act. There are more colleagues that 

would like to speak on this, and so with that I would be 

adjourning debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to enter into the debate on this 

particular Bill, the Bill No. 162, An Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, it is truly a pleasure to 

do so on behalf of the good folks of Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is of course I think a very, very important Bill 

and one that needs to, we need to pay a fair amount of attention 

to as what it does, Mr. Speaker. It’s really calling for changes 

that will require voters, when they want to exercise their right to 

select their representative, they will have to have a ID, a photo 

ID in order to be able to participate in the election. 

 



6386 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for those of us who just take this as 

commonplace because we’re fortunate enough to, you know, 

have a driver’s licence and to drive vehicles and be able to 

participate in that way, and we have a photo ID with our 

driver’s licence and we just take that as, you know, a 

commonplace, everyday occurrence. But what we fail to 

recognize in this particular, and I think this fails to recognize 

here, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that that’s not a privilege that 

everybody in this great province enjoys. 

 

We have those people, Mr. Speaker, who find themselves 

within the . . . without, I should say, the financial ability to be 

able to afford a vehicle or to use a vehicle and therefore perhaps 

don’t even have a driver’s licence and really have no need for 

one. And so that’s one of the group of people, Mr. Speaker, 

who certainly wouldn’t have as a automatic a photo ID. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s others of course with our society. I 

can think of some cases that are very close to home for me, 

within my immediate family, of those people who have, getting 

up there in age and have really enjoyed a full and productive 

life and continue to, but find themselves uncertain and perhaps 

not confident any more in their abilities to operate a motor 

vehicle and therefore no longer have a motor vehicle and 

therefore no longer need or find the need to have a driver’s 

licence and therefore don’t automatically have a voter ID. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we also find within this particular legislation, 

it is not I think doing what should be the role of any 

government of any political stripe, and that is to further the 

cause of democracy. We are very, very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, 

to live in a province and in a country that holds near and dear to 

our heart the principles of democracy and the right of people to 

participate and to select their representative and their 

representation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a right that we take for granted, I 

think, in this country. We’ve enjoyed it so much. We take for 

granted, many, many of us, and that we don’t realize the 

sacrifices that are made by individuals around the world in 

other countries who haven’t had the same experience as us, who 

haven’t enjoyed the ability to live in a democracy, and to do so 

in a way that would enhance their life and enhance the life of 

their families and their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people today who lay down their 

life in an attempt to be able to establish democracy in their 

country. And democracy is a very fragile thing. If we don’t 

nurture it, we don’t support it, and we don’t continually work at 

it, we can very easily lose it. 

 

And we’ve seen that in other jurisdictions around the world, 

where democracy perhaps was taken a little bit too much for 

granted and changes were allowed to happen that kept 

restricting the ability of the individual to have input into the 

selection of their representation. And as those opportunities 

slipped away, they were replaced with guidelines that restricted 

the individual’s ability to participate at election time to a point 

where democracy was lost. 

 

When we look back through history, we see many, many 

examples of that, where history tells us where democracy was 

lost because we didn’t protect it, that we didn’t work at 

ensuring that it grew and it became stronger. In fact history will 

show us that many of those people in power at the time worked 

at lowering the expectations of the general public as to what 

their rights were in a democratic system, lowering that 

expectation so that they can slowly strip away those rights, 

slowly erode those rights so that they no longer had the strength 

to elect their representation, their representative on a local level 

or representation on a more general or national level. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a role of government should be 

looking at ways and means on an ongoing basis, and I don’t 

think that you can just can make change and say, there, it’s 

done; we’ll protect democracy forever and a day. That is not the 

case. I believe that we need to look at a continuous 

re-examination of democracy, but with the purpose of 

identifying ways and means that we can strengthen, strengthen 

our democracy. And the only way you can strengthen 

democracy is having a greater number of people participating at 

election time. 

 

We have seen in the past where numbers of people who 

participating have slid. And, Mr. Speaker, we should be looking 

at why that is. Why is it that less people are participating? Is 

there certain groups, certain age groups of people who aren’t 

participating? And we should be working at educating them and 

encouraging them to take part in our democratic system because 

that is what makes it strong. 

 

Now I’ve had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to knock on a lot of 

doors during both the election process and in between elections. 

I have run into people, of which I’m sure we all have, who have 

said at election time, oh well no, I’m not going to vote; I’m not 

going to take part. And many of them have shared with me the 

fact that they haven’t on a regular basis. They just sort of don’t 

participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve taken the time to encourage them to vote. I’m 

not saying just to vote for me. Of course I would appreciate 

that, but I encourage them to look into what the positions were 

of the various political parties that were offering their services 

and for them to look at which . . . and to make their own 

decision as to which political party they thought had a platform 

that best represented them, best represented what they wanted 

to see done in this great province of ours, and then to support 

that party. 

 

If that was my party, I would really, really appreciate their 

support. But it could also be of some other political stripe. And 

I encourage that because I believe fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, 

we all benefit from a stronger, from a strong society that is 

governed by a democratic process. And in order to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to have participation. We have to have people 

who are willing to take part in elections. 

 

I often tell people that it’s not only a right that they have. It’s 

not only a right that they have to go to the polls and select their 

representation, whether that representation be in the local 

government or provincial government or our national 

government. They should participate in all levels of the 

democratic process because that’s what makes our democracy 

strong. That is what makes our democracy work. 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6387 

And I believe a role of any government of any political stripe 

should be to look at ways and means that we can continuously 

enhance our democratic process, continually encourage people 

to participate and to raise the level of participation, whether it’s 

through education or whatever it may take to encourage people 

to understand that it is so important. It is so important to 

maintain a democratic system through participation. Without 

that, we’ll lose it. 

 

Now there are other forms of government I guess, Mr. Speaker, 

in this world. And I think it was, I think it might have been 

Winston Churchill who once said that democracy may not be 

the best form of representation but it certainly beats whatever is 

in second place. And it certainly does. I think there’s flaws 

within our democratic system and those flaws should be 

identified and worked at improving, improving those flaws 

because the greatest flaw is to have people not participate. That 

really weakens the system. 

 

When you elect a government but based on a narrow band of 

people who actually participated, then you’re electing a 

government based on a narrow band of opinion. And that is 

wrong. That will lead to the loss of democracy. That will lead to 

the erosion of our democratic rights. 

 

And what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is look at broadening the 

base of people who participate, the people who come out at 

election time and who express their opinion as to their wishes 

for representation. And you do that through the ballot box. And 

time and time again that has been proven to be, you know, the 

right way, the right thing to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to . . . When I say we, I mean the 

government. The government of any political stripe should be 

looking at ways and means of strengthening the democratic 

process, making this necessary change, bringing those changes 

into the forum here, our legislature which is the forum of 

democracy, the opportunity for us to discuss the matters. To 

bring those changes here so we, the opposition, can have input. 

The government can have their input into it. And we can 

develop programs and policies here that will enhance 

democracy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly raised the question around the 

photo ID proposals here as to whether it really meets that 

measuring stick. Does this suggestion really meet that 

measuring stick of improving democracy? Does it really meet 

the measuring stick of encouraging people to participate at 

election time? All evidence, Mr. Speaker, is no, it doesn’t. No, 

it doesn’t. 

 

And why? Well I’ve kind of gone through some of those 

reasons already, Mr. Speaker. Because there are those people 

out there who are of voting age who simply don’t have readily a 

photo ID because they simply don’t require one. I require one 

because I have a driver’s licence that requires me to have a 

photo ID with it. But there are many people out there who don’t 

have a driver’s licence for various reasons, and they wouldn’t 

automatically have a photo ID. And without that photo ID, 

according to the suggested changes here of the government, it 

would restrict their ability to participate at election time. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, certainly, certainly is not something we want 

to do. 

We also . . . As I said a little earlier about some close relatives 

of mine who have enjoyed a very, very productive life in this 

country, in this province and have reached the age where they 

don’t any longer feel comfortable in operating a motor vehicle, 

so they’re not doing it. And as a result of it now, Mr. Speaker, 

they don’t require their driver’s licence that they’ve had for 

many years. They no longer require that driver’s licence. And it 

would be one of the things that if you don’t require it, why 

would you spend the money on it? If you don’t spend the 

money on a driver’s licence, you don’t have the photo ID. At 

election time, they wouldn’t be able to vote because they 

haven’t got a photo ID to be able to prove who they are. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we find it interesting that these 

changes would I think really cause people not to have the right 

to exercise their free and democratic rights to vote, to express 

their opinion, their wishes as to selection of representation 

whether it be on the local level or whether it be on a 

provincial-wide level or even a national level. 

 

But this pertains primarily to local government and to the 

provincial government. And I would hate to see those people 

being denied their democratic right because, as I said earlier, 

our democracy, the strength of our democracy is built on 

encouraging people to participate, not to sit at home. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a, you know, a list that goes on and 

on, I suppose you’d say, of people that this government has 

failed in its term of government of three and a half years or so. 

This government has failed seniors in this province and seniors 

who are of course coping, Mr. Speaker, with the rising cost of 

living, in particular rising rents. And we see that on an ongoing 

basis where rents are galloping, I guess you would say, up while 

the income of seniors are fixed, and they are finding it more and 

more difficult to be able to maintain a reasonable, reasonable 

shelter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in some cases where we’ve seen the increase in rental rates, 

we’ve seen the increase in utility rates, I know that there are 

some seniors in this great province of ours who, after spending 

their life here, after working very hard and building this great 

province of ours through their dedication and in some cases 

through their sacrifices, we enjoy a very, very prosperous 

province today. 

 

But not the same can be said for our seniors who find 

themselves paying high rent, increased utility costs, and doing 

so on a fixed income, doing so on a fixed income. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in some cases some of the seniors that I have had the 

opportunity to talk to in my constituency have expressed to me 

concern over where do they get the money to continue to make 

the rent increases, to continue to make the utility increases. 

Their only place that they can cut is from their food budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that would be a shame to find seniors who 

have spent their life in this great province of ours, working very 

hard in this province, building this great province that we’ve 

inherited, and we don’t have the ability to ensure that those 

seniors are able to live, retire, and to live with a reasonable 

income and a reasonable lifestyle. That, Mr. Speaker, is just one 

more betrayal, I guess you would say, of the good folks by this 

government. 

 



6388 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

Now we see, Mr. Speaker, that many people who no longer 

have — perhaps never did have — a driver’s licence, and there 

are some of those. Fact is, a couple in my constituency that I 

know that . . . Well I’ve known them for a number of years 

now. And all during that period of time they’ve never had a 

driver’s licence and they’ve never had need for one because 

they don’t own a vehicle. They use public transit and they are 

well served by public transit. And they’re certainly satisfied 

with it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these good folks simply don’t have a driver’s 

licence, and thusly they don’t have the automatic photo ID that 

you and I perhaps would automatically think of when asked 

about a photo ID. We’d pull out our driver’s licence because 

that serves the purpose. That’s not the case here, Mr. Speaker. 

These good folks don’t have it, and they have no need for it. 

They have no need for it because they don’t have a vehicle. 

They don’t plan to have a vehicle and they are quite satisfied 

using public transportation. And they, quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, would expend X number of dollars for no reason at all 

other than to have a photo ID. 

 

Now if they don’t have that and an election is called and one of 

the requirements when they show up at the polls is to be able to 

produce a photo ID and they don’t have one, well, Mr. Speaker, 

they may not vote. The concern I would have is some of these 

folks, you know, would either simply not go to vote because 

they say, I don’t have a photo ID. I need one, so I’m just not 

going to bother going. Or they may. They may go to the polls, 

and then when asked by the deputy returning officer to provide 

their identity, to provide a photo ID so that they can verify who 

they are, they can’t produce one. They feel awkward and 

embarrassed and simply leave the polls, not voting. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, once again we lessen participation. We 

lessen our ability to maintain a strong, democratic system 

because we haven’t got people participating. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Speaker, this certainly . . . Act isn’t headed in 

the right direction. It is probably headed in the wrong direction 

and is certainly not, not doing what I think the role of any 

government of any political stripe should be. And that is, first 

and foremost, it should be to encourage democracy, should be 

to encourage the strengthening of our democratic system. 

 

And like I said, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity on a 

number of occasions to talk to folks on the doorstep. I also here, 

not too long ago, had the opportunity to address a group of folks 

who were graduating or in process I guess you would say, near 

graduation from the Adult Learning Centre. And there I had the 

opportunity to address them and, you know, I had my little 

spiel. 

 

But whenever I meet with groups like that, Mr. Speaker, I 

certainly take the time to introduce myself and give them a bit 

of my background and perhaps some of my philosophy, where I 

stand personally. But I always like to open the floor up to 

questions and answers. Because I believe that that’s the 

opportunity for the individuals out there to ask the question that 

they may have on their mind. And I had that opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to do that to a group of about 15 young adults and it 

was very, very informative and interesting. 

 

But one of the questions was put to me by a young lady there 

who shared with me the fact that she had never . . . And I don’t 

want to date her, but I’m going to guess at her age at about 

somewhere between 25 and 30 years of age. And she shared 

with me and the class gathered there that she had never voted. 

She had never voted at any election — either in the municipal 

election, provincial election, or federal election. She just didn’t 

vote. She just didn’t think it was important. It was of no interest 

to her. 

 

So we had a real nice discussion on that with the group gathered 

there as to the importance of democracy and the importance of 

people participating in democracy. And I encouraged everybody 

there that when the next election rolls around — whether it be a 

municipal election or a provincial election or a federal election 

— that they each take the responsibility to attempt to meet the 

candidates, if possible. But failing that . . . And meeting the 

candidates, I don’t mean just meeting them and shaking their 

hand and going. I mean to have the opportunity to talk to them 

about the issues that may concern them. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Failing that, or on top of that perhaps, they should seek out 

information from each political party that’s offering them their 

representation, to get their pamphlets, to get the information. 

With that would come contact numbers. From that, if questions 

arose, you could phone the contact numbers, ask the various 

political parties where they stood on the various issues — the 

issues that affect you, the issues that were near and dear to your 

heart. And that way you could glean the information as to the 

position of political parties on various issues. 

 

I think we all have certain areas of our economy and certain 

areas of our society that we hold near and dear to us and we 

would like to see either certainly safeguarded, if not only 

safeguarded, but improved. And in order to do that you need to 

know what position various political parties have on that 

particular issue. 

 

So to do that you want to contact a representative of that 

political party, put forward your questions, get the answers, get 

all the information you can, so that the day before the election 

you can sit down and glean through all of this and then to make 

a decision — an informed decision, a decision that is based on 

the information you’ve been able to gather from the various 

political parties. And make that decision based on that 

information, and then go to the polls and support the party and 

the individual representing that party that holds what you think 

is the ideas or the positions that best reflect that you have or that 

you want to see. 

 

So we certainly made that point, Mr. Speaker, over and over 

again with the good folks there that they had a responsibility. 

They had a responsibility to democracy. They had a 

responsibility to the city. They had a responsibility to the 

province. They had a responsibility to this country to participate 

in democracy at election time. They had a responsibility to do 

so in an informed way by gathering the information from the 

various political parties and the representatives, and use that 

information as the basis of the decision making in their process 

of deciding who or what political party they were going to 

support at election time. 

 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6389 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that is so very, very, important. And like I 

made a point out of it that they didn’t have to vote for me. They 

didn’t have to vote for my political party. They may not all live 

in my constituency. But I did want them to vote for a political 

party. I did want them to take part in the democratic process 

because that is what makes our system work. Participating in a 

democratic system is what makes that system work. That’s what 

brought all of us here. That’s what brought all of us here with a 

responsibility to represent the good folks that brought us here. 

 

And we need, in order to do that, we need . . . We have a 

responsibility as elected members to stay in touch with our 

constituents, to hear from our constituents, and to bring those 

concerns that are brought to our attention by our constituents, to 

bring those concerns forward, either through a caucus process 

or into the Legislative Assembly here. But we need to be able to 

bring forward those concerns on a regular basis. 

 

But in order to do that, folks have to participate. The folks out 

there have to participate. And we don’t want just a narrow band 

because if a narrow band of people making representation, to 

me would be making a narrow representation. It would be only 

the representation in their area of concern and they would only 

be bringing forward their thoughts and their concerns on those 

particular issues. 

 

What we need to have is a much broader, a much broader band 

of representation. You need to have people from all walks of 

life, people who have various different experiences and people 

who have various different issues, and bringing those concerns 

forward to us, us the MLAs, so that we can then in turn use our 

opportunity in this great forum here to discuss those issues, to 

make that representation, and make that decision making on 

Bills such as the one before us, Bill 162, The Election 

Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, democracy is a very fragile thing. 

Democracy is something that needs to be supported. It should 

be enhanced whenever the opportunity arises. It should be 

enhanced and it needs to be strengthened so that we have . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . and nurtured, as my good friend and 

seatmate here mentions in my ear here. It needs to be nurtured. 

And yes, it needs to be nurtured. It needs to be supported. It 

needs to be nurtured in order to grow. 

 

We need to have a democracy that will not only serve us today. 

We need to have a democracy that is well-placed and a good, 

solid foundation for the future so that future generations will be 

able to benefit from a strong democratic process. Because that’s 

what really makes it work. 

 

It’s the opportunity to share ideas. It’s the opportunity to 

disagree, and that’s what this forum is all about. It’s the 

opportunity also for advice. Nobody has it all right. This 

government over here doesn’t have it all right. There are Bills 

that will come forward that this government has . . . perhaps on 

the right track, but maybe they haven’t gone far enough. And 

that’s what the good folks out there that . . . When we, the 

opposition, go out and talk to stakeholders and those people 

who are on the front line who may be affected by some of these 

changes, when we ask them about these proposed changes, they 

may say, you know, it’s headed in the right direction but it 

doesn’t go far enough. And it’s our job to bring this back to the 

government and point that out to them, that, you know, that 

they need to go further. On this particular aspect of the Bill or 

that particular aspect of a Bill, they need to go further. 

 

Or in some cases, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they’re going too far. 

Perhaps the good folks out there, when we’ve gone out in the 

general public and talked to them about the proposed changes to 

the particular Act, they will identify the fact that this 

government is going too far, going too far in this particular 

direction. And as a result of that, it’s not going to achieve what 

is the measuring stick, and that measuring stick should be an 

improvement and a net benefit to Saskatchewan people. They 

see this not as an improvement and not as a benefit. In fact they 

believe that certain changes may be anything but an 

improvement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is why it is so important that we have a 

democratic system that is supported, as my good friend says, 

nurtured so it grows, so it can be a strong system, so it could 

best reflect the wants and the needs of Saskatchewan people in 

particular. Because after all, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 

that Saskatchewan people are certainly wonderful people. No 

matter where you go in the world, you meet good people, but I 

don’t think you’ll find anybody better than Saskatchewan 

people. And they certainly deserve to have the best. But in order 

to have the best, you have to have a strong democratic system. 

And a strong democratic system can only be achieved by 

greater participation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at suggestions from the 

government of changes to the electoral process here and to 

cause a requirement of people to produce photo IDs, we need to 

look at how does this affect the people of Saskatchewan. Is this 

something that everybody would just automatically have and 

have no problem to produce? Well no, it’s not the case. That’s 

not the case at all. 

 

What it does show us and what it does show the good folks out 

there — and many of them have brought this to my attention 

and to our attention when we’ve been out speaking to various 

groups here — is that this does not encourage people to 

participate in the democratic system. In fact this is one of the 

things where they believe the government has gone off track, 

the government has gone too far, and that this in turn really be 

anything but an encouragement to people to participate. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I had it brought to my attention of a case 

where a couple simply, you know, as far they could recall, they 

simply don’t have a photo ID because they don’t have a driver’s 

licence. They don’t have a need for a driver’s licence. They 

don’t have a car and they don’t use a car. They use public 

transportation. And therefore they don’t have what you and I 

would automatically think of a photo ID or a driver’s licence. 

They don’t have that. 

 

So they themselves would be reluctant, reluctant to go and vote 

because (a) if they don’t have a photo ID, they believe that they 

may be denied the right to vote. If they were to go to a polling 

place with the number of people around and they were singled 

out as the only people in that room that didn’t have the right to 

vote because they didn’t have a photo ID, they would feel quite 

embarrassed about it. But so to save any potential chance of 

being embarrassed, they simply wouldn’t go vote. That, Mr. 



6390 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

Speaker, it does not, does not encourage democracy. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, what it does do, it probably goes the opposite 

direction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues and a number of 

concerns around this particular Bill and the effects it has on 

Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, there is certain 

yardsticks, I suppose, that I think a government should use 

when they measure the changes that they want to make to a 

particular program, or in this case to a Bill, when they bring it 

forward to the legislature here for our consideration. 

 

Some of the information that they should provide — and I have 

yet to see this government provide it, particularly in this Bill — 

is, who asked for these changes? My question to the 

government is, who asked for these changes? Who asked that 

the photo ID be certainly a very important part, if not the big 

part, of the right of a person to participate in the democratic 

process, their right to vote, their right to select their own, their 

representative that they want to represent them, whether it be in 

the legislature or whether it be in the city or whether it be 

federally? To do so, to do so with the freedom to do just exactly 

that is be able to go to the polls and vote for the individual or 

the political party that they wish to have represent them, rather 

than being concerned about their need to have a photo ID in 

order to get into the polls. Who asked for this, who asked for 

these changes is a question that certainly I think we need to use 

as one of the measuring sticks. 

 

Another question I would have of the government is, how was it 

determined that these changes were needed? Who said that 

these changes were needed? Who suggested that by making 

these changes, it would increase participation in our electoral 

process? Who was it? Where did it come from? Was it 

individuals or was it groups? Who provided this information? 

Who made this request? Who suggested that with these 

changes, it would benefit Saskatchewan people, it would benefit 

the electoral process, it would benefit the process of 

maintaining democracy here because we would have more 

people participating, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Again through all the information that’s been provided to us, 

the opposition, and Mr. Speaker, our opportunity to talk to 

people across this great province who are I guess you’d say 

stakeholders in this, that’s one of the questions that they put to 

me is, and to us is, how is it determined that these were going to 

be what was needed, that these were the right changes? How 

would that be done? 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question I suppose that pops to mind is, 

what consultations were carried out by this government? Before 

these changes were recommended to the Legislative Assembly, 

the government has a responsibility to talk to the stakeholders 

across this great province of ours to determine that these are the 

changes that are necessary. They need to do that by talking to 

individuals, to groups, to whomever would have input into this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I ask, I ask what consultations were carried out by this 

government. Who did they talk to? When did they talk to them? 

When did they communicate with them, whether they talked to 

them, Mr. Speaker, or was it a questionnaire? Was it some form 

of communication? Was that done? What was the form of 

communication? Who was it communicated to? Those are the 

questions, Mr. Speaker, that remain unanswered here. 

 

And the government is saying, well you know, we . . . Trust me. 

Trust me. Accept these proposals. Trust me. You know, these 

are what it will take to improve democracy. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m leery. I’m very, very leery about the government suggesting 

that these changes will improve democracy. I’m leery about that 

because I don’t see how it can encourage greater participation in 

our democratic process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, next question I would have of the government is, 

what was the reaction from those who were consulted with, 

from those who were consulted with if the government actually 

did do some consulting out there? They haven’t told us who 

they consulted with. But if they actually did do the consulting, 

then what was the reaction from those people who they talked 

to? 

 

Did they all stand up and applaud these changes as being the 

right changes, or did they say, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the 

government was on the wrong track and that these changes 

would not further the cause of democracy? In fact what these 

changes would do is perhaps lessen the number of people who 

would participate in the election process at election time. 

 

If that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, then why doesn’t this 

government come clean with that? Why didn’t they produce 

that information in saying, this is who we talked to, this is what 

they said, and this is why we’re making these 

recommendations? And if we see a situation where the 

government is making recommendations to changes to the Act 

that is different from what they heard through their consultation 

process, then one would have to wonder, what’s the motive of 

this government? 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think any time a government changes anything, 

whether it be an Act or whether it be in regulations, there is a 

couple of yardsticks that a government should use, and I say a 

government of any political stripe should use. And one of the 

yardsticks is, how will these changes affect Saskatchewan 

people? How will these changes affect Saskatchewan people? 

Will it improve Saskatchewan people, their ability to participate 

in elections? Will these particular changes improve the numbers 

of people who show up at polls on election day? Will it improve 

the ability for people in this great province to become informed 

of the positions of various candidates and political parties on 

various issues? Will it? That’s my question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And another yardstick I believe is important to be used, Mr. 

Speaker, is the yardstick of, how will these changes improve the 

welfare and the lives of Saskatchewan people? How will 

somebody who is living in Preeceville or Kindersley or Carlyle, 

how will their life be improved as a result of these changes? 

How will the lives of their families be improved as a result of 

these changes? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government hasn’t got the ability to answer 

those questions, then I believe that they have failed in their 

consultation process. I believe that they have, in that regards, 

they have failed the people of Saskatchewan. 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6391 

And in these changes, Mr. Speaker, I see as not being beneficial 

at all to the people of this great province. I don’t see any of 

these changes, anywhere, a suggestion that it’s going to 

improve the number of people that’s going to turn out on 

election day. I don’t see any of that. I don’t see any suggestion 

that these people, that they’re going to improve the number of 

voters, improve the number of people who turn out to cast their 

ballot in favour of the representation that they wish. 

 

I see nothing in this, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to cause the 

people of Saskatchewan to be better informed, cause the people 

of this great province to be informed as to what the policies and 

the positions of the various political candidates and the various 

political parties that offer themselves to representation. 

 

I see nothing in this, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to enhance our 

democratic system. I see nothing in this that’s going to nurture 

and grow our system to make it stronger, to make it a solid 

foundation for the future so that future generations who inherit 

this great province of ours do so with a strong democratic 

system in place that they can rely on, and that they too have the 

responsibility to improve. And I don’t see any of that in any of 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there is certainly need, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of need for 

further consultation with the good folks of Saskatchewan. We 

need to go out and talk to those people who are truly interested 

in maintaining a democratic system and maintaining a strong 

system so that we can enjoy the benefits of it today, tomorrow, 

and well into the future. 

 

So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we’ll need a little more time 

to consider various suggested changes to this Act. In order to do 

that, we’ll need the time to consult with the people across this 

great province. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Northeast has moved adjournment on Bill No. 162, The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act. Is the Assembly 

ready to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to be able to rise to speak to this Bill No. 159, An Act 

to amend The University of Regina Act. This Bill is to make a 

number of changes, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the strategic 

plan outline as the university has already advertised throughout 

the community and elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina has an amazing 

reputation all across the country and outside of the borders of 

Canada as well. And the strategic plan that was adopted is 

called mâmawohkamâtowin, and it transcends into Our Work, 

Our People, Our Communities. It’s the strategic plan for 2009 

to 2014. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this strategic plan came about as the work 

under the University of Regina and the current president of the 

University of Regina, Vianne Timmons. She had announced in 

2008 that a new strategic plan was needed to succeed the 

Building on Progress, the plan for 2004-2009. 

 

In October 2008, the university’s board of governors adopted 

terms of reference for a strategic planning process. At that time 

a facilitation team was formed and prepared to gather 

information and input from stakeholders. Consultations were 

launched in January of 2009, and more than 100 meetings were 

held with faculty, staff, students, alumni, retirees, 

administrators, government officials, professional 

organizations, and educational partners. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one can see that there was a great deal of 

consultation that went into the development of the strategic plan 

that the University of Regina is now proceeding under and 

would be a great example for the Sask Party government to 

follow, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, given that the reputation that 

the Sask Party government has with respect to consultations is 

not one that what I would call as admirable or as being 

cherished, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see on many occasions the Sask Party government 

proceeding with what it decides it wants to do without taking on 

those consultations, or worse yet, Mr. Speaker, saying that there 

has been consultations that have taken place, and when those 

stakeholders are contacted, one finds out that those 

consultations in fact did not take place. And a prime example of 

that, Mr. Speaker, of course would be The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. 

 

One saw under the discussions around The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act . . . And better yet, Mr. Speaker, the former 

minister of Environment at that time, her comments were that 

there were, I believe, six or seven stakeholders that she 

mentioned by name upon the second reading of that particular 

Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, given that I’m the critic for the Environment, 

and was at that time as well, when contacting those stakeholders 

I found out something quite different — that one of the seven, 

Mr. Speaker, actually felt that they were consulted and that the 

minister was proceeding with recommendations that they felt 

that they would support. But that the other six stakeholders that 

the minister mentioned by name (a) felt that they weren’t 

consulted; (b) certainly were not in favour with the Bill that was 

brought forward by the Sask Party at that time; and (c) were 

quite insulted when they found out that the minister actually 

named those organizations in her second reading remarks, when 

they did not concur with what the minister had said about 

having consulted with those organizations with respect to that 

Bill. 

 

So it’s quite a different scenario with the University of Regina. 



6392 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

They went to great lengths to make sure that the various 

stakeholders and a wide range of stakeholders were consulted 

with respect to putting together the new strategic plan that is 

currently in operation. 

 

The information gathered in these consultations, as well as 

more than 40 written submissions and over 1,100 responses to a 

series of online surveys, fed the creation of the strategic plan. 

Now these planning consultations revealed a deep, widespread 

commitment to the future success of the University of Regina. 

They also revealed a call for greater engagement and openness 

to change, a realization that the University of Regina’s size is 

an asset, and a conviction that sustainability in the broadest 

sense needed to be a major emphasis of the university. And as a 

result, the revised vision values and mission statements are also 

part of the strategic plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the strategic plan, mâmawohkamâtowin: 

Our Work, Our People, Our Communities, will hopefully 

position the University of Regina at the centre of this changing 

Saskatchewan. And it will be rooted in responding to the needs 

and aspirations of the students, the people in Saskatchewan and 

the communities, and reaching into the world around us, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one can see that there has been a great deal of thought that’s 

gone into the strategic plan, not just in terms of the insular 

needs of the university institution itself, but the needs of the 

ever-evolving change of students that are attending the 

university, the changes in the communities that the university is 

feeding, the changes in the employment situation across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that the university is obviously 

going to be catering to and also assisting in terms of the courses 

that it offers at this institution. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, it goes beyond that, and I’m 

really proud to be able to see first-hand the work that the 

University of Regina is doing in terms of reaching out into the 

community. One can see through either the involvement of the 

students and the various faculties in terms of how they’re 

reaching in the community and providing assistance to the 

community. 

 

There was a project for instance, Mr. Speaker, that I attended 

the official grand opening of not too long ago, about a month 

ago in the north end of University of Regina with respect to 

innovative technologies in terms of being more cost efficient in 

terms of heating businesses and such, Mr. Speaker. And the 

University of Regina had an intricate role to play with that. 

 

And we can also see through other technologies that the 

University of Regina is expanding on — whether it’s hydrogen 

technology, Mr. Speaker; whether it’s sustainable energy on 

other fronts, Mr. Speaker; whether it’s to deal with issues of 

water safety and quality, Mr. Speaker — the University of 

Regina is proving itself time and time again on each one of 

those fronts and on many others of course that they’re delving 

into at this point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It truly is a centre of excellence. And I am ever so pleased every 

time I receive an opportunity and an invitation to attend any of 

those sessions that they are providing as information sessions or 

any of their update sessions in terms of marking a specific 

occasion, Mr. Speaker. Every time one attends — or every time 

I attend, I should say — any of these occasions at the University 

of Regina, it provides a true, refreshing, educational update for 

myself, Mr. Speaker, and assists me obviously with my 

portfolio, which is the Environment critic portfolio, not to 

mention just in many other ways. 

 

There’s also technology, well actually research that’s being 

done in terms of how balance is affected in seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, and how that affects their general health and their life 

in terms of preventing falls and other particular issues that are 

specific to aging, Mr. Speaker. There is just so much good work 

that’s being done at the University of Regina that unfortunately 

most people don’t even realize the amount of good work that is 

being done through the research. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just research. When one looks at for 

instance the athletic organizations, the athletic teams through 

the University of Regina, one can see the amount of community 

work that’s happening through those particular teams and the 

members of those teams, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that comes from leadership. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to 

say I have the utmost respect, the absolute utmost respect for 

Dr. Vianne Timmons and the team that she is currently working 

with. I’m always amazed by the new and innovative things that 

they are able to come up with respect to bringing about 

improvements for the University of Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that vitality, that energy, and that enthusiasm for the institution 

and for the students and for the community and for the services 

that the University of Regina provides to the community, it 

trickles down, Mr. Speaker. It trickles down to the 

administration. It trickles down to the various professors that 

are teaching various courses, associate professors, the various 

research assistants, and the students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have to say that over the years we’ve seen that enthusiasm and 

that pride that has been ever growing in the University of 

Regina right from, you know, my experiences when I attended 

the University of Regina through to the various presidents along 

the way, Dr. Lloyd Barber and others. And we see how that 

pride and enthusiasm in this institution has grown over the 

many years, Mr. Speaker. And one can see that, as I said, 

through the athletic organizations as well. 

 

I have a 13-year-old daughter, Mr. Speaker, by the name of 

Morgan Morin, obviously, who is very enthusiastic about 

volleyball for instance, Mr. Speaker. She’s currently playing 

with the Regina Volleyball Club in the under 14 category, Mr. 

Speaker, and is very proud to be part of the Voltage team that is 

representing the Regina Volleyball Club for the under 14 girls. 

And they play throughout the province. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now this Regina Volleyball Club has an affiliation with the 

University of Regina women’s Cougars volleyball program, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s absolutely amazing at how intricate that 

affiliation is, whether it’s in terms of providing some assistance 

with coaching on occasion, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s 

actually getting coaches from the University of Regina 

programs into the Regina Volleyball Club program, Mr. 

Speaker, or whether it’s mentoring, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6393 

such a huge, huge component of what’s important for our youth 

and our province, Mr. Speaker, is mentorship. 

 

When those youth, when a 13-year-old like my daughter can 

envision herself attending the University of Regina — and I 

know Dr. Peter MacKinnon is going to challenge me on this — 

but, you know, when she can envision herself attending the 

University of Regina, and not just attending the institution, but 

she’s darn set on playing for the University of Regina women’s 

volleyball team. That’s a pretty phenomenal thing at the age of 

13, when that’s her goal at this point in life already, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now Dr. Peter MacKinnon, when he found out about this, of 

course challenged her on that and said, you know, the 

University of Saskatchewan has a women’s volleyball program 

as well and proceeded to tell her about all the wonderful things 

at the University of Saskatchewan. So luckily enough my 

daughter has a wonderful choice in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

There are two very reputable organizations — institutions, I 

should say — educational institutions, being the University of 

Regina and the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

So needless to say, she’ll have that choice, Mr. Speaker. And 

she has other choices outside the province as well. But it’s a 

very advantageous thing for the children in this province, the 

students in this province to know that we have two very 

reputable educational institutions that they can choose to attend. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina women’s volleyball 

program, as I said, provides great mentorship to young girls like 

mine. They invite them to attend the games at the University of 

Regina of course and really interact well with these young 

players and these young students so that they understand that 

this isn’t something that is distant in the future or it’s 

unreachable or, you know, that these players are larger than life. 

Because quite frankly at the age of 13, the University of Regina 

women’s volleyball team looks like they are larger than life, 

Mr. Speaker. My daughter has big eyes when she goes and 

watches their games and is quite in awe. 

 

So it’s nice when they interact with these young people and let 

them understand that, you know, at one point in time they were 

13 as well, and they had the same reaction when they were 

watching these games. And here they are, they’re now 

representing the institution of the University of Regina. 

 

So the work that these students and these administrators are 

doing in terms of reaching into the community and making sure 

that there is a strong bond between the educational institution, 

being the University of Regina, and the community and the 

surrounding community is vital, Mr. Speaker. And Dr. Vianne 

Timmons and the University of Regina board of governors and 

the administration have fostered that, Mr. Speaker. And this 

strategic plan speaks to that, Mr. Speaker. I’m very impressed 

with the strategic plan, and I’m really impressed with the . . . 

One can see the fruition of the work that has been done. 

 

And the University of Regina, Mr. Speaker, is very open to 

change. And whether that change is in curricula or in the way 

that members of the university community interact with one 

another and with the communities around the university, Mr. 

Speaker, the university, I’ve noticed, is very fluid. They’re very 

flexible. They’re very able to work with the changes that are 

occurring in the province and the changes that are needed 

within the institution to be able to accommodate the changes. 

 

And of course I already spoke to the fact that the University of 

Regina’s size is an incredible asset, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

incredible asset. Despite the fact the University of Regina . . . I 

mean, though the University of Regina is large enough to offer 

comprehensive array of programs, it yet remains compact 

enough to be nimble and responsive to change, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s very important in a society that’s changing very 

quickly, and that’s what we have today, Mr. Speaker. We have, 

through technology and through communication and through 

the advances in both, Mr. Speaker, this is a very ever-evolving 

world. It’s changing very rapidly. It’s changing very quickly. 

The employment situation is changing very rapidly and quickly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the fact that the University of Regina recognizes that, and 

is nimble enough to make those changes as quickly and as 

efficiently and as professionally as they can with the quality 

that is needed is truly an asset, Mr. Speaker. And one can see 

how that’s coming to the advantage of the university, Mr. 

Speaker. The enrolment is up, Mr. Speaker, and that speaks 

highly to the good name that the University of Regina has 

developed for itself. 

 

There’s one more thing I want to point out under the strategic 

plan, Mr. Speaker. And that is under the category, Our Work. 

Because as you will recall, the strategic plan is divided up into 

three, three prongs I guess I would call it. It’s Our Work, Our 

People, and Our Communities. 

 

So when one looks under one of the prongs being Our Work, 

one of them is, “Make the university a leader in environmental 

responsibility. Put sustainability at the core of our teaching, 

research, and campus life.” Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously this is 

something that is of great interest to me because of the critic 

portfolio that I currently represent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what I’m seeing from the 

University of Regina. Whether it’s having erected a windmill 

on top of one of the buildings so that students can see first-hand 

the benefits of what that can provide and the research data that 

is derived from that project, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s 

developing the other technologies at the University of Regina. 

Mr. Speaker, whether it’s, you know, carbon capture and 

sequestration, Mr. Speaker, there are so many different 

technologies and processes, Mr. Speaker, that are being 

researched with respect to protecting the environment and 

bettering the environment. Because quite frankly, obviously we 

know that we are one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gas 

emissions in the country, Mr. Speaker. We are second only to 

Alberta.  

 

And this is something that I’m glad to see that the University of 

Regina is taking on, especially in light of the fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are not seeing any movement from the Sask Party 

government on this particular file, Mr. Speaker. It’s as though 

they’ve fallen asleep on the file, Mr. Speaker, or whether 

there’s absolute complacency on this file, Mr. Speaker, or 

perhaps it’s just that they have no belief in greenhouse gas 

emissions and therefore change in climate, climate change. We 



6394 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

have obviously many, many quotes from members across the 

way as to their skepticism about climate change, Mr. Speaker, 

which is quite astonishing, quite astonishing given the research 

that’s available, the data that’s available. 

 

And if they’re not into research and data, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

some pretty, pretty, you know, simple things that they can do. 

They can go and see for instance how the ocean, level of the 

ocean is affecting the rice fields, Mr. Speaker. They can go and 

see that first-hand. Or if they don’t want to travel that far, they 

can go just next door to Alberta land for instance, Mr. Speaker, 

and go to the area where the glaciers exist and see how much 

recession has happened on those glaciers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I have unfortunately not been able to travel to the rice 

fields to see how the ocean levels have affected the water level 

in the rice fields. But I have been to the glaciers, Mr. Speaker, 

and I have seen that recession. And as a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Would the member 

. . . Would the Government House Leader please state his point 

of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the 

member opposite may have a speech to deliver about the 

environment, I’m not sure how that reflects on the University of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. I would request that the member be 

directed to speak to the Bill, not to some other favourite topic 

she may have. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much. To respond to the point 

of order, Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina is an institution 

that has a very broad foundation, including a area of 

environmental sustainability, Mr. Speaker. And the member is 

talking about the university and the aspects of the university, 

including its centre for environmental sustainability, Mr. 

Speaker. And in talking about environmental sustainability, 

which is one of the key areas of the university, Mr. Speaker, 

referring to the university, Mr. Speaker, and its programs is all 

part of the university’s mandate. It’s part of the university’s 

programs, Mr. Speaker, and it’s about delivering the program of 

the university. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is dealing with changes at the 

university, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Order. I have 

listened to both arguments on each side and I have to . . . And I 

was listening very carefully to the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. She was taking quite a bit of extra latitude, I have to 

admit, on going on to part on the glacier end. I would ask the 

member to please, please keep on referring to the actual Bill 

that she is speaking on, Bill 159, The University of Regina 

Amendment Act. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

reference to Bill No. 159 and looking at the University of 

Regina strategic plan called mâmawohkamâtowin: Our Work, 

Our People, Our Communities, I’m just going to repeat because 

I’m afraid that some of the members opposite didn’t understand 

the reference that I was referring to. 

 

So what I was referring to, Mr. Speaker, is the strategic plan of 

the University of Regina under the Our Work prong, Mr. 

Speaker. And that was, and I’m going to repeat for 

unfortunately the people who, the members opposite who didn’t 

hear that part of my speech and just heard about the fact that I 

was talking about the glaciers receding in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

So the part I was referring to under Our Work is, “Make the 

university a leader in environmental responsibility. Put 

sustainability at the core of our teaching, research, and campus 

life.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have an institution here, the University 

of Regina, that takes that to heart, Mr. Speaker. They are not 

just using wordplay here, Mr. Speaker. They are not just saying 

that to make themselves sound good, Mr. Speaker. And that, 

quite frankly, differs dramatically from the Sask Party members 

opposite. Because we do hear a lot of that from the Sask Party 

government. We hear the same type of verbiage. We hear the 

same type of words, but we see no action. There is no action, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the University of Regina, with respect to Bill 159, is actually 

putting action to the words. They’re actually putting action to 

the verbiage of doing something about climate change, about 

doing something about environmental sustainability . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — What is the 

Government House Leader’s point of order? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Bill before the House deals with the governance of the 

University of Regina, Mr. Speaker, not about the programming 

delivered by the University of Regina. I would ask that you 

direct the member opposite to speak to this particular piece of 

legislation, not to some other subject that is not covered under 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

respond to the point of order. Mr. Speaker, clearly the 

governance of a university has a great deal to do with its 

strategic directions, its plans, its programs, Mr. Speaker, about 

its future and the direction the university goes, Mr. Speaker. If 

the members opposite don’t want to talk about the university, its 

programs, and its governance, Mr. Speaker, maybe they 

shouldn’t be putting forward legislation dealing with that very 

issue. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I have listened to 

both sides. And I have to, I have to say that we are to stick to 

the Bill, to Bill 159. And I would ask the member to please, to 

please stick to the Bill of 159, The University of Regina 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6395 

Amendment Act. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to Bill No. 159, An Act to amend The University of 

Regina Act, I’d like to talk about how the University of Regina 

is such an amazing institution and has this amazing strategic 

plan called mâmawohkamâtowin: Our Work, Our People, Our 

Communities. And through that, Mr. Speaker, and through that, 

Mr. Speaker, they have done some amazing work around 

environmental sustainability. One of the prongs under that 

strategic plan is, “Make the university a leader in environmental 

responsibility,” and “Put sustainability at the core of our 

teaching, research, and campus life.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can see from the Bill before us, Bill 159, 

that the University of Regina is looking to make some further 

improvements. Now this is exactly what we’re looking at as an 

opposition. We always want to make sure that the amendments 

that are being made to any particular Bills are doing exactly 

what is the intention of happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now clearly there was, from the minister’s comments, Dr. 

Vianne Timmons was consulted. And we have a quote from Dr. 

Vianne Timmons about the fact that she’s looking forward to 

the changes that are happening under this Act. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m glad to hear that that’s the case, and I’m glad to 

hear that they consulted with Dr. Vianne Timmons. And we’re 

looking forward to seeing some of the other . . . the list of the 

other consultations that took place as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the University of Regina is taking 

on the role of leadership when it comes to environmental 

sustainability. They are taking on the role of leadership with 

actually putting practice past the words. In other words, they are 

not just putting empty rhetoric on paper. They’re not just 

spewing empty rhetoric like the Sask Party government does, 

Mr. Speaker, but they’re actually putting things into practice. 

 

Whether it’s putting a strategic plan in place to better the 

University of Regina going forward into the future — because 

this strategic plan is in place from 2009 to 2014 — or whether it 

is, for instance, environmental sustainability, Mr. Speaker, we 

can see how the University of Regina is putting into practice the 

notion of environmental sustainability. We can see how they’re 

putting into practice the research capabilities that they are 

pursuing with respect to environmental sustainability, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I know that this is all a bit of a surprise to the members 

opposite and perhaps that’s why they’re not moving on this 

particular file with respect to climate change and environmental 

sustainability and moving forward on green technologies and 

promoting that, and making sure that people in Saskatchewan 

see the benefit of that, Mr. Speaker. Because it seems to be that 

my speech today about Bill 159 is a giant surprise to the 

members opposite. And perhaps that’s why they’re so 

vehemently opposing the fact that I’m speaking to this, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’re learning through this speech today 

something that they’re obviously failing to do, Mr. Speaker, and 

there’s obviously some guilt and some regret there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

So when one looks at the changes that are being made under 

Bill 159, you can see that the University of Regina — being an 

important partner in this viable community that we have, this 

vibrant society that we have as a province of Saskatchewan — 

that they’re wanting to build a stronger Saskatchewan through 

higher education, research, and innovation. That’s fantastic. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can see how that’s being promoted through 

the strategic plan and through the changes that we’re looking at 

here in terms of making improvements to the university, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it’s always important to review legislation and make sure 

that it’s updated and appropriate in terms of the changes that 

one wants to see accommodated. So, Mr. Speaker, apparently 

these changes are going to allow the university to improve its 

governance process and to become more efficient. 

 

And clearly, Mr. Speaker, efficiency is something that we all 

strive, Mr. Speaker. Now even the Sask Party government was 

striving to achieve efficiency. That’s why they had this 

efficiency secretariat. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what 

happened to the efficiency secretariat? The efficiency 

secretariat no longer exists. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — A point of order 

from the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite clearly is not speaking to Bill 159 which has 

to do with the governance of the University of Regina. And I 

would ask her to return to that Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well clearly the member stated that the governance Bill was 

about creating efficiency. Then she went on to speak, to talk 

about the issue of efficiency in government, Mr. Speaker. There 

is direct relevance, Mr. Speaker, direct relevance, Mr. Speaker. 

And if the members, if the members opposite so want to 

participate in the debate, Mr. Speaker, they each will have their 

opportunity if they want to participate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Okay. I’ve listened 

to both sides, and I would ask once again, would the member 

please stick . . . because mentioning the efficiency secretariat 

was not, was not really going on to Bill 159, The University of 

Regina Amendment Act. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s funny. The only 

time the Sask Party members . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Refer to the motion. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well with reference to Bill No. 159, An Act to 

amend the University of Regina Act, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting that the members opposite, the Sask Party members 

in this legislature are only upset and only create points of order 

when they feel that they’re threatened by what I’m saying, Mr. 



6396 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

Speaker. So we’re talking about creating efficiencies under . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Would the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres please, please go back on to Bill 159, 

The University of Regina Amendment Act. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, with Bill 159 we’re 

talking about allowing the university to improve its governance 

processes and become more efficient, which is exactly what I 

said when I was talking about an example of the efficiency 

secretariat that the Sask Party government had set up. Now 

what happened to that efficiency secretariat, Mr. Speaker? It’s 

gone. It doesn’t exist. 

 

Well guess what? I think that the University of Regina is going 

to make sure that the changes that they’re looking for under Bill 

159 will provide the efficiencies that they’re seeking, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m fairly certain of that. Quite different from the 

waste of taxpayer money, and not to mention resources and 

time, setting up an efficiency secretariat that now no longer 

exists because there are no efficiencies within the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the other amendments include repealing the visitor section 

and enabling the university to adopt new processes for the 

election of the chancellor and senate representatives. And 

according to the minister, these amendments were initiated at 

the request of the University of Regina, and they were met with 

general support from stakeholders during the consultation 

process. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, we’re quite confident that these 

changes should be able to reach the efficiencies and improve the 

governance processes, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because it looks like 

there was consultation done on this by the University of Regina, 

Mr. Speaker, which is quite different from what we get from the 

Sask Party government any time the Sask Party government 

wants to bring something forward. It is rare that we see an 

efficiency process or that we see any due process with respect 

to consultations, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a surprise that we haven’t 

got anybody jumping out of their seats yet on that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is fully committed to student 

success and building world-class institutions right here in 

Saskatchewan, such as the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan, as well as our other 

post-secondary institutions that we have in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. Our pride in educational opportunities for students in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is very high. It’s very high. And 

we’re certainly interested in looking further at the requests that 

were made by the university. 

 

So if we indeed through our consultative process, because the 

opposition does engage in a consultative process as well, Mr. 

Speaker, because we actually believe that that is the best way to 

achieve the best means of legislation, Mr. Speaker . . . that we 

will look at this through the consultations and from the 

stakeholders, and hopefully we’ll find out that all of them are 

concurring with what’s being presented. 

 

But as I said, you know, I’m quite frankly skeptical of the 

government’s track record, the Sask Party government’s track 

record on consultations, Mr. Speaker, and quite frankly on 

efficiency, Mr. Speaker. So we want to make sure we have time 

to check with key stakeholders, and including but not limited 

obviously to the administration, the faculties, the current 

student bodies, the alumni and others, to ensure that this 

legislation is going to in fact achieve what it is designed to 

achieve, what the chancellor, what the president of the 

University of Regina actually has in mind for the changes to 

Bill 159, the Act to amend The University of Regina Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And on that I would like to adjourn debate, given that there are 

many other colleagues that would like to have some comments 

on this Bill as well. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Walsh Acres has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 

159, The University of Regina Amendment Act. Is the Assembly 

ready to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to stand and enter into this debate on Bill No. 160, An 

Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code and to 

make consequential amendments to The Labour Standards Act. 

We’re very proud indeed of The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code and all that it’s meant to the people here in this province. 

It’s one that’s provided real leadership in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada as we value those human rights that mean so much to 

people, especially those who are vulnerable or marginalized and 

don’t have access to the court system to fight for their rights. 

And so we’re very pleased to be part of this discussion and this 

dialogue around this Act. 

 

We do have some questions and of course it’s been interesting 

to monitor the debate over the last week or so and I’m sure that 

it will increase as we move towards the committee stage. But I 

do want to make some comments and I know others will as 

well, because as I said we’re all very, very proud of the Human 

Rights Code. It’s served us well. But as with anything, you need 

to be vigilant. You need to be vigilant to make sure it’s current 

and that people are getting access to it and that complaints or 

concerns are not being bogged down in undue red tape. This is 

something that we have become very much aware of in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada of course, that we don’t want to 

have circumstances where people lose their rights because of 

unforeseen circumstances that could have been dealt with, that 

could have been dealt with. 

 

But we want to make sure, and we often do this as opposition as 

we scrutinize the Bills, to make sure there are no unintended 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6397 

consequences. Because we know in the best-laid plans . . . and 

we often talk about, the devil’s in the detail. And we don’t want 

to have a circumstance where something untoward, something 

unfortunate happens where somebody is denied their rights 

because of something that we could have foreseen. And we 

don’t want to be favouring one group of people in society over 

another because they have more access to the legislature or 

more access to money that could provide for better lawyers, 

better lobbying, that type of thing. 

 

So it is incumbent on us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take the time 

today to have a good discussion and over the next weeks ahead 

— I’m not sure what the plan is here — but to have a good, 

good discussion about this Bill. 

 

Now I just want to review the government news release that 

came out November 29th, 2010, and I do want to quote it. And 

it talked about, and I quote, “Justice Minister Don Morgan 

today introduced amendments to The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code that will make the complaint process more timely 

and flexible to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people.” 

 

So I’m totally onside with the timely . . . I think the timely part 

is very, very important. We all . . . [inaudible] . . . want to see 

things be taken care of in a timely manner. Nobody wants to see 

delay, delay, delay. That is something that quite often, when 

you have complaints brought to Human Rights Commission, 

that delays can be painful. They can be . . . People can lose 

sight of the original intention or what happened in the infraction 

and things can grow and fester. We don’t want to see that. We 

want to see concerns being timely. 

 

I have a concern about flexible because . . . And we’ll talk more 

about this. It’ll be a reoccurring theme in my comments. 

Because while we want to be flexible . . . And I think that in 

many ways if people can agree to be flexible and move 

concerns forward, complaints forward to timely resolution, then 

what could be wrong with that? What could be wrong with that? 

Well, but we want to make sure people are making a full and 

well-considered decision when they take these things forward. 

And so when I have a concern about flexibility because we also 

. . . One of the great things about the Human Rights Code is the 

fact that it’s firm. We know what you can do and what you 

can’t do. It’s very, very well spelled out. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And we know that discrimination complaints may be based on 

race, colour, age, sex, sexual orientation, physical or mental 

disability, religion, marital status, family status, place of origin, 

or ancestry. And we know the Human Rights Code covers 

discrimination in a variety of context including tenancy, 

employment, employment advertisements, publications, public 

services and facilities, purchase of property, and discrimination 

by unions and associations. So they’re very firm about what 

they can do. 

 

We know for example in workplace harassment, psychological 

harassment need not fall in that. So we’ve had to create 

legislation around workplace bullying because that doesn’t 

necessarily fall into that. There may be some grey areas. But we 

don’t want to see the Human Rights Code . . . And of course the 

word code itself means a very firm and very strict delineation of 

what can and cannot happen. If we start to push into some grey, 

some of the grey areas — and we’ll talk a little bit more about 

that — I have concerns about how flexible is good. 

 

Obviously if we want to move things along in a forward manner 

and people are onside, then we’re all for that. But if there is any 

sense of we’re weakening the Code at all, I have some grave 

concerns about that. The Code itself cannot be weakened and 

the intentions of the Code cannot be weakened. And that is 

maybe one of the areas where we might see unintentional 

consequences. Nobody intended that, because I know we’re all 

onside in making sure the Code remains as strong as it can be. 

But in flexibility comes that danger, comes that danger, so we 

need to be vigilant about that. 

 

We want to make sure that . . . And the minister does go on and 

talks further about, and I quote, “One of our goals is to address 

inefficiency, complexity, and excessive delay in the complaints 

resolution, and modernizing the system will address these 

issues.” 

 

And actually it’s Chief Commissioner Judge David Arnot who 

said that. I should correct myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it 

was the Chief Commissioner who said that, not the minister. 

 

So he talks about inefficiency, complexity, and excessive delay. 

You know some of these concerns when you bring forward 

legislation that deals with some of those types of issues about 

inefficiency or delay, sometimes it’s just a resourcing issue. 

And no matter what you do, you can change the legislation. But 

if you’re not resourcing the organization as well as it needs to 

be, you’re not going to fix it by changing the legislation. 

Under-resourced organizations are simply under-resourced and 

so they need to be fully resourced. And I know there’s a 

challenge when it comes to setting budgets, but clearly this is 

one that this government needs to pay attention to. 

 

And so we’ll be looking to make sure that it’s fully resourced 

and there’s not issues around the fact that, you know what, it 

could be doing a better job in terms of bringing these 

complaints forward if they were fully resourced. That has got to 

be met. And by changing the legislation just compounds the 

issue already and doesn’t make it better; it compounds it 

because you’re creating a new circumstance that may be 

confusing to people. Right now we know what the process is 

and we have some . . . and people know what to do. But if we 

change it and under-resource it, then we still have problems. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to do is take a look at 

some of the comments that the minister made and I do want to, 

right off the bat, say that it was interesting. And I know my 

colleagues commented on the fact that he gave more detail in 

this thing and I do appreciate that. Sometimes ministers’ 

speeches on second reading can be short and then creates more 

questions. And this minister here has, actually he gave us more 

details and that was helpful. It was helpful because clearly we 

all see the priority of what this Bill means to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on and he talks about how, and I quote — and this 

would be the quote in Hansard, page 6291 — I quote: 

 

However the tribunal has not been seen by some as an 



6398 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

independent or arm’s length from the commission. This 

may be because tribunal members do not have security of 

tenure, financial security, or administrative independence. 

Also there’s been some confusion that the tribunal and the 

commission are the same body. 

 

I think that’s a very helpful statement because I do think that we 

do have to make sure that they are seen as independent; they’re 

not seen as the same. And so will this new process that the 

minister is envisioning, will they be seen as the same body or as 

separate? How do we get around some of these issues? And of 

course if we’re moving into the court system, they will be seen 

as somewhat different. 

 

But it will be interesting to see how the appointments are made. 

How we make sure that there’s no confusion about the fairness, 

the appropriateness, and as we get into some of the further 

remarks down the road here, we’ll see that there may be 

actually some confusion because the Chief Commissioner’s 

powers are enhanced and the relationship between the new 

process, the process of involving the courts could be 

compromised. And so we want to talk a little bit about that. 

 

And so I do also want to drop a comment about the minister’s 

comment, again on page 6291. And he talks about the Court of 

Queen’s Bench and that they will in fact be . . . that in fact the 

intention of this is to amend the Code to transfer the powers and 

duties of the tribunal over to the Court of Queen’s Bench and 

eliminate the tribunal. And he talks about the capacity, and I 

quote: 

 

The Court of Queen’s Bench has the capacity to handle 

the additional workload. If the last two years are any 

indication, there will be fewer than 10 human rights 

hearings a year. For example between April 2008 and 

March 2009, the tribunal conducted 11 inquiries. There 

was a substantial decrease the following year. Between 

April 2009 and March 2010, the Chief Commissioner 

forwarded just five complaints to the tribunal for inquiry. 

To date, since April 2010, just three complaints have been 

referred to the tribunal by the commission. 

 

So as I said, there’s a little bit of dissonance here. We have the 

Chief Commissioner talking about the excessive delay and the 

complaints resolution, but yet he’s talking about that they’ve 

not had that many. So why is it you cannot have that many and 

why are there delays? Where is the bottleneck? And that’s what 

I’m curious about. Why is there a bottleneck if the tribunals are 

not hearing that many complaints, if there’s not that many 

human rights hearings? And this is what the minister’s talking 

about, where is the bottleneck? If it’s not going to be a big deal 

for the Court of Queen’s Bench to take this on, then I’m not 

understanding the need here. I’m not understanding fully the 

need. 

 

I do appreciate the minister’s earlier comments about having 

that arm’s-length, that independence be seen, but is there a 

better way of doing that? You know we are arguing and . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I know that there’s other legislation before this 

House talking about justices of the peace and the small claims 

court and how it’s busy. There seems to be different messages 

happening here. And so we need to get a better understanding, a 

more fuller grasp of this because transferring one thing to a 

court and then transferring something out of the court system — 

and I know they may be in different levels and all of that — but 

I see that there’s quite a reorganization of the judicial system 

here, and I’m wondering will people fully understand that. And 

so, if there’s not that much of a workload, is there a better way 

to resource this? 

 

But I think that there is some fundamental shifts that I think the 

government’s trying to achieve. And I think that’s important, in 

terms of being seen to be more effective and trying some 

different methods to make it more effective so people have a 

sense that the work is being done. So I do have to ask, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is there an anticipation that there will be more? 

Or has there been a feeling that many people have turned away 

from the Human Rights Commission because they felt they just 

weren’t getting satisfaction, they couldn’t get satisfaction 

because of some bottleneck that was happening? I’m not sure. 

 

I do want to go on and talk about some of the comments. And 

this is the next page, 6292. And I quote the minister, and he 

goes on, and I quote: 

 

The new section 48 will have the effect of freeing up 

resources currently used by the commission to process 

exemption [clause] applications to focus elsewhere to 

promote the objectives of the Code towards not requiring 

these measures in the future. It will also address many of 

the concerns . . . with respect to processing exemption 

applications. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is where I get back to my earlier 

comment about flexibility and making sure that the Code is firm 

on what it means to do, and it does what it says it’s going to do 

and does what it says and says what it’s going to do. Otherwise 

we get into some confusing things here. So if we’re looking for 

more exemptions, that’s a problem. That’s a problem. So we 

have a situation where there seems to be fewer hearings. Are 

there going to be an increase of exemptions? I’m not sure. We 

need to have more detail around that, and I do have some 

concern about that. 

 

Another area, and I know my colleague from Regina Lakeview, 

I’m going to review his comments because I always find his 

comments very insightful in terms of dealing with justice issues 

before us because he’s very thoughtful. And he’s had a lot of 

experience, has a lot of experience particularly with the Human 

Rights Code and very familiar with the office of the Chief 

Commissioner and its powers. And I quote: 

 

The Bill will expand the Chief Commissioner’s powers of 

dismissal. Currently the Chief Commissioner may dismiss 

a complaint where he or she is of the opinion that the best 

interests of the complainant will not be served by 

continuing, that the complaint is without merit or raises 

no significant issue of discrimination, that the substance 

of the complaint has been dealt with through another 

proceeding, that the complaint has been made in bad faith 

or that there is no reasonable likelihood that an 

investigation will reveal evidence of contravention. 

 

So we see this expansion of powers of dismissal. We see some 

pretty fundamental changes of some of the rules. What can a 

complainant do here? We have that question, Mr. Deputy 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6399 

Speaker. What is the appeal process here? Because if we’re 

going to go to more of a mediation-style process, an alternate 

resolution process, there’s more opportunity for exemptions. 

 

What will be the appeal process for somebody to say, I disagree 

with the Commissioner; I have to find some other alternate 

route. And will that alternate route include such things as say, 

the media, going before the media? We’ve seen that many 

times, as that’s a way to establish fact. And we would have, we 

would have some real concerns about that. 

 

So, I have some real concerns about the powers of dismissal 

being expanded and what that will mean. I think that’s a real 

concern. But my colleague from Regina Lakeview I think made 

some very solid points, some very solid points about his views 

on this. And I know that he will have probably much more to 

say in committee. 

 

But he did talk about for example the limitation period in the 

Code being changed from two years to one year. And I 

understand that sometimes that can be seen as a hindrance, a 

way that people often feel is a problem if a few things go on too 

long. But I have some concerns about what that may mean 

because two years is not, not all that long. And one year can go 

by pretty darn quickly, and especially I know that if you have a 

circumstance where you may not have known that there was a 

process for you to avail yourself with, and you just didn’t 

realize what had happened. And through conversation with 

friends that somebody says, you know you really should take 

that to the Human Rights Commission. Take it and do some 

follow-up with it. And all of a sudden you find yourself, you’re 

six months, nine months into this. And you know, there may be 

personal circumstances that eat up six months of your life — 

you know, a serious illness, looking for work, that type of thing 

— and you just don’t have the time to do the things that are 

necessary to launch a complaint. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And I know that there is a provision that allows the Chief 

Commissioner to extend the limitation period given the 

circumstances. But again we’ve just talked about the powers of 

the Commissioner. And is there an appeal process? I’m not 

sure. We need to be fully aware of what that process is if there 

are problems. Because if the Commissioner doesn’t believe 

there’s a good reason for the delay, then you’re kind of up 

against the wall. And I know that it’s our job to be thinking of 

these circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it’s very important that we be fully, fully aware of some of 

the unintended consequences. And so that one year, when 

you’re doing such, I think, a pretty fundamental shift here, 

moving from a tribunal over to the Queen’s Bench, that maybe 

this is something we should not . . . I’d like to see a transitional 

period with this because the one year could catch people off 

guard. I’m not sure. And I’m not sure . . . I know that they talk 

about where other provinces such as BC or Manitoba have the 

one year, well in fact they have a six-month limitation period. 

Alberta and some of the others — Ontario, New Brunswick, 

Nova Scotia — have a one-year period. And so I think that’s 

something we need to be thinking about. 

 

So we know that the Chief Commissioner, Judge Arnot, has 

spoken about this and really believes there are some very 

positive things about it, and I would have to agree. He’s talking 

about his desire for, and I quote, “A decision-making process 

which is informal and accessible to all, provides for review of 

decisions, and is handled by experts who reflect our diverse 

society.” 

 

And I think we would all agree with that because our society is 

becoming more diverse. And as we bring that knowledge and 

that experience to the table, we should value that. And it should 

be informal. We don’t want to see things become so formal that 

people are intimidated by the process, especially newcomers 

and people who are not familiar with a European court system. 

This is an important process that people should feel comfortable 

and feel at ease to talk fully about some of the issues that they 

want to bring forward. 

 

So now I know that my colleague from Regina Lakeview had 

some concerns, and he talked about, what are the motivations 

behind this? What are the motives? Because we always think 

about, why is it that the government brings forward legislation? 

Because when you do, there is a time where things are very 

fragile, very vulnerable for misinterpretation and, as I say, the 

unintended consequences. 

 

So what are the motives? Who asked for this to come forward? 

And I understand that the commissioner talked about the 

excessive delays. And that is something that we totally, we 

totally agree with. We cannot see situations where it takes two 

to three years to bring a complaint to a hearing process. That’s 

unacceptable. And the timeliness of this issue, of that, is critical 

that we do something about that. 

 

But I do have to ask about the motives. And I know, for 

example . . . And this is going to create a lot of interest, and 

that’s a good thing. That’s a very good thing. We know that, for 

example, in The StarPhoenix last Friday, page A13 in the 

“Forum” section, a Ken Norman, a well-known lawyer in 

Saskatchewan — and I believe he teaches at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan]; in fact yet, “Following is the 

viewpoint of the writer, a law professor at the University of 

Saskatchewan” — he has a lot of questions about this. 

 

And I won’t necessarily go into all of this. But I know, when he 

talks about why, what is the motivation behind this, and he 

writes, and I quote: 

 

So why the different and distant drummer for human 

rights complaints? 

 

A report entitled Workplace Dispute Resolution Project, 

published Nov. 2 by the British Columbia Law Institute, 

notes — in response to the notion that the B.C. human 

rights tribunal ought to be scrapped in favour of an 

omnibus workplace tribunal — that such a drastic step 

ought to be undertaken only after the publication of a 

study paper and a full consultation process. 

 

By the way, none of the last five full external reviews of 

human rights processes in Canada have seen any merit in 

abandoning (the) human rights tribunal systems in favour 

of high courts. 

 



6400 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 2010 

And I end the quote there. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s a law professor very familiar 

with the Human Rights Commission and the process of 

tribunals and the high court system saying . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Commissioner. Former commissioner. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Former commissioner. There you go, former 

commissioner. So he’s very familiar with this. Very familiar 

with this. And asking some questions about, is this the right 

thing to be doing? And what is the motive? And he just has 

some questions I think deserve to be answered. And so I think 

that it’s only fitting that we continue that discussion. And we 

know that’s an important area for us to take a look at. 

 

And we know . . . And I have to thank the people and I know 

people before us have talked about . . . In fact, we’ve had issues 

before the Human Rights Commissioner and we only have to 

think about the civil marriages and the obligation to uphold the 

law and perform their duty to provide civil marriages to all 

Saskatchewan citizens. We know that was a controversial issue 

that was before the Human Rights Commission. 

 

How would an issue like that be dealt with in this scenario 

here? I think this will be something that, of course, somebody 

may say, well we have to have faith in the commissioner. And 

we do have an awful lot of respect. I absolutely have to say that 

Chief Judge David Arnot has served admirably. 

 

But this is not about him personally. This is about his office. 

It’s about the process. And will there be a way of dealing with 

this? And of course . . . Now it was ironic, as my colleague 

pointed out, that this government did refer it to the courts and 

because it didn’t like the tribunal’s ruling that it received. So 

here you go. 

 

My colleague talks about the number of red flags that this 

legislation rises, sends up. And I think that’s a fair way of 

putting it because we have to think about some of the other 

issues and we have to address those issues. And he talks about 

the limitations period. 

 

He talks about the lawyers. What’s the process of getting a 

lawyer? If a complainant has to find his own lawyer, will they 

have to pay for their lawyer? Now they have said that this will 

be a free process. It’s very critical that this process is free. And 

that is a good thing because nobody should be having to pay for 

their access to their Human Rights Commission and the code 

because that’s not been the case in the past. But the 

complication becomes now that if they want to appeal, there is 

no appeal process that’s apparent. But I understand that right 

now the existing law allows people to appeal the decision by the 

Human Rights Commission. 

 

So what is the appeal process? And I’ve referred to that and I 

will refer to it a few times because I think this is important. 

What is the appeal process if someone is not agreeing with the 

Human Rights Commission if they feel that their complaint has 

no merit? And then are people forced then to go out and hire 

their own lawyer, and what do we do in that kind of 

circumstance? 

 

And so there is a contradiction here that I think that we need to 

make sure is addressed fully. Now my colleague goes on and he 

talks about mediation. And of course I tend to think that in most 

scenarios the best way to resolve disputes and complaints is 

through mediation if possible. But then I do have — and I think 

this is another red flag, and I’ve talked about this earlier — that 

we cannot in any way allow the code to become diminished 

because we’re leaning more towards mediation and subtle 

interpretations of the code. We don’t want to go down that road 

in the quest for speedy resolutions. We want to make sure the 

integrity of the code is kept and valued. 

 

And so in the quest of resolutions, that can be an issue. And I 

know my colleague did talk about how sometimes when you 

have dispute resolutions mediation, they can be also blunt 

instruments. They’re not the silver bullet or the magic bullet 

people often think they are. Sometimes tough decisions have to 

be made. 

 

And so I think that it’s important that we really consider what’s 

before us. This is an important Bill and one that we will live 

with the consequences for many years if not decades, because 

this is, as I said, a sea change, and it’s one that will take us 

down a road that’s hard to come back out of. Because of course 

if you decide after three or four or five years it’s simply not 

working, then some people have paid a price and those people 

in the circumstance who would often be those who are 

marginalized, those who cannot afford their own representation 

and so in the quest for efficiency, the quest for speedy 

resolution, that we need to make sure that we do, we absolutely 

do the right thing. 

 

We cannot get hung up on the past. We cannot get hung up on 

saying, what we always did in the past was the right thing. I’m 

not saying that at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If there’s a better 

way, if there’s an innovative way, then let’s take a look at it but, 

you know, when I read Professor Norman’s comments about 

the last five external reviews not calling for a change, and 

thinking about where is the motivation, we have some concerns 

And so, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that then I would 

like to move adjournment of the debate on Bill No. 160. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Saskatoon Centre has moved to 

adjourn debate on Bill 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work of 

committees, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Deputy House 

Leader has moved a motion that this House stands adjourned. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 



December 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6401 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6369 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6369 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6369 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6369 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6369 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6370 

  Harper ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6370, 6378 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6378 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6378 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6370 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6370 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6370 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6370 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6371 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6371 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6371 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6371 

 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6372 

 Mamawetan Churchill River Health Authority Conducts Facilities Assessment 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6372 

 International Volunteer Day 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6372 

 India Night 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6373 

 Biggar Team Wins Cross-Country Championships  

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6373 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6373 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6373 

 Contract Negotiation and Supply of Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6375 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6375 

 Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6376 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6376 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6377 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6377 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

  Deputy Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Sport Participation Initiative 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6379 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Protection of Children in Government Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6380 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  Deputy Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6380 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6380 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6385 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6391 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 6394 

  Yates (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................... 6394, 6395 

  Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw) (point of order)....................................................................................................... 6394, 6395 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6395 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6396 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


