




















































Hansard: March 24, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 36A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 24, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4463 

 March 24, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

to you and through you we have a number of welcomes to offer. 

And obviously if we were to list all of the very special guests 

we have in the legislature today, even by the groups they 

represent, we would take up all the time of routine proceedings, 

and I know we don’t want to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me just say on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan a hearty welcome to all those who have gathered 

here to, I’m sure, to hear the Minister of Finance rise in his 

place in just a short time and deliver the budget of the province 

of Saskatchewan. They represent of course the business 

community, labourers across the province, the municipal sector, 

school boards. They represent the many, many partners of 

government in health care, in delivering social services for the 

province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in addition to welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly, on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan I want to thank them very much for what they do 

each and every day. Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

Premier in welcoming here today people from all over the 

province and even from out of the province, a few friends who 

have come from other parts of Canada to be with us today, a 

historic moment when the budget of the province is brought 

down for the coming year. 

 

I hope everyone enjoys the debate surrounding the budget. It’s 

an important day, and I welcome everyone here and wish them 

all the best and hope all members join with me in welcoming 

the group here today. 

 

The Speaker: — And I certainly want to extend a welcome to 

our guests as well, and just to ask our guests to not participate 

in any form in the debate from here on in. We certainly 

appreciate your presence here with us today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition concerning the reinstatement of the domestic 

abuse outreach program. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

. . . to cause the provincial government to reinstate the 

domestic abuse outreach program as a provincial 

government service and make it available in all parts of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This petition is signed by citizens from the good city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of 

Highway 310. The petition states that the condition of Highway 

310 has deteriorated to the point where it’s now a safety hazard 

for those who have to drive on it each and every day. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

so need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to introduce 

a petition put together by the Saskatchewan Student Coalition. 

The petition is in support of the implementation of a 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund that would be the scholarship 

fund promised by the Sask Party in the 2007 provincial election. 

The petitions reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on the petition today are all from 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on maintaining quality health care services in 

the province. And the petition speaks to the government’s need 

to recognize the value of all health care providers and provide 

adequate funding and good faith in provincial bargaining. And 

the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 



4464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw 

and Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 

present a petition signed by thousands of people from around 

Saskatchewan concerned with the possible elimination of 

government funding for chiropractic services. And the petition 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan honour the 

agreement negotiated between the Ministry of Health and 

the Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from communities 

around the province and I’ll read into the record their situations: 

Vanguard, Limerick, Earl Grey, Harris, Vonda, Chamberlain, 

Truax, Spruce Home, Bellevue, Medstead, Tramping Lake, 

Stoughton, Shaunavon, Frontier, Viceroy, Mortlach, Meacham, 

Cabri, Kyle, Maidstone, Birch Hills, Elbow, Ravenscrag, 

Hudson Bay, Kisbey, Chelan, Prairie River, Christopher Lake, 

Estlin, Kelliher, Emerald Park, Lang, Lipton, Rouleau, Lestock, 

Bienfait, Alameda, Leoville, Shellbrook, St. Louis, Waskesiu, 

Hoey, Holdfast, Sandy Bay, Henribourg, Spiritwood, Grayson, 

Macrorie, Loreburn, Air Ronge, Tessier, Hillcrest Colony, 

Sunny Dale Colony, Scott, Debden, Crooked River, Mildred, 

Albertville, Moose Jaw, Meadow Lake, Regina, Lumsden, 

Creelman, Fort Qu’Appelle, Tisdale, Carrot River, White Fox, 

Porcupine Plain, Archerwill, Zenon Park, Melfort, Ridgedale, 

Mistatim, Weekes, Nipawin, Hudson Bay, Kelvington, Wadena, 

Prince Albert, Rhein, Pelly, Kamsack, Veregin, Markdale, 

Norquay, Stornoway, Togo, Endeavour, Yorkton, Wroxton, 

Runnymede, Buchanan, Sturgis, Stenen, Preeceville, Balcarres, 

Willow Bunch, White City, Climax, Hodgeville, Herbert, 

Beechy, Waldeck, Swift Current, Wymark, Kyle, Hazlet, 

Abbey, Morse, Pennant, Aneroid, Gull Lake, Webb, Saskatoon, 

Bethune, Wynyard, Langham, Martensville, Colgate, Osage, 

Trossachs, Weyburn, Ponteix, Bracken, Dundurn, Martensville, 

Waldheim, Kinley, Osler, Rosetown, Zehner, Humboldt, Pilger, 

Yellow Creek, Middle Lake, Muenster, Carlton, Laird, 

Carragana, Bjorkdale, Eastend, Cadillac, Bracken, Tompkins, 

Simmie, Govan, Duval, Regina Beach, Bulyea, Southey, Dilke, 

Bladworth, Davidson, Strongfield, Findlater, Craven, Silton, 

Redvers, Wapella, Moosomin, Rocanville, Manor, Estevan, 

Lampman, Midale, Carievale, Sintaluta, Central Butte, 

Mossbank, Hanley, Chitek Lake, Clavet, Blaine Lake, Jansen, 

Leask, Colonsay, Lajord, Sedley, Lake Lenore, LeRoy, Lang, 

Lipton, Bredenbury, Ituna, Cut Knife, Handel, Unity, Conquest, 

Borden, Invermay, Clair, Watrous, Kronau, Disley, Quill Lake, 

Drake, Guernsey, Bruno, Pense, Deer Valley, Kylemore, 

Margo, Rose Valley, Fosston, Rama, Wishart, Glidden, 

Lloydminster, Wakaw, Gravelbourg, Coderre, Churchbridge, 

Pleasantdale, Beatty, Fairy Glen, Indian Head, St. Gregor, Burr, 

Quinton, Carmel, Lafleche, Glenbain, Scout Lake, Rockglen, 

Battleford, North Battleford, Mayfair, Biggar, Rabbit Lake, 

Wilkie, Unity, Paynton, Cochin, Mervin, Candle Lake, 

Grenfell, and Hazlet. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants. As people will 

know, the Ministry of Education has published a document that 

significantly reduces the number of educational assistants in the 

province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to provide funding 

for the required number of educational assistants to 

provide special needs students with the support they need 

and maintain a positive learning environment for all 

students. 

 

And this petition is signed from citizens from Kamsack, Sturgis, 

Yorkton, and Veregin. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition protecting renters from unreasonable 

increases. And we know that Saskatchewan renters are facing a 

combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates right across 

this province. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view to 

protect Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable increases 

in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of new long-term care bed facilities in La Ronge, 

with almost a waiting year for our seniors to wait. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition, a request that the Sask Party 

government’s actions match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4465 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise and 

present a petition in support of reducing the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to prime, and it’s a petition that’s been 

circulated by the Saskatchewan Student Coalition. It’s in 

support of the fact that students in Saskatchewan are paying the 

highest amount of interest on fixed-rate student loans in Canada 

at prime plus two and a half per cent. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, resulting in a minimum monthly bill of $165. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Saskatoon and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that the existing construction industry labour relations 

Act, 1992 has provided a stable environment for labour 

relations in the construction industry in our province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents in North Battleford, 

Colonsay, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Buffalo Narrows. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

present a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan Hospital, 

signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan who note 

that in February of 2006 the Government of Saskatchewan 

committed funds to the development of a new hospital in North 

Battleford. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners call upon the 

Assembly to ask the Government of Saskatchewan: 

 

To immediately recommit funds and resources for the 

continued development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and provide the 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the 

necessary authority to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the shameful $1 billion deficit that the Sask Party’s created. 

And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks from Estevan, 

Saskatoon, Silton, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 



4466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present again today a petition in support of the expansion of the 

graduate retention program. Again this petition is about 

fairness, how we treat post-secondary students, and about 

ensuring we maintain our best and our brightest here in 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the good residents of Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Ford World Women’s Curling Championship 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t want to pass up the opportunity of a full gallery 

here to discuss something that’s happening in Swift Current 

that’s been occurring since the weekend. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

chance to attend the opening ceremonies of the Ford World 

Women’s Curling Championship being hosted in the city of 

Swift Current for 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the event is already a huge success, not just in 

terms of what’s happening on the rinks. And by the way, the 

iPlex now in Swift Current, the hockey rink has been replaced 

by four great curling rinks. And on those rinks, Canada is doing 

very, very well, last night defeating the United States with a 

record now of 8 and 0 as they make their way through the round 

robin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event is being made possible of course by the 

sponsors, by Monsanto and by Ford, by local businesses who 

have come forward, by 464 volunteers and counting who are 

making it happen, Mr. Speaker, led by two very able Co-Chairs 

in terms of the host committee — Bryan Tallon who was a 

teacher of mine, back in about 1922 I think, and Barbara Walter 

who’s a well-known community leader as well. 

 

They’ve done a great job, they and the team of volunteers, to 

make sure that Saskatchewan puts its best foot forward, not just 

to the rest of the country through networks like TSN [The 

Sports Network], but also to the world through the world 

curling television channel that’s covering the event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a proud moment for the province of 

Saskatchewan whose provincial sport of course is curling, and 

it’s a great moment for Swift Current. I acknowledge the 

sponsors and the volunteers who are making this happen. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Public Access to Information Regarding Tommy Douglas 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas served our 

province and our country with great distinction as the first 

social democratic leader in North America. His legacy to our 

promise and country is extensive. 

 

He can be credited with bringing us old-age pensions, family 

allowance, rural electrification, central Bank of Canada, civil 

rights legislation, and our Crown corporations. And of course 

he’s remembered fondly by many as the leader of medicare. 

Introducing universal health care in Saskatchewan was his 

proudest achievement and became the cornerstone for a national 

medicare program. Many of these social programs and 

institutions that we sometimes take for granted, we owe to 

Tommy’s hard work, dedication, and courage. 

 

Yet the Government of Canada, CSIS [Canadian Security 

Intelligence Service], and the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] refuse to release the complete intelligence file of the 

former premier despite having no legitimate security reason. 

We have twice brought forward a motion in this legislature to 

release these files, and this Premier and his government refuse 

to support that motion. We owe it to Douglas’s memory, to his 

family, and to all Canadians to ensure that the full intelligence 

file is released, yet this Premier refuses to grant citizens the 

opportunity. 

 

Today as we gather on budget day in Saskatchewan, it provides 

a tremendous backdrop to reflect upon the legacy of Tommy 

Douglas and think about how he made life better for Canadian 

families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recognition of their 

significant contributions to this great province, our government 

has proclaimed March, Rural Women’s Month. From the very 

beginning of our province’s history, rural women have been 

settling the land for future generations. It was not only the men 

that came to and settled our great province. Women shared in 

the hardships of all the earliest pioneers as they made their long 

journeys west. Saskatchewan has prospered, and the rural 

women in this province have and continue to play a pivotal role 

in our province’s success. 

 

The contributions of strong rural women can be seen whether 

through working the land, educating our youth, tending the sick 

and elderly, or providing commercial services. Rural women 

are also vital volunteers to their communities, be it umpiring, 

refereeing or working booths for hockey and ball tournaments, 

working bingos for fund-raising or being a 4-H club leader. 

 

As Saskatchewan takes its place as a leader in the new West, 

our rural areas will continue to be areas of strength and vitality. 

The rural women in Saskatchewan will continue to play a 

prominent role in the success of our province, and we would not 

last long without them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4467 

A Tale of Two Leaders 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today is a day for comparisons, and we’ll compare the 

Sask Party’s new budget with the budget they presented last 

year, and we’ll also compare them to the balanced NDP [New 

Democratic Party] budgets of previous years. We should also 

take time to compare the current leadership of the two parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a tale of two leaders. The Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, is well known as the character who turned the best of 

NDP economic times into the worst of Saskatchewan Party 

fiscal times, taking the province from a $2.3 billion surplus into 

a $1 billion deficit. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 

of the Opposition played a leading role in restoring the province 

to fiscal health after the particularly dark chapter in the ’80s and 

1990s. 

 

In his private life, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is 

a successful grain and livestock farmer and has been for his 

whole life. He’s been a successful businessman with extensive 

experience working with business and government from around 

the world. By contrast, Mr. Speaker, to read up on the Premier’s 

business experience, we’d have to turn our books to Chapter 11. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s budget will write the next chapter in the 

story of these two leaders. If, as we fear on this side, it’s written 

with too much red ink, we can take comfort in the fact that the 

people of Saskatchewan will be holding the pen, or should I 

say, pencil, when the concluding chapter is written in 

November 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Big River Shiver and Ice Fishing Derby  

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This previous 

weekend I had the pleasure of attending the 10th annual Big 

River ice fishing derby. This was a great opportunity for the 

people of the community to meet, socialize, and to attempt to 

catch as many fish as possible. The fishing derby took place at 

Cowan Lake where 12 fish were caught with the winning fish 

weighing over 3 pounds. At this derby, Mr. Speaker, I was 

informed about another annual Big River event that is garnering 

national attention. 

 

I would ask that this Assembly recognize Mr. Jack Hills for 

organizing the 3rd annual Big River Shiver polar bear swim. 

For the previous two years, several brave souls have actually 

volunteered to jump into ice-cold water to raise money for local 

organizations. This event has received so much recognition, the 

Canadian Tourism Commission has listed it as one of the 

nation’s top 13 must-experience-now winter places. 

 

Though this event is a great display of community spirit, the 

main purpose of the Big River Shiver is to raise funds for local 

projects. This year it’s estimated that each participant raised 

roughly $2,700 that will go to the local senior centre. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Big River Shiver is another example of a 

small community showing big Saskatchewan spirit. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Reaction to Fiscal Management 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We wait with 

bated breath for the presentation of another Sask Party budget, 

delivered on the heels of last year’s budget, that has proven 

itself disastrous. 

 

The Sask Party’s budgetary record is summed up in a recent 

issue of Canadian Business. I quote, “For all its reputation for 

being attuned to business, the Saskatchewan Party government 

of Premier Brad Wall has a terrible track record of budget 

forecasting.” 

 

That’s what business is saying about the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, and economists agree as well. U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] professor, Eric Howe, says in today’s 

StarPhoenix, I quote, “The thing about the deficit is that it 

wasn’t caused by a revenue problem, the deficit was caused by 

a spending problem.” 

 

This Premier took a $2.3 billion surplus and in only two short 

years has turned it into a $1 billion deficit. We’ve seen cuts to 

programs and services and a string of broken promises already. 

It’s clear that he is forcing Saskatchewan people to pay the 

price for Sask Party mismanagement. Because as Eric Howe 

notes, I quote: 

 

. . . the economic costs are straightforward. We are the 

ones who are going to pay. There is no one else there. So 

the costs will end up coming out of our standard of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is mismanagement that Saskatchewan 

families, businesses, and communities can ill afford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Entrepreneurial Spirit in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to talk about the entrepreneurial spirit of our great 

province. Last year Birth of a Boom: Lives & Legacies of 

Saskatchewan Entrepreneurs was published by the Prairie 

Policy Centre. It is a book that chronicles the struggles and 

successes of many of the entrepreneurs that helped build this 

province. 

 

These are the family-run businesses that have grown over 

decades, often handed down from generation to generation. The 

stories range from an Irish immigrant, saving his paycheques 

for years to take a chance and open Wallace Construction in 

Saskatoon, to the beginnings of Morris Industries in 1921. 

George Morris went from local mechanic to agricultural 

machinery manufacturer. 

 

This book also has, Mr. Speaker, a very personal story in it for 

me. Birth of a Boom tells the story of my great-grandfather, 

grandfather, father, and now brother who have all worked in my 

family’s business, which was started in 1930 by my 

great-grandfather, Jacob. My great-grandfather was a dray man, 



4468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

Mr. Speaker. He delivered coal with a team of horses all day. In 

the evening, to make a few extra dollars for his family, he 

mixed concrete by hand and made concrete blocks one at a 

time. This book is full of tales of these types of stories, Mr. 

Speaker. The people in these stories epitomize the hard work 

and dedication you will find in people across the province from 

Prince Albert to Lampman. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking Suzanne for collecting 

these great stories for Saskatchewan achievement and wishing 

continued success for all entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Spending Reductions 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

government has indicated that there will be necessary cuts in 

the budget that we’re going to be hearing in a few moments. 

Mr. Speaker, the last time we were in a situation where we had 

a huge budget, following the Devine government, billions of 

dollars in deficit, the Romanow government of the day started 

the tough process of balancing the books. But Premier 

Romanow started at the top. He cut the cabinet from 16 to 11. 

He cut the salary of cabinet ministers by 5 per cent and 

removed and took away many political staff in this building. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: in this tough time of deficit, 

will the Premier today use that by way of example and will he 

start in his own office? If there needs to be cuts, will he make 

cuts at that level, at that level in his office? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To the Leader of the Opposition’s question, Mr. 

Speaker, I can say this: the government hasn’t waited to start to 

find efficiencies in terms of the political staff of this building, 

Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is we have already cut the 

number of political staff in this building versus what was . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well they laugh, Mr. Speaker. Already 27 

fewer political staff working for this government than worked 

for the NDP government, a cut of 15 per cent. That’s the fact. 

 

Here’s another fact, Mr. Speaker. Advertising used to be about 

$16 million. You remember that when the NDP tried to burnish 

their image with taxpayer-funded ads, Mr. Speaker, they used to 

spend $16 million a year on advertising. We’ve cut that in half, 

to $8 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we haven’t waited for the return of the Opposition 

Leader or this budget. We have already started saving from the 

very top, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Budget Forecasts and State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last year’s budget was a 

disaster, with revenue forecasts that bore no resemblance to 

reality and out-of-control spending increases, all resulting in a 

budget deficit of more than $1 billion. Everyone agrees that the 

budget unveiled by the Premier last year did not provide an 

accurate picture of the province’s finances. 

 

To the minister: will today’s budget be any more accurate? And 

why should Saskatchewan people trust the Premier this time 

around? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 

comments from the Finance critic from the official opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. He has been very consistent in this line of 

questioning. He raised a petition today with respect to 

government restraint, but he ought to share his memo with the 

Leader of the Opposition who just, I think, just very recently as 

it’s reported in The Sheaf was saying that no, it’s not the time 

for the provincial government to engage in restraint. He’s now 

saying it’s no time to make a cut. 

 

There’s quotes here right from The Sheaf. What he said 

yesterday to the media, Mr. Speaker was no, no, the resource 

revenue projections are actually going to be much higher this 

year, so you shouldn’t engage in restraint, Mr. Speaker. Two 

weeks ago it’s restrain. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s spend some 

more money from the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not long ago the Opposition Leader was saying 

the economy’s too hot. Now he’s saying it’s too cold, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s like Goldilocks’s grandpa on this issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s see if the leader 

can dance around this one. Mr. Speaker, more than 125,000 

Saskatchewan people received chiropractic treatment last year. 

These people depend on this treatment to relieve their pain and 

help them live a healthy life. Mr. Speaker, many of these 

chiropractic patients are here in the gallery today, and we have 

received and submitted and presented to this legislature 

petitions with tens of thousands of names on them for more of 

those patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the budget today make 

chiropractic care inaccessible to these people, forcing them to 

live in chronic pain? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

issue of chiropractic care in the province is debated in this 

Assembly, and so it should be. And people have become 

engaged in terms of both petitions and letter writing, and the 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4469 

chiropractors themselves have been very progressive and 

aggressive in making the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand the importance of chiropractic care 

in the province. We also understand the importance of priority 

setting, Mr. Speaker, as evidenced by this government target for 

nurse recruitment and retention which we’re more than halfway 

to completing, as evidenced by this government’s priorities with 

respect to physician recruitment and retention. We’re already 

under way with respect to this government’s commitment to 

reducing the surgical wait times we inherited from the previous 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are not a lot of provinces today in the 

country that provide chiropractic care. We’ll find out in a few 

moments . . . A subsidy for chiropractic care. We’ll find out in a 

few moments if Saskatchewan remains one of the places that 

does provide some assistance. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Funding for Health Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

November 9th of 2009, the government announced that 

construction of the children’s hospital and 13 long-term care 

facilities would be “deferred.” 

 

When the opposition asked the government about these 

deferrals, the government said it was because the projects 

weren’t ready to proceed. The Minister of Finance told the 

Leader-Post on November 20th, and I quote, “It’s our clear plan 

and commitment that as these projects are available for moving 

forward we will provide funding as construction requirements 

dictate.” 

 

To the Premier: will there be funding for the children’s hospital 

and for the deferred long-term care facilities in today’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was the practice, it was the 

practice of the previous NDP government to make a lot of 

announcements about health care projects, not actually do 

anything about them. Case in point was the Preeceville 

Hospital. I think the minister announced it seven times, Mr. 

Speaker, before it actually got done. 

 

I make this commitment to those who are working very hard 

with respect to the children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the government and the taxpayers. More than just issuing 

press releases, our commitment is to that facility, and as money 

is needed it will be there. Money for the long-term care 

facilities in many respects is already in the regions. It will be 

there as the local funds are raised, as that money is needed. 

 

Those facilities will be built, and well they should, Mr. Speaker, 

because, because, Mr. Speaker, there was fully a decade of 

neglect for rural long-term care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s going to end now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

Coverage For Dental Treatment 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Charlene is looking for help. She’s 

unable to wear any type of dentures due to multiple allergies. 

Her dentist writes, “The only treatment possible to restore her 

masticatory function is implant-retained prosthesis.” 

 

Charlene suffers every day, but the government doesn’t care. 

She writes: 

 

This is a medical procedure, not a cosmetic procedure. 

Wearing my dentures causes pain, bleeding, coughing and 

constant clearing of my throat. I cannot find the words to 

tell you how much this procedure would improve my 

quality of life. 

 

To the Premier: why is Charlene forced to live in constant pain 

and suffering because of Sask Party government fiscal 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member, I thank 

the member for the question. I’m not familiar with this specific 

case. If he would like to forward it to our office, we can look 

into it. 

 

I know that obviously the Government of Saskatchewan, as it 

has in the past, provides dental care for those who are on low 

income, Mr. Speaker. It is not a universal program, certainly, 

but as I said earlier on in my answer, if the member would send 

over the information, we could have a look at it. I haven’t seen 

it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many post-secondary 

students are in the gallery today anxious to hear what this 

government has to offer them. Last year tuition increased 3.5 

per cent. This year when the Sask Party government is facing a 

$1 billion deficit, students are afraid of huge tuition increases. 

 

To the minister: will he listen to the students here today and 

ensure that tuition increases do not exceed 2 per cent? Or will 

they be asked to pay for this government’s fiscal 

mismanagement again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the 

hon. member raises an important question. The premise of his 

question is wrong. Although, Mr. Speaker, when we took office 

there was $6.8 billion in debt in the province; there was a 

billion two in the savings account — that’s what we inherited. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, there’s $4.2 billion in debt, $700 million 

cash in the savings account after historic income tax cuts, after 

historic property tax cuts, after $2 billion to fix the 

infrastructure pothole left behind by those members, Mr. 

Speaker — a net improvement in the position of the province of 



4470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

2 billion. That’s why we’ve been able to invest over a billion 

two in post-secondary education in this province. That’s why 

we’ve been able to implement the graduate retention program, 

which of course could constitute almost a complete refunding of 

tuition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, low, affordable post-secondary education is a 

priority for this government, and I think that will manifest itself 

when the Minister of Finance rises to present the budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Funding for School Boards 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we did leave them with $2.3 

billion in cash, and this year they have a $1 billion deficit. It 

doesn’t make sense to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Catholic School Board attended 

this legislature. They were asking, through the opposition, about 

the funding difference between the Regina Public School Board 

and the Regina Catholic School Board, and there’s a difference 

of about $275 per student or about $2.6 million. Now school 

boards, Catholic school boards have said publicly, if this 

inequity between they and their public counterparts isn’t fixed 

in this fiscal year, they’re going to have to resort to the 

possibility of program, staff cuts and so on. 

 

So a very simple question to the government: in this budget 

today, is it the intention of the Sask Party government to fix the 

inequity between Catholic school boards in the province of 

Saskatchewan and their public school board counterparts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve listened to the member opposite. I’ve listened to the Regina 

Catholic School Board. In fact I visited the Regina Catholic 

Board to talk about what she calls an inequity, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there is no inequity. Because I want to tell you that in 

the area of administration, in the area of governance, in the area 

of instruction, Mr. Speaker, those are the three areas that 

provide dollars to boards of education to make sure that there 

are teachers in the classrooms and that there are provisions of 

materials, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the board member today, not 

more than an hour and a half ago, in fact the Regina Catholic 

board of education receives $200 more than the Regina Public 

in those areas. Mr. Speaker, in the area where they do not have 

exactly the same dollars is in the area of physical structure. The 

age of schools in the Regina Public are older and the cost of 

maintenance is over $400 per child more than the Regina 

Catholic. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Aboriginal Employment 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As of 

March 31, 2009, the Aboriginal employment development 

program helped 4,465 Métis and First Nation people to get a 

job. It has provided skills training for nearly 2,000 employees 

and Aboriginal awareness training to 36,000 individuals. 

 

And since 1995, more than 100 Aboriginal employment 

development agreements have been signed with a multitude of 

community partners, many of whom are represented in this 

room today. The government’s own ministry has told us that 

this is a “sustainable and focused approach to First Nations and 

Métis employment and economic development.” Can the 

minister or the Premier tell us if this valuable initiative will 

survive the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

for the question. The issue of Aboriginal employment, First 

Nations and Métis employment, is very important to this 

government, Mr. Speaker. In fact the employment record of the 

province of Saskatchewan is second to none in the country, Mr. 

Speaker, and of course that’s going to help anyone who is 

looking for a job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would just say this. The budget’s going to be 

tabled very, very shortly. The minister will rise in his place. I 

think he will be talking very specifically about some initiatives 

with respect to First Nations economic development. In the 

meantime we will continue to partner with institutions like the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology that have seen 

their funds increase from this government because, Mr. 

Speaker, they take those funds, they provide the training, and 

then those who are trained are finding employment and a bright 

future in this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Attrition and Job Tenure 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this government has talked for 

weeks now about their so-called plan to cut the civil service 

through attrition. Mr. Speaker, this is no more of a plan than 

their potash revenues were last year. Does this mean that if our 

highway workers retire, snow won’t be removed from the 

highways at Christmastime? Does this mean cuts to home care 

workers and an elimination of home care services for our aging 

mothers, fathers, and grandparents? 

 

To the Minister of Finance: if he retires, does this mean that we 

won’t have any more deficit budgets? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I know, based on the net 

improvement of the fiscal health of this province of $2 billion in 

two years, Mr. Speaker — the strongest economy in the 

Dominion of Canada, the best employment rate, Mr. Speaker, 

the best population record — I know the people of this province 

because I’ve seen the polling, their position with respect to the 

Minister of Finance is this: they say, I hope he’s doing this job 

for a long, long time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4471 

Riversdale. 

 

Film Industry Issues and State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

been a 70 per cent decline in film production under the Sask 

Party government. The industry has called for changes to the 

film employment tax credit to make Saskatchewan more 

competitive with other provinces. They also need opportunities 

to showcase their work to an audience. 

 

To the minister: will this government take steps in today’s 

budget to help the film industry address the decline in 

production, or will they continue to drive the film industry jobs 

and investment out of our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, we know that there 

are challenges in the film industry right across North America. 

The minister highlighted that in answers to the questions earlier 

on this day . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

think members are, from their seats, shouting out points that 

may be in the budget, for which they’ve signed an embargo, 

Mr. Speaker. I think the member for Nutana just did that from 

her seat, which shouldn’t surprise anybody in this Assembly if 

they have seen how this opposition has conducted their affairs 

since the return of the member for Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member has been running down the province 

of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That member, that Leader of the 

Opposition, has been running down the province of 

Saskatchewan. He said the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan is in a free fall, Mr. Speaker. He said we’ve 

moved from boom to bust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why there’s this great disconnect between 

the people of the province — whether they work in the film 

industry or others that are less challenged — that’s why there’s 

this gap between the people of the province and the NDP. 

They’re familiar with the old Saskatchewan that led in 

out-migration and had the worst job creation record in the 

country. This new Saskatchewan is a different story, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Contract Negotiations for Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, before that Premier should 

point fingers, he should . . . He understands, and now people of 

Saskatchewan understand, the mismanagement of the finances 

of this province today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care workers from across the province are 

in the gallery today. They are representing the 25,000 of their 

colleagues that are still without a contract. They provide care 

and support to patients every day, yet this government has 

shown them nothing but disrespect. 

 

To the minister: will the government be including funding for 

pending negotiations with health care workers in today’s 

budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, those health care workers are 

very important to the system, the health care system, obviously. 

They’re important to the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the collective bargaining process is still unfolding in 

the province of Saskatchewan, and whatever agreement is 

reached, it’ll obviously be funded by the health care provider in 

Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Victims of Domestic Violence 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the end 

of December this government cut the domestic abuse outreach 

program without consulting the community. This program 

provided a number of valuable services to women victims of 

domestic violence, including helping women find emergency 

shelter, accompanying women to their homes, court, the 

hospital, or the police station as needed. It was a model that 

should have been copied throughout the province, but instead it 

was eliminated. 

 

To the minister: will the government restore funding for the 

domestic abuse outreach program in today’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the specific 

services the member raises are being provided in a different 

way, but they are being provided. We also know this. We also 

know this. This party campaigned in the election on a 

commitment to increase funding to transition centres, to assault 

centres, Mr. Speaker, in this province. We campaigned on a 

promise to increase funding by $1.1 million, a long-neglected 

area of service delivery by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. In 

the first two years of this government, Mr. Speaker, that 

promise for $1.1 million has been kept and has been delivered. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Support for Seniors 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are many senior citizens in 

the gallery today who depend on the rural recreation facilities 

for their physical and mental well-being. But due to 

skyrocketing costs for utilities, insurance, taxes, garbage 

disposal, and the maintenance of these facilities, about a quarter 

of these centres will close in the next 18 months. Will the 

budget today provide much-needed funding for these seniors to 



4472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

keep their recreation facilities open, or will these seniors be 

forced to pay more and get less? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in just a few moments the 

Minister of Finance will take his place in the Assembly and 

present the budget, and that member’s question will be 

answered as the documents are tabled. 

 

I can tell the member this: that the measures that this 

government took in previous budgets, for example to increase 

the seniors’ income assistance program for the first time in 16 

years, that will be sustained, Mr. Speaker, in the budget. 

 

I can tell the member this as well: that the 80,000 low-income 

people dropped from the income tax rolls because of the tax cut 

measures this government took, many of them seniors, that will 

also be sustained, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will also inform the member, who used to be a minister of 

Health, that this government’s plan, this government’s target to 

reduce the wait times for surgical care that we have inherited 

from those members opposite — many seniors waiting for hip 

and knee surgery — we will begin to deal with that. And I 

expect you might hear the Minister of Finance talk about that in 

just a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Reduction in Provincial Debt 

 

Mr. Furber: — The truth about wait-lists in the province of 

Saskatchewan is that they’ve doubled under this Premier. It’s a 

sad state of affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year’s budget surplus turned out to be a $1 

billion deficit. Under the Saskatchewan Party government, debt 

increased last year. There’s been a lot of rhetoric leading into 

today’s budget about the government tightening its belt. Most 

Saskatchewan families believe that to mean the budget will 

result in a decrease in the overall provincial debt. 

 

Question is simple. To the Premier: will the province carry less 

debt after today’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member has taken the 

place, I think, of his former father-in-law, Eldon Lautermilch, a 

friend to this Assembly, someone we know well. Someone once 

gave him the nickname of angry Homer because he always 

seemed to be angry. And sometimes, sometimes he engaged in 

information that wasn’t necessarily truthful. 

 

This member is clearly too young to be described that way, so 

maybe he’s angry Bart. I don’t know. But here’s what they have 

in common. Here’s what they have in common. They engage in 

information, and offer it, that’s not completely the truth, 

including what that member said about wait times in this 

province which is absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In answer to the member’s question, I will say this. This side of 

the House, together with the people of the province, have 

reduced the debt of the province by almost 40 per cent. And that 

will be sustained in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask members to 

choose their words wisely and not reflect on the integrity of 

other members. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Attorney General stood in the Assembly, pretended that he 

could unilaterally change the rules to appoint independent 

officers of the legislature, the reason being the Sask Party has 

said that the candidate recommended by a bipartisan committee 

for the position of Chief Electoral Officer is off the table 

because the Premier doesn’t want him. 

 

To the minister: is he saying that the Premier, through his 

caucus, can fire an independent officer of the legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to provide some clarity to this issue. Mr. 

Speaker, the selection of the Chief Electoral Officer for this 

province is not made by the committee, a subcommittee of the 

Board of Economy. It is not a choice made by the Board of 

Economy. It is not a decision made by the opposition. It is not a 

choice made by the government members, Mr. Speaker. Nor is 

it a choice made by the media. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it is a 

choice made by all of the elected members of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is advisory roles provided by that 

committee. However, Mr. Speaker, this is a position that must 

be voted on by all of the members. And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 

I made the offer that I would work with Chief Justice Klebuc so 

that we could have an overseer and a facilitator from the 

outside. Mr. Speaker, that offer has not been taken by the 

members opposite. And I want to have a fair, democratic, and 

impartial process and would ask the members opposite to try 

and join in that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General endorsed 

the recommended candidate, saying that his “qualifications 

would appear to make him the ideal candidate.” 

 

Despite this recommendation from the Attorney General, the 

Premier, for no apparent reason, has rejected the recommended 

candidate. Will the minister agree to hold a public inquiry into 

the decision not to hire the candidate recommended by the . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I fail to see the humour, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Will the minister agree to hold a public inquiry into the decision 

not to hire the candidate recommended by the Board of Internal 

Economy for the position of Chief Electoral Officer? 

 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4473 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 

to be holding a public inquiry. Mr. Speaker, the Attorney 

General has also offered to engage either a retired or current 

justice if the opposition members want to see even more 

oversight in the process that exists. 

 

I can see why members opposite would be very concerned, as 

we are on this side of the House, about election rules and that 

they were followed because, Mr. Speaker, they’re led by an 

individual who has some problems, has some difficulties when 

it comes to following election rules. Some of them, Mr. 

Speaker, are the subject of investigations. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, during question period twice today, 

the Premier has in his comments and replies to questions 

maligned the character of members of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, when he was questioning whether or not members of 

the opposition were truthful. You know that is not acceptable 

language in this Assembly. And just seconds ago, Mr. Speaker, 

he mentioned and maligned the Leader of the Opposition by 

saying he was under . . . had been under investigation for 

something. That never happened, Mr. Speaker. Not true. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the facts of an investigation regarding the member of the 

official opposition is well known in the public. It’s publicized in 

all of the media across the province. This is not a fact under 

dispute, Mr. Speaker. This is a well-known fact in the province, 

and the member of the House on the opposite side’s point is not 

well taken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I have listened to the point of 

order presented by the Opposition House Leader and listened to 

the arguments from the Government House Leader, and I will 

review Hansard to see the context in which the comments may 

or may not have . . . [inaudible]. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before we get to ministerial statements . . . 

Order. Before we get to ministerial statements, I am prepared to 

make a statement on a point of order that was raised yesterday 

by the Opposition House Leader. 

 

I am now prepared to rule on the point of order raised yesterday 

with regards to the ministerial statement given by the Minister 

of Education. 

 

First, I would like to remind members of my previous rulings 

relating to ministerial statements given on April 15th, 2008 and 

December 17th, 2007. At that time I stated that ministers should 

not comment on matters that have been previously announced. 

My rulings were based on previous Speakers’ rulings and our 

practice that ministerial statements must refer to a new 

government policy or program or directive. 

 

Members will appreciate the difficulty faced by the Speaker in 

determining the appropriateness of a ministerial statement as it 

is being delivered. Often it is only once a statement is well 

under way, or has been announced, that the Speaker may be 

able to discern whether the statement is in order. The Speaker 

does not monitor government announcements and does not 

always know if a statement relates to something previously 

announced. Compounding my difficulty in making an 

immediate ruling is the need to ensure fairness to the opposition 

by affording an equal opportunity to respond to the statement. 

 

In reviewing the matter, including the information put forward 

by both House leaders, I find that the ministerial statement 

provided by the Minister of Education contained information 

that was announced by the government on the previous 

Thursday. Therefore on the basis of an established practice of 

this Assembly, I must find that the point of order is well taken. 

 

For the guidance of members, I would like to clarify that a new 

announcement is one that is made at the earliest opportunity. I 

would also like to remind all members that the accepted 

guidelines for ministerial statements are that statements should 

be brief and not lengthy in nature, and equally the response 

should not exceed the time taken by the minister. 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to submit the estimates and supplementary estimates 

accompanied by a message from His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the members of the Assembly and 

our guests to please rise for the message from His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2011, and supplementary 

estimates, March, of certain sums required for the service 

of the province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2010, 

and recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

[Signed by] His Honour Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, today it is my honour as 

the Minister of Finance to present the 2010-11 budget to the 



4474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

people of Saskatchewan. It is my pleasure to report to you, to 

the members of this House, and the people of Saskatchewan 

that today’s budget is a balanced budget. 

 

This budget was built on solid principles — caution on the 

revenue side, restraint on the spending side, and a firm 

commitment to government living within its means. These are 

the principles Saskatchewan families follow in managing their 

own money. These are the principles our government will 

follow in managing taxpayers’ money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I continue, I would like to welcome the 

many guests who have joined us here today and throughout the 

province, especially my wife, Carole, and our daughters Laurie 

McKerracher from Calgary, Pattie Draude and her husband Tim 

from Melfort, and Bonnie Nayet from Regina. Thanks for 

coming, family. We love you a lot. 

 

[14:30] 

 

You know, Carole and I have been married a lot longer than 

I’ve been the Finance minister. And the principles I just 

outlined are the ones that we have followed throughout our 

family’s finances for over 40 years of marriage — caution, 

keeping spending under control, living within our means. We 

know this worked for our family, and we know it works for 

Saskatchewan families, and we know it’ll work for this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I delivered the provincial budget last year, I 

began my address by saying that we in Saskatchewan are not 

immune to the turmoil that has shaken the world economy, and 

it was true. But while Saskatchewan certainly felt the effects of 

a global recession, our province fared much better than most, 

and our economy remained strong and steady. 

 

Much has happened over the past year. We know how 

important it was that our government invested in projects 

specifically designed to keep our economy strong. We know 

how important it was that we paid down the province’s debt by 

$2.6 billion, saving Saskatchewan taxpayers $650 million in net 

interest costs over five years. 

 

This budget builds on that foundation. We want to build on the 

successes we have had and are rebuilding the province’s 

infrastructure and sustaining our economic momentum through 

our historic tax reductions. Those decisions have supported the 

economic strength we continue to enjoy in Saskatchewan today. 

 

We see it everywhere in our daily lives. The people of 

Saskatchewan are confident and optimistic about the future. 

Surveys conducted by the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business show that small-business owners in Saskatchewan are 

the most optimistic in the country and that five of the top 

business-friendly cities in the country are right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] describes our province as being 

off to a rip-roaring start in 2010. Recent headlines in our daily 

papers declared, “Saskatchewan job numbers surge” and 

“Saskatchewan economy expected to lead.” There are 

tremendous optimism heading into 2010-11 and for pretty good 

reason. CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] recently 

announced that Saskatchewan will lead the country in economic 

growth this year. In its most recent provincial outlook, RBC is 

predicting a 3.6 per cent growth rate for Saskatchewan this year, 

the second highest in the country. The outlook also predicts a 

4.6 per cent growth rate for next year, the highest in Canada. 

 

In 2009 the number of people working in Saskatchewan 

increased by nearly 8,000 — the only province to post 

significant job growth last year. In February of this year, the 

provincial unemployment rate dropped to 4.3 per cent, by far 

the lowest in Canada. Saskatchewan’s population has hit an 

all-time high, breaking the record set back in 1987. Over the 

past two years, Saskatchewan has grown by nearly 30,000 

people, the fastest rate of growth since the early 1950s. 

 

So 2009 was a good year in terms of job creation and 

population growth. Next year promises to even be a better year 

for our province, our economy, and our people, but we’re not 

taking anything for granted. Our government believes that a 

strong and growing economy is built on a firm foundation of 

balanced budgets and fiscal discipline. As we control 

government spending, our government will be guided by the 

principles of fairness and fiscal responsibility. We remain 

vigilant in balancing the need for restraint with the need to 

protect important services. 

 

Saskatchewan families work hard and live within their means. 

They expect their government to do the same. Therefore this 

budget is about moving beyond the boom and bust cycle, as 

define Saskatchewan budgeting. Yes, our resource revenues 

will always fluctuate from one year to the next, but the new, 

confident Saskatchewan people do not fluctuate. It is 

unwavering. Everywhere I go Saskatchewan people are positive 

about our province’s future. They want our government to 

reflect that confidence, this new positive attitude. 

 

This budget moves Saskatchewan away from the notion of 

boom and bust, making the decisions that need to be made 

regardless of the current price of oil or potash. This budget 

prepares Saskatchewan for permanent, steady growth through 

innovation, through responsible spending, and through new 

ways of approaching important challenges like surgical wait 

times and improving efficiencies in the health system. 

 

This budget sets the stage for a new approach to delivering 

government services, an approach that is based on innovation, 

on measuring performance, and on making government more 

efficient rather than simply measuring the amount of money 

being spent. This budget is balanced, forward-looking, and 

responsible. 

 

With this budget our government intends to reduce the overall 

government footprint and strive for a more efficient delivery of 

public services. Over the last decade, the size of the public 

service in our province has grown much faster than the rate of 

growth of Saskatchewan’s population. This must change.  

 

This is not something unique to Saskatchewan of course. If you 

look across the country and around the globe, you’ll find other 

jurisdictions faced with the same challenge. In Saskatchewan 

we’re already ahead of the curve. Early in the last fiscal year we 

began a process to begin finding efficiencies throughout 

government, including a delay in hiring or simply not filling 

vacant positions. We went on to examine government programs 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4475 

and services as we developed this budget. The result was that 

we were able to reduce the size of the public service by about 

135 positions, with limited job loss. This year we’ll begin a 

four-year plan to reduce the size of the public service, with a 

goal of reaching a 15 per cent reduction over four years. The 

goal for the first year is 4 per cent. 

 

Many of those who retire or move on to other opportunities will 

not be replaced. We will control this by establishing a 

centralized review process to ensure that only critical positions 

will be staffed. In the years ahead, we will continue to improve 

the way we do business and deliver service. 

 

We know that the public service must become smaller, more 

effective, and more efficient, and we know it will. This has 

already begun to happen through the budget process. 

 

Last fall we asked all ministries to develop their budget 

submissions for this year at 90 per cent of last year’s budget. 

Then we asked them to rank the remaining 10 per cent of their 

spending by priority. The result is that 14 ministries came in 

with real reductions in their budgets, mainly by eliminating 

programs that were not being well utilized or by making 

changes to provide improved efficiency. 

 

As an example, our government reviewed approximately 350 

government agencies, boards, and commissions and discovered 

that many had outlived their original purpose. This review 

process resulted in the elimination of 82 different governing 

bodies, saving a half a million dollars a year. 

 

Our government has also cut the amount spent on government 

communications and advertising by almost half, from $17 

million in 2007-08 to about $8.5 million in 2009-10. These 

were good first steps, but this budget needed to go further. 

 

So this year we have seen other governments increase spending, 

resulting in multi-billion dollar deficits. Our government is 

choosing a different path. Our goal is not simply to slow the 

growth of government spending. Our goal was to reduce 

government spending, ensuring a balanced budget today and a 

spending trajectory that is sustainable tomorrow. 

 

I am pleased to announce that we have achieved this goal. 

Compared to last year, today’s budget reduces government 

spending by $121.3 million or 1.2 per cent. 

 

To get there, some difficult choices had to be made. As the 

Premier has announced, we will not be able to move forward on 

the second phase of municipal revenue sharing this year. 

Revenue sharing will be maintained at $167.4 million, the same 

record-setting level as last year and 43 per cent higher than 

when our government took office. Our commitment to revenue 

sharing equalling 1 per cent of PST [provincial sales tax] will 

be met in the next fiscal year.  

 

Education property tax rates will also remain at the same level 

as last year when our government delivered the largest property 

tax reduction in Saskatchewan history. 

 

As ministries work to reduce their budget, they ask many 

important questions like: are programs delivering the desired 

result? For example we had a program in Advanced Education 

called work-based training for the unemployed, but we found 

that it wasn’t working very well. Very few participants were 

getting jobs. So we’re winding it up as part of an effort to better 

match these training programs to the needs of employers in the 

labour market. A skilled labour force is critical for a growing 

economy, so we’re redirecting these dollars into other training 

programs that work. 

 

In government we have a tendency to do things the same way 

we’ve always done them. Our goal is to change, and we’re 

using the creativity and common sense of our employees to help 

us. Nobody knows the frustrations and inefficiencies of 

complicated processes better than the people who deal with 

them every single day. So it shouldn’t come as a surprise if we 

find better ways to get the job done with their help. 

 

Our Health ministry is producing some promising results using 

what’s called the lean method of process improvement. Here’s 

an example. It used to take 13 different steps and 67 days to 

deal with an out-of-province medical claim. By revamping the 

process, the medical services branch in Health have eliminated 

a backlog of 2,200 claims and reduced the turnaround time to 

between 9 and 19 days. That is the kind of creative problem 

solving and innovation we are looking for. This is the kind of 

thing we want to see more across government. Part of saving 

money is innovation, and part of it is simply applying more 

rigour to the budgeting process. 

 

We have worked diligently using this approach, and we looked 

in places where government hadn’t looked before. For example 

regional health authorities appeared before Treasury Board this 

year, the first time this has ever happened. This exercise will 

lead savings and efficiencies in the delivery of health care in 

our province. 

 

Health spending now makes up over 40 per cent of our 

provincial budget. Since we were elected in 2007, we’ve 

increased spending on health care by more than 8 per cent each 

year. We are covering more new drugs. We’ve made significant 

investments in capital projects and made great strides in 

recruiting and retaining health care professionals. But we know 

this rate of growth is not sustainable in the long run, and every 

effort must be made to be sure we are spending smarter, not just 

spending more. That’s why we are holding the growth in health 

care spending this year to 3.1 per cent. 

 

The regional health authorities have embraced this challenge 

and support the effort of the government to contain cost 

increases and target new spending to areas that improve service 

and enhance the health care experience for Saskatchewan 

families. That said, the RHAs [regional health authority] will 

still be getting $123 million more than last year, a 5 per cent 

increase. 

 

This budget also adds $10 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency and provides an extra $30 million to cover increased 

use of medical services drug plan and extended benefit 

programs. 

 

We’re proud to say that this budget also provides $10.5 million 

to begin our commitment to reduce surgical wait times to three 

months within four years. 

 



4476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

This budget also adds another 12 new postgraduate residency 

seats in the College of Medicine. This brings the number of new 

seats since we were elected to 60 and the total number of seats 

to 120. We think this is a forward-looking move that will help 

the future doctor shortages. As well, funding of $3.5 million 

will continue the implementation of the physician recruitment 

strategy and agency. 

 

We’re also moving to help those affected by autism. This 

budget provides $2.5 million to establish a pilot project aimed 

at finding more effective treatments for autism. Mr. Speaker, it 

is not enough to only search for health cures, we also must look 

for preventative measures. 

 

We know that smoking is very dangerous for our citizens. The 

financial cost is great; the human cost is greater. We also know 

there is a direct link between the cost of cigarettes and smoking 

rates, particularly among young people. That is why, effective 

midnight tonight, the tax on tobacco will go up by 2.7 cents per 

cigarette. That is why we have chosen to reduce the number of 

tax-free cigarettes for individual purposes on reserve from three 

cartons a week to one. Smoking is the leading cause of 

preventable illness in Canada. These measures will help build 

up our tobacco reduction strategy with the goal of reducing 

smoking. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Developing this year’s Health budget meant balancing 

priorities. The difficult decision of de-insuring universal 

chiropractic services was made in this budget, saving the 

province $10.4 million annually. Low-income people will 

continue to receive coverage for up to 12 treatments per year. 

This change is consistent with most other provinces which do 

not pay for chiropractic services or which limit the number of 

treatments covered. 

 

Also with the concern to the future health of our people, we 

must also take steps to invest in post-secondary education and 

innovation to prepare our young people for the future. To that 

end, we have significantly increased the operating grant to our 

post-secondary institutions, including an extra $16.3 million to 

help them keep tuition increases to a minimum. We are also 

enhancing the student support programs by $1.8 million, 

including the lowering of the interest rate paid by students. 

Funding for the graduate retention program will increase by 

$4.3 million for total funding of 23 million as our government 

continues to encourage post-secondary graduates to start their 

careers and build their lives in Saskatchewan. 

 

On the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] side, last week we 

were pleased to announce funding for six schools and upgrades 

to seven existing schools. This year we’re investing $17.2 

million in new capital funding. This brings the total new school 

capital funding since 2007-08 to more than $328 million over 

three years. The overall operating funding for school divisions 

will increase by $33 million this year including property tax 

revenue. One-time transitional funding of $12 million is also 

available from education property tax revenues due to the delay 

in reducing mill rates this year. 

 

Our government sees innovation and trade as key elements of 

our growth agenda. The innovation agenda cuts across a 

number of areas where we have high hopes for the future, 

including agricultural biotechnology, value-added development 

in the nuclear industry, and carbon capture technology. 

 

This budget commits $11.8 million in new operating funding 

over four years to the synchrotron on the University of 

Saskatchewan campus. This money will support the facility’s 

13 beamlines in operation and commissioning stage and nine 

beamlines in development. 

 

The Petroleum Technology Research Centre, or PTRC, located 

on the University of Regina campus will receive $2.5 million 

for its research projects including CO2 capture and enhanced oil 

recovery. A further 1.6 million in Go Green funding is also 

being provided to the PTRC for carbon capture research in 

developing solutions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

And this budget establishes Innovation Saskatchewan with a 

base budget of $1.3 million; $480,000 of this funding will go to 

TRLabs in Saskatoon to support the work they do in 

telecommunications research. 

 

International trade has been a real success story in 

Saskatchewan and a big part of the reason our economy 

remained strong throughout the global recession. Saskatchewan 

companies are being introduced around the world. Our Premier 

has made several trips to the United States where he’s 

personally made the case for Saskatchewan on Capitol Hill and 

beyond. Our Energy minister has carried the same message to 

China on more than one occasion. 

 

We’re encouraged that the first sale of Crown petroleum and 

national gas rights this year received bids from Chinese oil and 

gas companies. We will build on this momentum later this year 

when our Premier joins his Western counterparts on a trade 

mission to Asia in the spring. 

 

We all know about the breakdown in potash sales to China in 

2009. What people may not know is that while we struggle to 

sell potash to China, the Chinese were actually buying a lot 

more of our other products. In 2009, canola sales to China were 

up by 80 per cent to $553 million. Sales of peas were up by 51 

per cent to 105 million, and linseed sales were up a whopping 

341 per cent to $69.4 million. 

 

Similar trends were evident in our trade with India. Last year 

Saskatchewan sold $975 million worth of goods to India, which 

amounted to 45 per cent of all Canadian trade with that country. 

It’s more than twice as much as Ontario. 

 

And it’s this success that have convinced us we need to do 

more. The Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, STEP, 

and its 400-member businesses have done a tremendous job 

expanding trade and developing new markets for Saskatchewan 

products. This budget increases funding to STEP by $325,000, 

about 10 per cent, to assist in increasing access to new markets. 

 

STEP’s success in agriculture exports would not be possible 

without the hard work of Saskatchewan farm families. Our 

government is proud to say that we are fully funding farm 

income stabilization programs again this year, and we will 

devote $234 million to pay our share on these important 

programs. 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4477 

We’re also devoting $16 million to agriculture research and 

development. In recent weeks, our Agriculture minister has 

announced important changes and improvements to the crop 

insurance program, including more diversified crop coverage 

and improvements to wildlife damage compensation. We will 

continue to protect the best interests of agriculture and 

Saskatchewan family farms by constantly striving to improve 

ag programs as we did this year by moving administration of 

programs to right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government is committed to reducing the burden of 

government regulation and red tape for businesses across the 

province. In the Ministry of Finance, we’ve introduced a 

taxpayer service commitments and standards code to improve 

public service to taxpayers and vendors. Last week we 

announced one-stop shopping for businesses, a single point of 

access for business services provided by government, rather 

than having to deal with several different government ministries 

and agencies. 

 

At the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour, we have established a Canada-Saskatchewan rapid 

response team to help workers and businesses affected by 

layoffs to find the help they need more quickly. This program 

has provided support to about 4,400 people, including 1,200 

who have avoided layoffs by taking advantage of the federal 

government’s work sharing program. 

 

We know too that a strong performance in our economy and our 

booming population growth in the last couple of years have put 

pressure on the housing market. The gap between the cost of 

renting and owning has grown, making it tougher for renters to 

move up to their own home. So in this budget, we are 

establishing a new head start on a home program to allow more 

people to own their own homes. It’ll provide low-cost, 

fixed-rate mortgages to qualifying families so they can purchase 

a new home. In the weeks to come, the Minister of Social 

Services will provide more details on this exciting new program 

that’ll provide the opportunity of home ownership to 1,000 

Saskatchewan families. This program is just another example of 

the forward-looking plans of the government. 

 

We’re also moving to improve the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

We’ve asked the federal government to increase the annual 

contribution limit from $600 to $2,500 a year, which will help 

those with no company pension plans, including self-employed 

and those working for small businesses. 

 

This budget will also provide needed support for those who 

need a hand up from government. This year we will provide a 

4.8 per cent increase for social services. This not only maintains 

benefits for those who need the help, it provides new funding 

for a number of important initiatives. For example, there is $5.4 

million more to help operate 144 new child care welfare spaces 

built in 2009-10. There’s a $4.4 million increase for expanded 

foster care, more spaces for the intellectually disabled, and a $9 

million increase to provide more support and services for foster 

families. 

 

This year we will also provide community-based organizations 

with a 1 per cent increase in their budgets. This brings their 

overall base operating increase to 13.3 per cent since our 

government was elected. 

We think that’s progress, and we’ve been ever mindful of the 

promises we made to Saskatchewan people. One of those 

promises was to hire 120 police officers over our four-year 

mandate. We will keep that promise, and we will be hiring 

another 30 officers later this year. 

 

Over the past two years, our government has made an 

unprecedented commitment to addressing the infrastructure 

deficit in our province, investing $2.3 billion in hospitals, 

schools, highways, municipal projects, and other much-needed 

initiatives. This year this government will make a further $632 

million investment in infrastructure, bringing the total capital 

investment to nearly $3 billion over three years. 

 

As part of our capital investment, we will spend 302 million on 

highway projects this year — the second largest highway 

capital program in the province’s history. This will allow us to 

continue to work on important multi-year projects like the 

twinning of Highway No. 11, continually working on the 

Lewvan Drive interchange, building the Yorkton truck bypass, 

and moving ahead with 270 kilometres of highway construction 

under the rural highways strategy. 

 

We’re also continuing with a number of infrastructure projects 

through the Ministry of Municipal Affairs. We’ve devoted $61 

million to federal-provincial projects that have to be completed 

by March of 2011 and another $52 million for projects that will 

stretch over the next few years. Overall funding for 

federal-provincial municipal infrastructure and programs 

increases by $48 million or 72 per cent over ’09-10. 

 

These are all important priorities for Saskatchewan that require 

additional funding. That is why we’re introducing a series of 

modest changes to liquor markups while still maintaining 

competitive liquor prices in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ll note that, thanks to historic income tax reductions 

introduced in 2008, Saskatchewan individuals and families still 

pay among the lowest provincial taxes in Canada. In fact a 

two-income family with $50,000 family income will pay just 

$1,270 in 2010, less than half of what would be the same 

families paying in BC [British Columbia], Manitoba or Quebec. 

 

In recent years, governments of all stripes have followed the 

well-worn path of bigger government and increased spending. 

That path is not sustainable in the long run. That is why we 

have chosen a different path. We have chosen to make the right 

decisions today because we know what it means for our 

children tomorrow. The budget delivers the forecast $20 million 

surplus in the General Revenue Fund and keeps debt from 

growing this year. This budget also leaves 511 million in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund to provide the security we 

might need along the way. 

 

This budget is balanced. This budget is balanced, 

forward-looking and responsible. Mr. Speaker, this path we 

have chosen is not the easy path, but it is the right path to 

ensure Saskatchewan’s economic momentum continues. It is 

the right path for the new Saskatchewan — the growing, 

optimistic, self-assured Saskatchewan — where we are looking 

to the future with confidence and with hope, and where we 

know without a doubt that our best days are still ahead. Thank 

you. 



4478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. If I could have the members’ 

attention. First of all, I would just like to say to our guests how 

much we appreciate your presence here and your co-operation 

in observing the rules. The procedure in the Assembly now 

gives the opposition critic the opportunity to respond, and it 

would be appreciated if at all possible that members would 

remain . . . or guests would remain in their place, unless 

necessary to leave, to allow the member to respond without 

interference. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Minister of Finance has moved, seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That this Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome 

everyone here today and thank the Minister of Finance for 

delivering a tough budget, and one that after the record last 

year, I’m sure was bothersome because last year’s budget was a 

budget of deception and deficit. And I must say that looking in 

a very early way at this budget, I have to say and advise that 

this is a budget that should not be trusted, delivered by a 

government that should not be trusted with the finances of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing I am pleased with in the budget, that I 

think the numbers on commodities might be closer than being 

off the 3 billion that the Minister of Energy advised us last year 

when it came to potash numbers. I think those numbers are 

better this year. 

 

The problem is, the deception is in another area of this budget. 

And all you need to do is look at the change in the accounting 

procedures. Now what is the motive of a government or a 

company that changes the accounting mechanism in the middle 

of a term? What could that be? When they say they’re 

forward-looking, I want to say this: that we saw this before and 

I was hoping we’d never see it again. It happened after a couple 

of years of deficits in the Devine administration back in the 

1980s. And then after a couple of deficits, they came forward 

with a change in — what did they change? — the accounting 

system. 

 

And what was the motive? It was to hide things like deficits. 

And we have today in their own documents, if the public would 

read the document, and it says right here the public debt, the 

debt of the province in 2009, 7.9 billion. In 2010, 8.4 billion. 

This year estimated to be $9.1 billion. That’s what it says in 

your own document. And the minister stands in this place and 

says there’ll be no increase in the public debt. 

 

Now that is as unbelievable as last year’s budget. This is their 

document, not mine. When it comes to the debt in the 

consolidated fund, the summary, surplus or deficit — in 

brackets, meaning deficit — what is the number there for this 

year? $622 million deficit. This is in their document. This is the 

second year of deficits that we’ve seen from this government. 

 

Now the question is, when you get into this pickle that they’re 

now in, how do you solve it? That’s the question that many 

people in the province are asking. How do you get out of this 

predicament? They’re saying we have to tighten our belts. The 

Premier has said that a number of times. The question is, where 

do you tighten the belt? Who do you ask to tighten the belt? 

Should it be the community groups in Regina and Saskatoon? 

Should it be the trappers in northern Saskatchewan? Should it 

be the students with ever-higher tuition fees probably likely this 

year, something in the area of 5 per cent, double of the inflation 

rate? Or would you expect it would be, and start, at the cabinet 

level with a reduction in the number of cabinet ministers or the 

reduction in salary or a reduction in the political staff? 

 

I never heard any cuts there. Not one. I’ll tell you, in the 1990s 

when we had to come here to clean up the mess left by Grant 

Devine . . . And I might advise that the Premier of this day was 

working with the government at the time that the mess was 

created. He was there. He was one of the political staff, and he 

watched and he saw how the government operated. And my fear 

is that’s where he got his education in financing. 

 

Now the problem with that is we’re headed back in the same 

direction, and we are all going to suffer as a result. Every 

citizen of Saskatchewan, as the documents indicate, will have to 

be part of paying back this debt — almost getting close to $10 

billion; 9.1 billion is the public debt. And that’s up 

considerably. 

 

Yet I drive around the province and I see billboards where the 

Premier says that he’s reduced the debt of the province by 40 

per cent. It’s not true. It’s not true. It’s not true. The problem is, 

the problem is, it’s not true. The problem is, it’s not true. But I 

tell you, Mr. Premier has to know that he will be exposed by the 

public of Saskatchewan when it comes to the debt of the 

province. 

 

Now if this were in the private sector, and I just want to end on 

this point, if you were the CEO [chief executive officer] of a 

private sector company, and you went to the annual meeting 

and you said, look we’re doing well; we’re making lots of 

money. And then it was discovered that that was as a result of 

an accounting change, I can tell you, the analysts in New York 

and Toronto and the regulator and the members who held shares 

in your company, the shareholders, they would kick out that 

CEO. 

 

And my bet is, when the next election comes, if this trend 

continues of putting the onus of paying for this bill that this 

government has put in place on the backs of the poorest people 

in the province, this government will be soundly defeated, as it 

well should be. 

 

I’ve had only a few moments to look at the budget, but I want to 

say this: that we have many other comments to make on the 

budget, myself and the other members, and we’ll be doing that 



March 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4479 

in the days to come. And I might add the weeks and months to 

come. And based on that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

Government House Leader. 

 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 25th, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved: 

 

That debate on the motion that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government be 

resumed on Thursday, March 25th, 2010. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question, I just want to say 

again, thank you to our guests for recognizing the process and 

abiding by the rules of the Assembly. And once the Speaker is 

. . . First of all I would ask, following the adjournment motion, 

that you rise with the members and wait until the Speaker 

leaves the Chamber. And then you are invited to a tea to take 

place, as you exit the Chamber, to your right in room 255; to 

your left in room 218. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved that this House do 

now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:08.] 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4463 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4463 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4463 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4463 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4463 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4463 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4464 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4464 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4464 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4464 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4464 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4465 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4465 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4465 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4465 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4465 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4466 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Ford World Women’s Curling Championship 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4466 

 Public Access to Information Regarding Tommy Douglas 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4466 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4466 

 A Tale of Two Leaders 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4467 

 Big River Shiver and Ice Fishing Derby  

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4467 

 Reaction to Fiscal Management 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4467 

 Entrepreneurial Spirit in Saskatchewan 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4467 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Spending Reductions 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4468 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4468 

 Budget Forecasts and State of the Provincial Economy 

   Wotherspoon .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4468 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4468 

 Chiropractic Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4468 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4468 

 Funding for Health Care Facilities 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 

 Coverage For Dental Treatment 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 

 Support for Post-Secondary Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4469 

 Funding for School Boards 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4470 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4470 

 Aboriginal Employment 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4470 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4470 

 Attrition and Job Tenure 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4470 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4470 



 

 Film Industry Issues and State of the Provincial Economy 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 

 Contract Negotiations for Health Care Workers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4471 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 

 Support for Victims of Domestic Violence 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 

 Support for Seniors 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4471 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 

 Reduction in Provincial Debt 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 

 Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4472 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4473 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4473 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4473 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4473 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4473 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4473 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4473 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4473 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4478 

 Resumption of Budget Debate 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4479 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


