




















































Hansard: November 24, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 16A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6195 

 November 24, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 

statement regarding the Holodomor Memorial Day. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for leave to 

make a statement regarding the Holodomor Memorial Day. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

International Holodomor Remembrance Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to my colleagues. Mr. Speaker, November 22nd to 28th is 

International Holodomor Remembrance Week. During this 

week, people around the world remember the millions of 

victims of the famine genocide that occurred in Ukraine in 1932 

and 1933. 

 

It is said, Mr. Speaker, at least seven million and perhaps as 

many 10 million people fell victim to this man-made famine at 

the hand of Joseph Stalin’s dictatorship in Ukraine. Sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, the citizens of the region abundant with hearty 

farmlands suffered from unfathomable starvation during a time 

of bumper crops. It should not have happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The international recognition of Holodomor as an act of 

genocide continues to grow every year, and in 2008 this 

Legislative Assembly became the first jurisdiction in Canada to 

recognize this genocide with The Ukrainian Famine and 

Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act. The Government of 

Canada soon followed with their Act and by establishing a 

national Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) 

Memorial Day. And similar legislation has been passed by the 

provinces of Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec. Mr. 

Speaker, I recently had the opportunity to visit Ukraine, and I 

was able to light a commemorative candle at the new 

Holodomor monument in Kiev to honour the memory of its 

victims. 

 

As I also mentioned earlier, we have a number . . . Mr. Speaker, 

I will be introducing a number of special guests of Ukrainian 

heritage later on that are in the galleries today. They came to 

the legislature today, Mr. Speaker, to participate in a special 

candle lighting ceremony that took place here earlier today. The 

candle lighting is a symbolic gesture of recognition in memory 

of those whose lives were lost. 

 

A similar ceremony will take place at many of the international 

commemorations in Ukraine and around the world, Mr. 

Speaker. Memorial candles that have been blessed by clergy are 

distributed and then lit from the memorial candle which has 

been lit from the original memorial candle at the Holodomor 

memorial in Kiev, Ukraine. People are then asked to light their 

candles at home on Saturday, November the 27th, International 

Holodomor Memorial Day, in memory of all those who lost 

their lives. And the spirit of the national memorial in Kiev is 

then passed on through these candles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the candle used to light the memorial candle in the 

ceremony this morning kept with this tradition. It was lit using 

a candle provided by the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the 

Saskatchewan Provincial Council. And that candle was lit from 

the Holodomor memorial candle in Kiev. This candle, Mr. 

Speaker, will remain in the rotunda until November 28th to 

show solidarity with people around the world who are taking 

time to remember. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, I’d like to quote the 19th century 

Ukrainian poet and humanist, Taras Shevchenko, who said in 

his poem entitled “Where’er We Roam, Whatever We May 

Do.” 

 

Where’er we roam, whatever we may do, 

We men are proud and foolish, through and through! 

We boast that we, each son or daughter, 

Whether we live on earth or on the water, 

In shining palaces or dungeons dark, 

Are monarchs all, are despots true and stark, 

Above ourselves —  real masters we must be, 

Whether on thrones or in captivity. 

 

And that conception issues from our will, 

And through our reason must keep flaming still 

Like a bright beacon on a sea of ill —  

To wit, the sea of life. Thus it is come 

That in the lighthouse of our cranium 

The fiery pharos of our reason flares 

Which further oil of knowledge oft repairs; 

And so we hymn, with thoughts ill understood, 

Man’s destiny, if it be ill or good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find these ancient words of Shevchenko remain 

true and relevant. And as I read them aloud here today, I am 

humbled by them, humbled by this concept that despite our 

circumstances, whether we live in palaces or dungeons, we are 

as Shevchenko says, monarchs all, that each and every life has 

value and that knowledge is the oil that feeds the lighthouse in 

our minds. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members here today to take a moment 

and reflect upon the value of the lives lost and share the 

knowledge of this horrible time in our modern history just as 

we share the flame from the memorial candle in Kiev. And in 

doing so, we honour and remember the many people of 

Ukrainian descent in our province and the country who lost 

loved ones during Holodomor. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a few 

comments. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 



6196 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

asked for leave to respond. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Assembly 

for allowing me to say a few words on this very important and 

significant event in world history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Holodomor originates from the Ukrainian 

word holod and mor, which means hunger and plague 

respectively. The term originated directly from the expression, 

moryty holodom, which means to inflict death by hunger. In 

1932 to 1933, an estimated 7 to 10 million people perished in 

the Ukraine as a result of this famine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress Saskatchewan 

website states that they are there to serve the 

Saskatchewan-Ukrainian community and maintain, develop and 

share the Ukrainian-Canadian identity, culture and aspirations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank these unsung heroes here in 

Saskatchewan, particularly UCC [Ukrainian Canadian 

Congress] Saskatchewan President Ed Lysyk, his members, 

Vice-president Slawko Kindrachuk, Secretary Vera Feduschak, 

Treasurer Larry Balion, and past President Eugene Krenosky. 

Members-at-large, Peter Abrametz, Prince Albert; Orest 

Gawdyda, Regina; Cathy Schabel, Saskatoon; MaryAnn 

Trischuk, Yorkton; branch presidents, Paul Kardynal, North 

Battleford; Taras Korol, Canora; Elmer Malec, Prince Albert; 

Orest Warnyca, Regina; Merle Maximiuk, Yorkton; and Stan 

Ganczar, Weyburn.  

 

Without their efforts, the commemorative ceremony at the 

legislature today and many services throughout Saskatchewan 

would not be possible. The Ukrainian community and all 

Saskatchewan owe a deep gratitude for their tireless efforts to 

make this day a reality. Many of us would have thought this 

was not possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, politics and life are truly amazing. In 2004 here at 

the legislature, we watched and witnessed the Orange 

Revolution in the Ukraine. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

The Orange Revolution started in the immediate aftermath of 

the runoff of the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election. The 

November 21st election, marred by corruption and electoral 

fraud, caused huge protests beginning on November 22nd, 2004 

and continuing until January 2005 when Viktor Yushchenko 

was declared president of the Ukraine by the electoral 

commission. 

 

It was not until November 28th, 2006 that the Ukrainian 

parliament passed a law finding the Holodomor a deliberate act 

of genocide and the public denial illegal. It was a time of 

excitement and the flame of democracy truly flickered for 

Ukraine. Again, it was the UCC Canada that brought the 

international remembrance flame to Canada. And with the 

coordination of the UCC Saskatchewan it passed through 

Saskatchewan in 2008, carried by Mr. Stefan Horlatsch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the UCC of Saskatchewan has been there 

throughout, bringing awareness and educating all of us on this 

genocide. And, Mr. Speaker, on a personal note, I want to thank 

the UCC for igniting in me a greater sense of identity and pride 

in my heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did high school Ukrainian by correspondence 

and even took a Ukrainian language class in University of 

Saskatchewan but, Mr. Speaker, how easy it is to forget our 

roots in this day-to-day business of living. That is why the UCC 

is so important, not only the work they do for the Ukrainian 

community, but the work they do with newly arrived 

immigrants to our province. They maintain that language and 

cultural ties, and they tirelessly promote such important events 

as the Holodomor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are again dark clouds on the horizon in 

Ukraine, a country with incredible debt load and concerns over 

irregularities in local elections. Mr. Speaker, democracy is truly 

a fragile piece. 

 

It is into this void that the UCC Canada and Saskatchewan 

organizations have stepped and why their work is so important. 

These Ukrainian Canadian and provincial organizations have 

been directly responsible for no less than five provinces and the 

federal government now declaring the Holodomor a genocide. 

Mr. Speaker, just this past June, the province of Quebec joined 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, and the federal 

government in declaring the fourth Saturday in November to 

commemorate the Holodomor in the province and country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am a son of Ukrainian immigrant farmers, and 

it’s not often easy to speak of these horrible events. And I think 

of times I listened to the stories of my grandparents, and they 

were stories of oppression in Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end with two quotes. First, I was at the 

UCC Nation Builders event in Saskatoon a week or so ago, and 

I want to end with what former judge Ernie Boychuk said in 

receiving his Nations Builders award. Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

And today in the rotunda, President Ed Lysyk ended his speech 

with: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated 

in your gallery today is a very special group of people that I’ll 

reference a little bit later in members’ statements, but if I can, 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, introduce them now. And maybe as I introduce them 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6197 

they can give us a quick wave. 

 

In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are Kim and Sharla Knox. Sharla 

is the mom of a Saskatchewan hero, the late Chris Knox. And 

joining them is George Yannitsos. He is the president of the 

Chris Knox Foundation. 

 

And then very special guests indeed, Mr. Speaker, Jan Fowler is 

a grandmother to Reyce Ball, who I’ll introduce in a moment. 

His mom Erin is here as well. And ladies and gentlemen of the 

House, Reyce Ball has also joined us today. 

 

And just in a little while, Reyce is going to be going to Grey 

Cup because of everyday heroes in the province of 

Saskatchewan and companies that are going to make that 

possible. And we’ll talk more about that in a moment. But I had 

a chance to visit with him a little bit before the proceedings 

today, and Reyce has a lot to say on a lot of subjects and was 

just a delight to be able to meet. 

 

And I look forward to talking a little bit more about the Chris 

Knox Foundation later on. I wonder if all members would help 

me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am especially 

blessed. Through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly I’m very fortunate to introduce one of my brothers 

and his wife, their daughter-in-law, and their two grandchildren. 

Seated in your gallery are my brother, Ray, and his wife, 

Joanne, Melissa, and Melissa and Steven’s children, Tristen and 

Teigan. Steven is at work today, so unable to take the day off to 

join us, but they made the trek in from Govan this morning. 

And I ask all hon. members to help me in welcoming a very 

important part of the Trew family to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is with great pleasure that I introduce to you and to all 

members in the House the members of the Regina Catholic 

school Ukrainian program choir that are seated in the west 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. This choir is under the direction of Ms. 

Katie Nakutny, and also with the choir are Helena Demchuk, 

Olena Shyian, and Yvonne Sirdar. I’d ask all of the children 

and the adults to give us a big wave over there. All right. That’s 

the group that took part in the ceremony earlier on today at 

noon hour. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in the same gallery are a number of 

individuals from Ukraine, from the Ivano-Frankivsk University 

in Ukraine that are attending the University of Regina. I know 

all of them aren’t there, Mr. Speaker, but I’m going to mention 

their names because these five students have taken advantage of 

our exchange program with Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students are Mykhailo Skrobach, Natalia 

Petryshyn, Julia Mykhaylova, Arsenij Stefanov, and a special 

mention of the fifth student — and I want you to pay attention 

to the name — Oleksandra Kravets. Mr. Speaker, these students 

are with their host families, Bob and Elizabeth Ivanochko, Ed 

and Janet Lysyk, and Kathy Lloyd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce Ed Lysyk. Ed is the 

president of the Ukrainian Canadian Council, Saskatchewan 

provincial council and is a member of the advisory 

Saskatchewan Ukraine relations advisory committee. Ed — 

along with the chairperson who was the master of ceremonies 

in the rotunda earlier today, Mr. Speaker, Gerald Luciuk — Ed 

and Gerald accompanied me as part of a delegation to Ukraine 

to build on what we had started in 2008 and what the advisory 

committee has done so far. 

 

Tremendous work by the advisory committee in giving 

recommendations to the Government of Saskatchewan on how 

we might move forward with improving better relationships. 

And we saw that this week as evidenced by the signing of an 

agreement with Zhytomyr oblast in a new agreement to expand 

on trade with that province. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 

members to join with me in showing our appreciation to all of 

the guests in the west gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 

like to join the Deputy Premier in also welcoming these special 

guests to our legislature. Mr. Speaker, a thank you to the 

students from the Regina Catholic Schools Ukrainian program, 

the choir that attended here. And they sang for us and that was 

well appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the exchange students from the Ukraine, I 

welcome you here. And as well then to the good work, I think 

we can’t say enough good work that Mr. Lysyk does for all of 

us in the Ukrainian community. And I thank him for that and to 

Gerald Luciuk who has joined him. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 

members to join me as well in congratulating all of these folks 

for the fine job they do. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I am honoured to introduce to you today 

25 dedicated and professional members of our public service. 

They’re here to take part in the parliamentary program for 

public servants, and they’re in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

The participants are employees from the following ministries: 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration; from 

Agriculture, Education, Enterprise, Environment, Health, 

Public Service Commission, Social Services; Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. And we also have employees here from 

Legislative Assembly Service. 

 

The program that they’re taking part in today will give them an 

in-depth history and tour of our building. There will be 

briefings from the Legislative Library, the Office of the Clerk, 

and Executive Council. They’ll observe the proceedings in the 

House, and they’ll meet members from both sides of the 

Assembly. And they’ll meet with the Speaker later. 

 



6198 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank them all for their interest in 

what’s going on here in the legislature, and for their work. And 

I’d ask all members to join with me and welcome some of our 

public service employees to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I’d like to join with the minister and 

welcome the many public servants to their legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always an enjoyable time to see members of 

the public service come and learn about the democratic process 

and about how the Legislative Assembly works. And I’ll be 

very pleased this afternoon to meet with you about, I believe, 

about 3:20 this afternoon. And so welcome to your legislature 

and enjoy yourself today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

make reference to some of the introductions that were done 

earlier. Seated in the west gallery is the mother of my chief of 

staff, Denise Batters. Her name is Jane Lesiuk. And she is not 

here to watch the wonders of question period or even to check 

up on whether Denise is working. She’s actually here with 

another one of her daughters, Yvonne Sirdar, who is one of the 

teachers with the musical group that was here this morning. 

And Yvonne is here as well. And we’re delighted that they’re 

here, and we really appreciate the musical selection that was 

done this morning. And if the students are as well-served by 

Mrs. Sirdar as I am by her sister, they will be well-served in 

life. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you Kirby Benning, president of the fire fighters 

association for the province of Saskatchewan and a team of 

people he has with him today — firefighters from around the 

province. They’re here today, I think, the 14th annual come to 

the legislature to lobby MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]. 

 

I know these are men and women who put their life at stake 

defending and protecting families and property in the province 

of Saskatchewan. I know we have a reception later on today. 

I’m sure all members are going to take advantage of going and 

visiting with our firefighters. I just want to welcome you all 

here to the Assembly today and hope you enjoy the process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs, the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 

join with the Leader of the Opposition in recognizing 12 

members today in the Legislative Assembly, members of the 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association. Of 

course, Mr. Benning’s already been introduced, but 

Vice-president Lloyd Zwack, and the secretary-treasurer, Brian 

Belitsky, as well. It’s great to have them in the Legislative 

Assembly again this year lobbying for some worthwhile causes. 

As a police officer, I had the honour and privilege to work with 

some members of the Prince Albert firefighters service, various 

calls throughout my career. And they do a great service. Men 

and women of this province who serve in firefighting services 

are there to answer the call day and night, no matter what the 

conditions or the weather, and will always put their lives first to 

save others. And we want to thank you on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan for that service, and welcome to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

two individuals seated in the east gallery. One person is Kent 

Peterson, who’s been to the legislature once or twice. He of 

course has a keen interest in politics and is a student at the U of 

R [University of Regina] and involved with the campus 

newspaper. 

 

Also in the east gallery is Jon Petrychyn who is a U of R 

student in the film studies program, has a real passion for 

Saskatchewan history and our historic buildings. He’s 

originally from Wolseley and has been involved there the past 

few summers in endeavouring to preserve the building and 

secure funding for the historic courthouse in Wolseley. On top 

of that, Mr. Speaker, he’s also a member of the Saskatchewan 

Youth Parliament. So I’d ask all members to welcome these 

two individuals to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly I’d to join 

the member opposite in welcoming these two students from the 

University of Regina to their Assembly. And I hope everyone 

will certainly continue to support the endeavours of the 

University of Regina. We know how important this campus is 

to the future, not just of our students but of our communities, 

Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

students to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in 

with the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs in welcoming the firefighters, but two in 

particular two Yorkton residents, Mr. Neal Matechuk — give 

me a wave, Neal — and Brian Belitsky, as was formerly 

introduced. And I’m not here to introduce them because of their 

. . . Neal was formerly a firefighter model in the calendar in 

2005, and apparently Brian is awaiting his turn possibly next 

year. But I wanted to point out these gentlemen specifically for 

a purpose. 

 

They are just two faces of the Yorkton firefighters, the 

emergency services in Yorkton, that did just such an amazing 

job during the events of July 1st and post-July 1st in the efforts 

in mitigating the damages and the potential life loss in Yorkton. 

So I want to acknowledge them publicly, thank them for all the 

hard work they do, all the sacrifice they put in that very difficult 

time and thank all firefighters for the sacrifices that they do 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6199 

make. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a 

constituent and a good friend of a number of members of the 

legislature here today. Tina Friesen, who’s seated in your 

gallery, joins us from time to time. I want to say welcome, 

Tina, and hope you enjoy today’s question period. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of Saskatchewan residents. And it has to do with renters 

and the difficulties they are facing with the combination of 

rising rents and low vacancy rates in many communities, and 

that many of these renters have suffered rent increases in the 

hundreds of dollars and it is proving to be a strain on their 

budgets. Many provinces in Saskatchewan, in fact the majority 

of provinces, have rent control guidelines in place, and that the 

argument that the private market would deliver sufficient 

affordable housing in the absence of rent control has proven to 

be false. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to consider enacting some form of 

rent control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan 

renters from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions on behalf of the undersigned residents of 

Saskatchewan who want to bring to our attention the following: 

that many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes and are 

victims of physical, emotional, and financial abuse. They also 

want us to know that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty. And they want us to add that Saskatchewan seniors 

have a right to protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to enact a 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

The over 60 signatures are from the communities of Stenen, 

Asquith, Shaunavon, Arborfield, Eatonia, Christopher Lake, 

Prince Albert, Mistatim, and Indian Head. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for increased support for hospice 

and palliative care in Saskatchewan. 

 

We the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system including residential 

hospices would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present some petitions from Furdale residents. Government 

ministry has directed SaskWater cut off supplies of water for 

domestic use to Furdale customers. The same government 

ministry has directed that customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

These Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment, as well as 

for livestock irrigation lines. And that the alternative water 

supply being referred to by the government ministry is a private 

operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost 

with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water, 

Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Saskatoon and Clavet. I so present. 

 



6200 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented financial mismanagement by the Sask Party. 

They allude specifically to the two consecutive deficit budgets 

put forward by this government and the billions of dollars of 

debt growth that’s accruing under this government — $4.2 

billion alone over the next four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This going on, Mr. Speaker, at a time of all-time highs in 

revenues and asking Saskatchewan people, communities, 

municipalities, and civil servants to pay the price for their 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

[14:00] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Caring Hearts Camp Fall Retreat 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Saturday the Greystone Bereavement Centre held their Caring 

Hearts Camp fall retreat at the Dallas Valley Ranch Camp. This 

is a one-day retreat for children and teens aged 5 to 18 who 

have lost a loved one. And, Mr. Speaker, there is no charge for 

this camp so any youth that wanted to attend could attend. 

 

The 64 youth and teens were given an opportunity to participate 

in activities such as horseback riding, indoor wall rock climbing 

and snow tubing. The camp also provided age-appropriate 

therapeutic activities to help these children with their grief. 

 

This camp was made possible, Mr. Speaker, through the hard 

work of the centre staff and the support of a number of 

organizations who saw a need and generously supported it. But 

most importantly, Mr. Speaker, this camp would not have been 

possible without the dedicated 38 volunteers who gave of 

themselves to help these young people, Mr. Speaker. These 

volunteers came from in and around Regina and I know that 

some of them work in this building. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the success of this one-day 

event for these young people who have recently lost a loved one 

can be best summed up in the words of my granddaughter who 

said, it was great to be with people who feel what I’m feeling. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 

Professional Fire Fighters Association represents 700 

professional firefighters in the cities of Saskatoon, Regina, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Yorkton, North 

Battleford, and Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud to have members from the 

association here today with us in the legislature to lobby on 

behalf of the Saskatchewan firefighters who put themselves at 

risk to ensure the safety of others. Mr. Speaker, the association 

does this annually and it’s great to see that such an organization 

takes such command of their members’ interest in the 

community and within the legislature. 

 

The SPFFA [Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 

Association] are active members in our community through the 

Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association burn fund, 

as well as countless other activities at local levels supporting 

other great community causes. With the burn fund, the 

firefighters take their work a step further by providing 

assistance to those who need it after they have been rescued. 

The purpose of this is to raise and distribute funds to help 

Saskatchewan families and burn patients with treatment, care, 

and rehabilitations. All funds raised stay in this province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association are 

advocating on three key issues they wanted addressed and the 

association is here to do just that and represent the best interests 

of their members. These men and women do not have the right 

to refuse dangerous or life-threatening tasks when on the job. 

Mr. Speaker, they lobby for the people of Saskatchewan every 

day. Therefore it is our duty to advocate for them here in this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in honouring those 

with us today and firefighters across this province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit ceremony was held in Regina. 

The Order of Merit is the province’s highest honour and 

recognizes individuals who have contributed significantly to the 

well-being of the province and its residents. 

 

This year’s recipients are an extraordinary group of individuals. 

Each honouree exemplifies excellence, determination, and 

passion and we’re all the beneficiaries of their outstanding 

contributions. This year saw seven recipients. They are Mr. 

Maurice Bundon, senior vice-president and chief operating 

officer of Harvard Developments Inc., Regina; Mr. Donald E. 

Kramer, Chair of Kramer Ltd., Regina; Dr. Janice MacKinnon, 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6201 

professor of history, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon; 

Dr. J.D. Mollard, OC [Officer of the Order of Canada], founder, 

J.D. Mollard and Associates Ltd., Regina; Mrs. Elizabeth 

Raum, composer, teacher, and professional oboist, Toronto; Dr. 

Douglas Schmeiser, professor emeritus of law, University of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatoon; and Mrs. Myrna F. Yuzicapi, special 

adviser to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] on Aboriginal initiatives, Saskatoon. 

 

On behalf of this legislature, I want to congratulate the 2010 

recipients of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Battlefords Citizen Honoured for Community Service 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize and congratulate Keith Koberinski of The 

Battlefords, who was recently presented with the Julian 

Paslawski Meritorious Service Award by the Saskatchewan 

Catholic School Board Association. 

 

Keith Koberinski is the board Chair of the Light of Christ 

Catholic School Division. He has served on this board of 

education for five terms. This included nine years as Vice-Chair 

of the board and the past two years as the Chair. 

 

A retired provincial highway department employee, Keith 

Koberinski has devoted himself to his community and his 

province. As a member of the Light of Christ board, he served 

as provincial representative on the Canadian Catholic School 

Trustees Association, and he was a member of the executive 

committee of the Saskatchewan Catholic School Boards 

Association for six years, including three as president. 

 

Together with his wife Linda, the couple has provided 

mentoring services for couples preparing for marriage. Keith is 

also a member of the St. Joseph’s choir, the parish council, and 

the Knights of Columbus, and in his spare time he can be found 

playing golf and acting as a players’ representative at the North 

Battleford golf course. 

 

Herb Sutton, director of education, says, and I quote, “Keith’s 

biggest contribution has been his ability to build relationships 

with people, particularly in difficult situations.” 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating Keith 

Koberinski, this year’s recipient of the Julian Paslawski 

Meritorious Service Award. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Manufacturer Heads International Organization 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to bring to the attention of the Legislative Assembly today the 

prestigious honour that has been bestowed upon Yorkton’s John 

Malinowski. For the first time in its 60-year history, the Farm 

Equipment Manufacturers Association has elected its first 

Canadian president. 

 

John has served on the association’s board since ’01, and has 

been the chairman of the international relations and convention 

committees. He also serves on the association’s investment 

committee. 

 

Currently John is the president and co-owner of Leon’s 

Manufacturing Company in Yorkton. Founded by his uncle 

Leon and his father Ray, Leon’s Manufacturing had very 

meagre beginnings in Bangor, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing that this company which got its 

start building dozer blades has grown to reach such 

international recognition. Leon’s Manufacturing is currently 

headquartered in Yorkton, and the company now manufactures 

and distributes agriculture and industrial material-handling 

equipment worldwide. 

 

Like all Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, John is 

well-rounded as a human being. He is a current member and 

past president of the Rotary Club of Yorkton and still finds time 

to actively compete in marathons. 

 

I would like this Assembly to join me in honouring John 

Malinowski, not only for this historic achievement but also for 

his and his family’s contribution to Yorkton, the province, and 

this country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Economic Policy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier and the Sask 

Party have long desired to model Saskatchewan’s economy and 

finances after Ireland’s. With respect to this, the now Justice 

minister on March 17th, 2006 said, “Ireland is a Celtic tiger that 

has demonstrated how successful you can be.” It goes on. I 

quote, “It is a lesson that this government should be paying 

attention to.” 

 

The Sask Party and this Premier, while in opposition, lauded 

the tax cuts, massive spending, and business subsidies — the 

very policies that have now crippled both the Irish economy 

and public purse. This Premier and the Sask Party have based 

much of their financial and economic policy on Ireland’s 

policies. This Premier led these changes, and I will quote from 

Enterprise Saskatchewan’s newsletter in spring 2009: 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, conceived by Saskatchewan 

Premier Brad Wall, the agency is loosely modelled on the 

Enterprise Ireland which is that country’s government 

agency responsible for development and promotion of its 

business sector. 

 

The country once called the Celtic tiger has become an 

economic and fiscal basket case. It is in receivership. It is 

begging for bailouts. And those that have gained the least are 

being asked to pay the most. And this is the model used by that 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have been well served by a 

strong, balanced economy and prudent fiscal management 

delivered by New Democrats. This Premier is fighting to undo 

this progress. Ireland serves as but one example of the wrong 



6202 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

direction this Premier is recklessly taking our fine province, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan people deserve better. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Chris Knox Foundation 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. In November of 2007, something 

very special happened. Not the Grey Cup win by the Riders, as 

special as that was, but the seeds were planted during that Grey 

Cup for the Chris Knox Foundation. Unfortunately of course, 

shortly thereafter, we very tragically lost Chris Knox who is the 

inspiration for this foundation. 

 

But the work has continued, and the compassion of 

Saskatchewan people and businesses have continued to 

manifest through the Chris Knox Foundation as it has sent 

children who are fighting cancer in our province to enjoy 

special events here in Saskatchewan and outside of the 

province. 

 

And today as I introduced earlier, we have a very brave and 

courageous young man named Reyce Ball. He’s from Regina. 

Reyce, you can give us another wave there. Reyce was 

diagnosed on September 2nd, 2009 with Philadelphia 

chromosome leukemia. Treatment options include a bone 

marrow transplant or three years of chemotherapy, and the 

family has chosen chemotherapy. And he’s in the midst of that 

right now with perhaps the most significant of the treatments 

over by March of next year; as we chatted earlier today. He’s 

here with his mom, Erin, and his grandma, Jan Fowler. Mr. 

Speaker, Reyce is one of 12 or maybe more young people that 

are battling various forms of pediatric cancer who are going to 

go to the Grey Cup this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m mindful of the time for members’ statements, 

but I just want to say, these kids are going to enjoy a great Grey 

Cup game. They’re going to be involved in the Grey Cup 

Parade. They’re going to Fantasyland at the West Edmonton 

Mall. They’re going to do it because of the vision of people like 

Sharla Knox and the foundation itself, people like George, the 

president, who’s joined us. 

 

Corporate sponsors include Cameco, Co-operators, Greystone 

financial, CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], SaskTel. Potash Corp of Saskatchewan came 

on recently with a $20,000 donation. Mr. Speaker, how about a 

big hand, not just for the sponsors and the people supporting it, 

but for these great kids who are going to go to Grey Cup this 

weekend with the Chris Knox Foundation. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Response to Firefighters’ Brief 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is in 

light of the fact that we have a number of firefighters with us 

today. And in the brief that they gave to the MLAs today they 

say, and I quote: 

 

Firefighting is a dangerous occupation. Firefighters place 

themselves in harm’s way and do not have the right to 

refuse unsafe work in carrying out their mandate of 

protection and life safety. 

 

My question to the minister, Mr. Speaker, is in light of the fact 

that studies that have been done and carried out in North 

America, here in Canada, indicate that the minimum number of 

responders to an emergency is five — in order to protect 

property and life and also to protect members of the firefighting 

community, that that number is five — and in light of the fact 

that some of our communities, Weyburn for example, sends out 

one responder; North Battleford I believe is three responders; in 

light of the fact that we’re putting at risk property, but more 

importantly, families’ lives and the firefighters themselves, can 

the minister respond to that fact and indicate that there will be 

funding available to ensure that five responders are available in 

emergency situations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

member opposite for that question. This government values the 

service and dedication of all the women and men in the fire 

services across this province. And on that note, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to the staffing issues within our municipalities, 

this government’s proud to say, we’ve increased revenue 

sharing like no other time before in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on that note, Mr. Speaker, talking with the mayors this 

summer, they all recognize that they have the revenue sharing 

unconditionally to use for operating or capital costs. And on 

that note, Mr. Speaker, that funding can be utilized to advance 

the staffing numbers in fire departments. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the attempt to lay this at the 

feet of the municipal government is simply not on. The fact of 

the matter is is that there needs to be, and should be, direct 

funding for the proper number of responders in emergencies, 

that number being five. The minister needs to respond to that. 

 

But the other area of concern to firefighters is the cases of 

esophageal cancer, a situation that is related very directly to 

workplace safety. A number of provinces in Canada now cover 

that, in terms of insurance and in terms of compensation, and 

identify it as a disease that is directly caused by the career 

decision to work in that area. 

 

Can the minister guarantee that that change will come into 

place so that our firefighters are protected? And does it make 

sense that a firefighter in Brandon is protected and a firefighter 

in Weyburn is not? Can the minister ensure that these cases of 

cancer will be in fact insured and compensated when it relates 

to families who find themselves in this situation? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6203 

the question. I too would like to echo the sentiments expressed 

earlier that we thank the firefighters very much for their hard 

work and dedication and the fact that they routinely and 

regularly put their lives at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an ongoing process that reviews the 

different types of cancers that are caused and looks for links to 

the work that’s being done. Since forming government, over the 

last several years a number of different cancers have been 

added. I’m looking forward to meeting with the firefighters 

later in the day to have discussions both with regard to 

esophageal cancer and also with regard to testicular cancer, Mr. 

Speaker. There are officials that are working on this as an 

ongoing process. And for the benefit of the members opposite, 

we will endeavour to put the best science, the best approach to 

the matter. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the minister. 

This is now three years that these same requests have been put 

to members of the legislature, particularly to the government. 

And every year we hear the same response, that while the 

government holds firefighters in high esteem, they don’t deal 

with the issue of proper funding for their proper number of 

responders or for cancer that’s directly related to the workplace. 

 

My question to the minister is this: in light of the fact that in 

order to remedy the situation, the cost, both for the responders 

for the coverage and also for education and training within the 

community as to fire safety, the total cost is about $2.4 million, 

after three years of requests being put and all of the areas where 

this government has wasted tens of millions of dollars, how is it 

that it can’t find 2.4 million for this important purpose? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. I’ve indicated earlier that it is 

something that we are looking at. Mr. Speaker, this particular 

issue, I’m pleased to advise the House, is something that was in 

existence, and the request from the firefighters was there, many 

years before the change in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to look at this. Every year more 

and more things are added to the list of things that are covered 

through workers’ compensation. And, Mr. Speaker, it will be 

the position of this government, is if there is a factual and a 

scientific link between their work and the cancers that are 

caused, those items will be added to the things where coverage 

is provided. Mr. Speaker, if there is additional information that 

the firefighters have, I look forward to viewing that information 

and meeting with them later today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s gone out 

of its way to censor the truth about the Amicus deal in response 

to my FOI [freedom of information] request. Even the most 

mundane details, like the names of people who were copied on 

emails, are sometimes blacked out. But one name does appear 

on several emails. That’s Rod Donlevy, the lawyer who put this 

deal together and the brother of the Premier’s chief of staff. 

Another name that’s popped up is an individual by the name of 

Urban Donlevy. So to the minister: who is Urban Donlevy, and 

what is his role in this Amicus affair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, day in and day out, I’m 

amazed at that member standing in the House trying to slander 

family names, such well-respected family names in the 

Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker. Once again she’s going after 

another name, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of Health 

has been asked a question, and there’s a couple of members on 

the opposition side who are not allowing the minister to 

respond, to at least let the guests hear what the response is. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I just received a letter 

later on yesterday afternoon from Paul Ellis who is the 

chairman of the Catholic Health Ministry of Saskatchewan. He 

goes on to say that, talking about the opposition day in and day 

out asking questions, he goes on to say in the letter that “They 

are inferring that this contract was in some way influenced by 

the Government of Saskatchewan or by our legal adviser, Rod 

Donlevy.” 

 

At the end he goes on, “Any allegations that there was outside 

influence on our board to select Miners Construction or any 

other firm associated with this project is completely false.” Mr. 

Speaker, completely false, from the chairperson of the Catholic 

Health Ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s really simple for the 

government to clear this little mess up, and that is release all of 

the information that they blacked out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Urban Donlevy is another brother of the 

Premier’s chief of staff, so that’s now two brothers of the 

Premier’s chief of staff now directly involved in the deal. And 

we’re told that Urban Donlevy is the Amicus project manager, 

whose responsibilities include financing, construction, and 

banking. Perhaps as the project manager, Mr. Donlevy could 

shed some light on why Miners Construction was collecting 

bids from subcontractors several months before the Saskatoon 

Health Region approved this deal. 

 

So to the minister: just how many connections are there 

between the Sask Party and the Amicus deal? And are these 

close Sask Party connections the reason it was full steam ahead 

and contracts were being let months before the Saskatoon 

Health Region approved this deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



6204 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that member has again 

made accusations that are absolutely unfounded and untrue, Mr. 

Speaker, when she talks about the contract that was given to 

Miners Construction. I’ll explain from, again, Paul Ellis, the 

chairperson of the Catholic Health Ministry, the process that 

was selected . . . used to select Miners Construction. The 

process used to select Miners Construction involved the 

interview of firms in Saskatoon to identify . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 

Walsh Acres will allow the minister to respond to the member’s 

question. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — It goes on to say that firms in the 

Saskatoon area . . . to identify a firm prepared to offer a 

fixed-price contract for the construction of Samaritan Place. 

Miners Construction was the only firm prepared to offer this 

price guarantee. Mr. Speaker, given that, that’s why this firm 

was selected. It goes on to say, “Any allegations that there was 

outside influence on our board or the selection of Miners 

Construction is completely false, [Mr. Speaker].” She can twist 

and spin all she wants, Mr. Speaker, but she is completely off 

base. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health wants 

Saskatchewan people to believe all of these connections 

between the government and Amicus are just a coincidence and 

that we have no cause for concern and that I shouldn’t be 

asking these questions. But there’s just too many connections, 

Mr. Speaker. Now we learn that the Amicus project office is 

located in the same hallway as the Minister of Justice’s 

constituency office, the same Minister of Justice whose brother 

got the electrical contract. 

 

So to the minister: does he really expect people to believe that 

all of these connections are just a coincidence? And just how 

many coincidences are there? And maybe, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to ask the Sask Party MLAs to all table their family tree, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that question was 

absolutely ridiculous. Down the hallway? Are you kidding me? 

Mr. Speaker, the member, the Justice minister’s brother who 

owns a electric company, bid on a contract that was tendered by 

Miners . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Prince 

Albert Northcote will come to order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the firm that was 

selected to do the electrical work in Samaritan Place went 

through a tendering process. It was $140,000 less, cheaper, less 

than any other electrical firm, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know if we should have not selected that firm because he had 

connections to the Minister of Justice. Maybe we should have 

spent a couple hundred thousand more just so there was no 

connection there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have the Minister of 

Health having a little chat about the Amicus deal over a year 

ago. Then we have the contractor, Miners Construction, letting 

out contracts in January. And by the way, Miners is untendered. 

And then we have an MOU [memorandum of understanding] 

with the Ministry of Health after all of this and then we have 

the health region approve it in May. But the dirt was already 

being moved on April 1st. 

 

Now you know, the minister and the government can solve this 

little problem. All they have to do is lift the blackout. When is 

the government going to give us all of the material if the 

government so chooses? And that way we won’t be asking as 

many questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the 

member opposite would do with her time if she wasn’t in here 

asking questions day in and day out and trying to spin this, 

weave, and a story about insider influence, Mr. Speaker, when 

nothing could be further from the truth. The chairperson . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres continues to interfere with the ability of the ministers to 

respond. I ask members to allow the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the chairperson from the 

Catholic Health Ministry has written and said there’s absolutely 

no influence. They’re unfounded, the accusations that the 

members opposite are making. They’re making these 

accusations against some of the most well-respected families in 

the Saskatoon area that have done great work for disabled in the 

area, Mr. Speaker, have done great work around the whole 

Saskatoon area. It’s unbelievable. They continue to try and spin 

this and spin it to try and make a story out of it, Mr. Speaker. 

But the accusations are absolutely unfounded. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Contract with Information Technology Office 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question is to 

the Minister Responsible for the Information Technology 

Office. Mr. Speaker, a senior official in the Information 

Technology Office, William McMorris, is also the president of 

a closely held company registered as Common Sense 

Consulting Ltd. In 2009-2010, Common Sense received over 

$216,000 in contracts from the Information Technology Office. 

 

To the minister: can he tell us what services were provided 

under that contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6205 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

question is clearly along the same lines of trying to smear the 

business people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The specific 

details of this one contract, Mr. Speaker, I cannot respond to 

that question so I will take notice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why the 

minister can make all these assumptions about allegations that 

haven’t been made when he doesn’t know anything about the 

contract; he has to take notice of it. 

 

When the minister comes back to answer the question about 

what services are provided under this contract of the office that 

he’s responsible for, could he also provide information to the 

Assembly on whether the contract has been renewed for 

2010-2011 and at what cost? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, again, Mr. Speaker, the 

detailed nature of this question, I will take notice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, according to the government 

directory, Mr. McMorris is the executive director of customer 

services for the ITO [Information Technology Office]. He’s 

also president of a company under contract with the ITO, and 

I’m sure the minister and the government will understand why 

this might give rise to some concerns amongst the public. 

 

To the minister: has Mr. McMorris been hired as an executive 

director of community services or customer services? And if so, 

on what date did his employment begin? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I take notice of 

the question. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — When the minister is prepared to advise as to 

who works in his office and who does the work in his office by 

contract, the minister can also advise as to one other detail of 

the contract, if he would be willing. As the Assembly 

appreciates, the opposition has some concern with untendered 

contracts. So I’m sure the minister will understand why we 

have questions about the contract between ITO and Common 

Sense Consulting. Can the minister advise if that contract was 

tendered? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I take notice of the 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Housing 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, renters across the province are 

struggling to make ends meet, thanks to the rising rents and low 

vacancy rates. Many people can’t find a place to live or are 

moving in with friends and family. Some are couch surfing, 

moving from place to place with no stability and no security. 

 

A study by the Conference Board of Canada shows that the 

problem of overcrowding in housing is particularly bad in 

northern Saskatchewan where 18 per cent of all homes have six 

or more people living in them. To the minister: what is her 

government doing to help northern families to deal with 

overcrowding in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, our government has put 

money into locations like Meadow Lake. We put money into 

Prince Albert. We put money into the northern areas. Mr. 

Speaker, we have talked about the importance of making sure 

that people have money to spend in their pockets and so we’ve 

made sure that there is . . . Our employment rate is lower and 

we have more people working in Saskatchewan than ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made sure that people have more 

money after personal income tax deductions. We’ve spent over 

$161 million of provincial and federal money to make sure that 

there are housing units across Saskatchewan. We have 700 

more affordable housing units in Saskatchewan than we did 

when those members opposite were in power. And if I 

remember correctly, there was only 58 units of housing built 

under the NDP [New Democratic Party] in the last year they 

were in government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, many people who are couch 

surfing are people trying to change their lives. Some may be 

recovering from abuse or addictions. All too often however, 

they find themselves living in situations that expose them to the 

very things that they are trying to leave behind. They are put at 

risk to resume their former lifestyle, all because they can’t 

afford a place to call home. 

 

To the minister: why is her government making it harder for 

people who are just trying to live their lives, all because she 

won’t take action to adjust the rising rents and the lack of 

affordable housing in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we understand that a 

common thread among some of the, many of the issues we have 

is housing. We’ve talked about that and we’ve addressed the 

issue in many ways. 

 



6206 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

Is there more to be done? Yes, there definitely is. But we’ve 

increased the money for housing programs since we’ve become 

government by 45 per cent — 45 per cent higher than when 

they were in government. We’ve helped people receive home 

ownership. We’ve helped 2,900 families in low to moderate 

incomes have the health and safety and efficiency of their home 

increased. We’ve increased shelter rates and we’ve increased 

the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement four times since 

we’ve been government and we’ve indexed them both to the 

cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is there more to do? Yes, there is. Are we working 

with the members in this province? Yes, we are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of these homes are not 

just overcrowded. The conditions in many of them are simply 

shocking. The Conference Board of Canada reports that 38 per 

cent of these homes in northern Saskatchewan suffer from . . . 

[inaudible] . . . plumbing and wiring or deficiencies of 

plumbing and wiring, or they need structural repairs to walls, 

floors, or ceilings. 

 

The report describes the situation as dire, and the people who 

have called my office would agree. To the minister: why is her 

government forcing nearly one in two northern families to live 

in substandard housing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite 

and to the people in northern Saskatchewan, we understand that 

there is an issue and we’ve been dealing with it. That’s why 

we’ve made sure that there are 2,900 people who’ve had their 

health, safety, and energy efficiency of their homes looked at. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s interesting that the members 

opposite . . . In fact one of their former members, minister Bob 

Pringle, said of affordability issues under the NDP, the issue 

was not addressed. And when the NDP did finally get around to 

dealing with the issue in 2007, they had a task force. They 

undertook a task force but they kept the findings of that task 

force a secret, Mr. Speaker. The NDP didn’t bother helping 

Saskatchewan’s struggling citizens get shelter. They built 58 

affordable housing units in the last year they were government; 

we’ve completed over 700. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, we see such a number of 

people waiting, just about 1,000 people, residents of our 

province, but also in northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, talk 

is cheap, and these answers are of no help to northerners. Now 

will the minister admit that the North is not a priority for the 

government? And where is her plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the plan we have, we 

presented to the people of the province in 2007 — the election 

plan that got us in a position of government and left them 

sitting on the other side of the House, a plan that included 

making sure that we could take 80,000 people off the tax rolls, 

a plan that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister’s actually fairly 

close to the Speaker’s Chair and I’m having difficulty catching 

some of the answer. I’d ask the members to allow the minister 

to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there is a plan and the 

people of the province know it. I think in fact the last polling 

numbers show that the people of the province know that 

something was done. 

 

We’ve more than doubled the numbers of seniors eligible for 

benefits under the seniors’ income plan. We more than doubled 

the amount available to low-income seniors through their plan. 

We’ve increased the amount of money for utilities to the 

transition employment assistance. We’ve doubled the caregiver 

tax credit. We’ve got infirm dependent tax credit and 

supplement disability tax credit. Mr. Speaker, is there more to 

do? Yes, there is. Are we working on the plan? Yes, we are. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 159, The University of Regina Amendment 

Act, 2010 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education and Immigration has moved that Bill No. 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6207 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

answers to questions 412 through 418. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 412 through 418 are 

tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity today to speak to Bill No. 157. Mr. 

Speaker, Bill No. 157 is The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010, introduced for second reading on 

November the 22nd, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 157 is a companion to Bill No. 156, Mr. 

Speaker; 156 is a companion piece of legislation that has been 

sent to committee and that we will be studying at greater length 

in the coming weeks, Mr. Speaker. But I think it’s important 

today that we review the basis for Bill No. 157, the Bill in front 

of us today, Mr. Speaker, in light of the Bill No. 156, its 

companion piece. 

 

I want to acknowledge the Minister of Energy and Resources’s 

comments, Mr. Speaker, when he introduced both of these Bills 

on November 22, Mr. Speaker, because a number of the things 

that the minister said, I think we will find agreement with, Mr. 

Speaker. And at the same time, there are a number of things left 

unsaid that we need to ensure the minister and the government 

members in the future will review and examine before we 

complete our work on this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the oil and gas sector, very important 

to the province of Saskatchewan. I’ll outline some of my 

thoughts in that regard in a few minutes. The oil and gas sector, 

Mr. Speaker, has been a part of the revenue base of this 

province for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, and obviously 

will continue to be so in the future.  

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we also know that in addition to 

oil and gas, the mineral sector generally, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s potash, uranium, diamonds, rare earth minerals, Mr. 

Speaker, these are all matters that are important to the future of 

this province and our ability as a province to ensure financial 

support for programs like health care, education, highways, and 

social services, Mr. Speaker, to name but a few. 

 

In his opening remarks at second reading, the Minister of 

Energy and Resources said, “. . . oil and gas and indeed all of 

Saskatchewan’s vast natural resources continue to drive this 

province forward.” He goes on to say, the delivery of important 

social programs and infrastructure depend on these revenues, 

Mr. Speaker, and he indicated: 

 

The province has earned a reputation with industry for 

creating a positive business environment for resource 

development. Our royalty and tax regimes have earned 

praise from the industry for their certainty and for their 

stability. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a number of things from those short remarks 

from the minister. Most importantly, when we review this 

legislation or we review any legislation regarding oil and gas, 

minerals, or other resources, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

industry wants certainty and consistency. That certainty, Mr. 

Speaker, comes out of development that industry can count on 

— not development from environmental or a land perspective, 

Mr. Speaker, but development of public policy. They need 

certainty there, Mr. Speaker. They need certainty of what 

they’re paying for. They need certainty about a time frame. 

They need certainty about their ability to get things done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the oil and gas sector is one that’s had a world history and 

world experience, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with various types of 

governments, various types of political regimes, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly those that have certainty attached to the process 

are ones that have proven to be the most successful. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that the oil and gas sector which, as I said, 

has had world experience, knows that there’s a huge difference 

in doing business in Nigeria versus Norway, in doing business 

in Venezuela or doing business in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And 

industry will applaud efforts by governments that ensure that 

there’s a regulatory process in place that provides for some 

certainty. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not that we need less regulation or less 

process, Mr. Speaker. We need to have regulation and process 

that’s completely understandable, that’s transparent, and that 

allows for this certainty and, as the minister says, stability. At 

the same time, Mr. Speaker, governments acting on behalf of 

the people of their jurisdiction — in our case the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — the people of the jurisdiction 

need to have some certainty too that their government is acting 

in the interests, the long-term interests of the people of the 

province or the people of the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we look at the history of the oil and gas sector around the 

world, Mr. Speaker, we know that in countries like Nigeria, the 

oil and gas industry — where there were few regulations or few 

rules — are able to go in, do things that ultimately did not help. 

Rather they hindered, penalized, and in fact hurt the people of 

Nigeria, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So people want their governments to also ensure there is 

regulation and process in place that not only provides certainty 

for the industry but also provides certainty for the public. If 

there’s a fair royalty paid — the resource, after all, belongs to 

the people, Mr. Speaker — if there’s a fair royalty that’s paid 

and it’s agreed to and understood, then there’s a net benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, for the public. 



6208 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

And we all know that the Minister of Energy and Resources 

understands that phrase “net benefit” today better than he did 

some time ago, Mr. Speaker. And some would argue that in fact 

the phrase “net benefit” has not been fully defined yet, Mr. 

Speaker. But regardless of the circumstances, ultimately the 

public wants to see net benefit applied to the resource sector — 

the net benefit to the owner of the resource, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So you’ve got two parties, Mr. Speaker: the industry, which this 

province respects and wants to encourage, and the public, Mr. 

Speaker, who wants to know that their government is taking 

their long-term interests to heart. 

 

What do I mean by this, Mr. Speaker? Let’s just have a look for 

a minute at the budget that this government, the Sask Party 

government, brought down in March of last year, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a budget that said the revenues for the province of 

Saskatchewan would be $9.9 billion for the 2010-2011 year 

budget — $9.9 billion, Mr. Speaker. The taxes collected by this 

government or expected to collect by this government, add up 

to $4.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, or roughly 49 per cent of total 

revenues. 

 

So if the public expects that there’s going to be funding for 

health care, i.e., long-term care facilities or ambulance services 

or doctors in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or if the public 

expects that there’ll be funding for education — teachers in our 

classrooms, Mr. Speaker, educational assistants, program for 

special-needs students, or even a heating system in a school like 

in Preeceville, Mr. Speaker — then we need to ensure that 

there’s funding available to support that. Health care, education, 

even municipal governments, Mr. Speaker, or for firefighters 

functioning within our communities, Mr. Speaker, there needs 

to be funds available for that. 

 

So on a budget of $9.9 billion, taxes account for only 49 per 

cent of the total revenue that this government expects to collect 

or 4.8 billion, Mr. Speaker. How much do our non-renewable 

resources bring in for revenues, Mr. Speaker? Well in this case, 

in the 2010-11 budget, the government is expecting $2.1 billion 

in revenue or roughly 20 per cent of the total funds that this 

government wants to spend over the course of the year. 

 

Now we all know that this government miscalculated two years 

ago on potash revenue, Mr. Speaker. They wanted 20 per cent 

of total revenues two years ago. The Sask Party government 

wanted 20 per cent of total revenues to come from potash, Mr. 

Speaker, and they were wrong. They were wrong by $2 billion. 

As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, 13 long-term care facilities — 

replacement beds in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker 

— announced a year prior, had to be postponed, Mr. Speaker, 

or effectively cancelled until such time as the government 

wished to bring them forward again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The loss of resource revenue, Mr. Speaker, directly affects the 

ability of governments to deliver education, health care, 

municipal, or infrastructure services, Mr. Speaker. And 

non-renewable resources in this province, in this current year’s 

budget, make up 20 per cent of the total revenues of the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So tax revenue at 49 per cent is not enough to run the province 

of Saskatchewan’s programs, Mr. Speaker. So the oil and gas 

sector, the mining sector, the non-renewable resource sector, 

Mr. Speaker, very important to the people of Saskatchewan, 

very important to the delivery of services to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So government has to recognize and realize why it is therefore 

that the public wants its government to get this right. It wants to 

make sure that, on the one hand, industry is able to do what it 

needs to do because without that industry and the resource . . . 

or the revenue . . . The ability of the resource companies to 

provide revenue to the province, Mr. Speaker, is important so 

that the programs that people rely on can be delivered. Simple 

things like library services in our community, Mr. Speaker, 

things like the firefighters, things like keeping a heating system 

on in a school, Mr. Speaker, or as important as providing 

doctors in rural Saskatchewan — Mr. Speaker, this all depends 

on our resource revenues. 

 

Well the last government, Mr. Speaker, between 2003 and 

2007, understood this process extraordinarily well. Right across 

the province, the previous premier of Saskatchewan talked 

about the importance of getting this formula correct, that 

without economic progress, there could not be social progress. 

And, Mr. Speaker, again, it’s that social progress, the programs 

that government provides to ensure that vulnerable people are 

cared for, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the public wants their 

government to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in 2005, members of the public will 

remember, there was an economic summit in the province of 

Saskatchewan — Saskatchewan centennial year — an 

economic summit that members of the Saskatchewan Party 

boycotted, Mr. Speaker. They said, this is a useless exercise. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that useless exercise was attended to by 

mostly the non-renewable resource sector. They made 

presentations to government, Mr. Speaker, presentations that 

said we need certain things done to improve our ability to 

provide revenues to the Government of Saskatchewan to deliver 

its programs to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The government between ’05 and ’07, Mr. Speaker, listened 

very carefully to the presenters from the resource sectors and, 

Mr. Speaker, promptly, promptly brought about the corporate 

capital tax changes that in 2007 led to a tremendous amount of 

new investment in the province of Saskatchewan. Investment, 

Mr. Speaker, that led to the establishment or creation of a $2.3 

billion surplus and direct deposit into the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund — which it was called at that time, Mr. Speaker — a fund 

that the government was able to use for either rainy day 

purposes down the road or to finance one-time infrastructure 

support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the industry knows the value of some certainty, and the 

corporate capital tax program, Mr. Speaker, provided additional 

certainty. And the industry stepped up to the plate and after that 

tax benefit was provided by government, they brought their 

investment into the province of Saskatchewan. They responded 

quickly and immediately to that call by government: we’re 

doing something to promote economic progress; let’s see some 

economic progress. And that is exactly what happened. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some things happened in November and 

government changed. The Minister of Energy and Resources 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6209 

said some interesting things, Mr. Speaker, in a couple of places 

after that election. In committee, in committee here in the 

Legislative Assembly, the Minister of Energy and Resources 

said, the NDP government from ’03 to ’07 got something right, 

Mr. Speaker. They got the regime for oil and gas right, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Also in Lloydminster, at the opening of the Husky oil new 

office, headquarter office, Mr. Speaker, the representative from 

Husky Oil from Hong Kong said he was really pleased with the 

former government’s oil and gas regime, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Minister of Energy and Resources subsequently is quoted as 

saying, “the NDP got that right.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas sector has already indicated 

support for the regime in Saskatchewan that deals with 

regulation, legislation, and process, Mr. Speaker. But this stuff 

evolves. It always evolves. As technology changes, which it 

certainly is, and as matters change in other jurisdictions, 

Saskatchewan must keep up with that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this evolution of regulation, this evolution 

that’s taking place, Mr. Speaker, in technology, has to be 

addressed by the Government of Saskatchewan. I wanted to 

indicate one other thing in this regard, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the minister’s comments on this Bill. He talks about . . . I just 

can’t find the quote here quickly, Mr. Speaker, but the minister 

referred to the fact that the industry was pleased with the way in 

which the former department of Industry and Resources and 

now the Ministry of Energy and Resources has managed its 

communications and activities with the oil and gas sector. 

 

Earlier in this session of the legislature, I had occasion to ask 

the Minister of Energy and Resources if there had been 

significant changes in senior staff or in the administrative team 

over at Energy and Resources after the Industry and Resources 

transfer took place. And the minister indicated no, there had not 

been much change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is another significant reason why 

the oil and gas sector is comfortable with working with the 

people of Saskatchewan, because the team that they found 

worked well with them between ’03 and ’07 under the New 

Democratic Party government is the same team that they’re 

dealing with now under the Sask Party government since 2007. 

 

So the process has pretty much stayed the same. The people 

have still pretty much stayed the same, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

that’s part of the consistency that industry is looking for. 

Remember I said industry was looking for certainty and 

consistency, and so both of these things bode well. 

 

Now the minister, in introducing Bills 156 and 157, indicated in 

his remarks that the ministry had consulted with industry, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the way it should be. That should be happening 

all of the time. And as they reach consensus on changes, well 

indeed those changes, that consensus should be moved forward 

to the political people — the Ministry of Energy and Resources 

and, Mr. Speaker, ultimately the Legislative Assembly here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, again this 

process is evolving as it should. The ministry administrative 

team has met with industry, and this legislation appears to be 

developed in regards to that consultation. 

Now the thing that I’m uncertain about, Mr. Speaker, is how far 

did that consultation move into the realm of the minister’s 

office? And obviously the opposition parties, Mr. Speaker, have 

not yet had the opportunity to speak with industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, are you looking for me to sit? I will do so. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to thank the member from The 

Battlefords, and I ask members if they would allow leave for 

the Speaker to introduce a group of guests who have joined us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — I thank the members for the opportunity of 

introducing to you a group of students from the grade 4 class in 

Kipling. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Robyn 

Roy-Hampton. I understand they have spent some time at 

Agribition today. And there is 19 students, a good number of 

chaperones, and being at Agribition with that crowd I think you 

do need a number of chaperones. 

 

Today accompanying the teacher and her students are Murray 

and Nicole Lyons, Colleen Currie, Carlo Roppel, Kevin 

Marton, Chris Toth — yes, he’s my nephew — Glenn Kuhn, 

Sarah Dayman, and Sarah Johnson. I’d like you to . . . Oh, and 

his son, Sam, has joined us as well. I won’t go through the rest 

of the students. 

 

But I’d like the members to help me in welcoming the students 

to their Assembly. I look forward to joining them for photos 

and an opportunity just to discuss the process and the procedure 

in the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And a fine looking 

group too, I must admit. 

 

Back to my discussion on Bill No. 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010, Mr. Speaker, just a few 

more things. Again, based on what we’ve heard in the past, 

Saskatchewan has indeed developed a very good working 

relationship with the natural resource sector, not just the oil and 

gas but mining. I think members opposite will remember that in 

2006 the Fraser Institute did a study and a report indicating that 

Saskatchewan was the best place in the country in which to do 

mining, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s reasons for that. It’s because the people in the 

department respect the industry. The government respects the 

industry. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the industry 



6210 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

respects this process of setting up consultation and developing 

certainty and consistency over the years. 

 

But now, Mr. Speaker, we have a new Bill that’s brought in, a 

Bill that the minister indicates is going to move us closer to 

processes that occur in other provinces. And of course as I said 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing wrong with that — as the 

technology evolves and as processes evolve and people reach 

agreements on these things, Mr. Speaker, that we move 

forward. 

 

But there is reason to have some degree of skepticism as we 

look at this, Mr. Speaker, because the minister makes it very 

clear in his remarks that this is one of what he calls an early 

deliverable under the New West Partnership. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, first of all I think we all know there are concerns about 

the detail of the New West Partnership in general. We also are 

aware that there are a number of initiatives that were under way 

in discussions with the province of Alberta and the province of 

British Columbia, even before the Premier decided to sign a 

TILMA-like [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement] deal that they now call the New West Partnership. 

 

And every member will remember that, prior to the election, the 

Saskatchewan Party and the now Premier — the then leader of 

the opposition, the member from Swift Current — indicated 

that there was no way they were going to sign TILMA, Mr. 

Speaker. Well without any consultation, this government went 

ahead and signed a TILMA agreement that they now call the 

New West Partnership. And the minister has introduced a Bill 

here that he said is one of the government’s early deliverables 

of the New West Partnership. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I fully expect that because of the complexity 

of this piece of legislation and the fact that it’s following along 

discussions that were already under way with regards to 

Saskatchewan becoming a partner in the Petroleum Registry of 

Alberta, a joint government and industry strategic alliance that 

enables Canadian upstream oil and gas producers to carry out 

their complex business and regulatory activities in an efficient 

and seamless manner, Mr. Speaker, I expect that this process of 

developing Bills 156 and 157 was in place before the New West 

Partnership was signed and they’re simply rolling it out as one 

of the early deliverables. It’s sort of the low-hanging fruit, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just because this legislation or this process might work as a 

joint provincial initiative doesn’t mean that every joint 

provincial, interprovincial initiative under the New West 

Partnership would be equally supportable, Mr. Speaker, or 

equally beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan. We already 

know that in some cases we have professionals indicating that 

the New West Partnership leads to a downgrading of 

certification in the province of Saskatchewan. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, that there were concerns raised under TILMA about 

municipal government policies, about the ability of Crown 

corporations to operate, Mr. Speaker, tendering processes 

between governments, Mr. Speaker. All of these things now fall 

under this New West Partnership Agreement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while the government may want to use this 

legislation or this new agreement with industry to tout the New 

West Partnership, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think Saskatchewan 

people should be fooled into believing that this means that 

everything under the New West Partnership is going to work, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government is notorious for its lack of consultation and 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that we also consult 

with all of those affected by this legislation, Mr. Speaker — all 

of those affected either in industry or in the public. Because 

let’s remember my earlier remarks, Mr. Speaker, in that there 

are two parties here that government has to be responsive to. 

Number one, I repeat, is industry because we need them to 

operate, invest, create jobs, and create revenue for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And two, there’s the public of the province who 

wants to ensure that we’re getting a fair return and that the 

companies that are extracting resources from the land — 

resources that belong to the people — that they’re doing so in a 

way that respects the people, respects the environment, respects 

the custom, culture, and heritage of the land under our feet and 

the resource that is underneath that land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So despite the fact that the government indicates there’s been 

consultation on this Bill, consultation with department officials 

in any case, Mr. Speaker, we need to have further consultation. 

We need to ask a number of questions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, secondly — and I think this is very 

important because the minister did not address this aspect of the 

legislation in his second reading remarks — we need to 

understand the total impact of the provisions in this legislation, 

the impact, Mr. Speaker, not only on the resource revenues for 

the province but on all of the other activities that take place 

when there is extraction of a resource from our lands, Mr. 

Speaker, and that there could be an impact on the environment. 

There could be an impact on local culture and tradition. 

 

We do have laws in this province, Mr. Speaker, that were there 

to protect certain areas of the province, for example the Great 

Sand Hills in the southwest part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

And we know that there are already restrictions, because of that 

legislation, on the extraction of any oil, gas, or minerals. It 

doesn’t prevent the extraction of resources, Mr. Speaker, but it 

ensures that there are protections there in any case. 

 

If this legislation expedites any process or facilitates a process 

and it detracts from some other process, Mr. Speaker, then 

we’ve got to know that in advance and prepare mitigation 

measures if required. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think as we look at this legislation, we have 

to ensure that all of the things that I’ve talked about — respect 

for the industry and what the industry does for our province, 

respect for the people of Saskatchewan who own the resource 

and want a fair return, and respect from both parties, respect on 

government — that must ensure that we put together a regime 

that will allow both those things to function in balance for the 

people of Saskatchewan and for the industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve indicated there’s more work to do 

on this Bill. I know that some of my colleagues will wish to 

speak on this Bill before we send it to committee. I know that 

we need to consult further with industry and with the public. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 

debate on this Bill. 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6211 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 158 — The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to speak to An Act to amend The Correctional 

Services Act, Bill No. 158. And as I understand this Bill, what 

this piece of legislation does is gives the Corrections and Public 

Safety the authority to establish communication systems within 

correctional facilities that basically monitors inmates’ 

communication with people outside the institution. As well, I 

understand that there are also communication monitoring 

systems to monitor inmates’ communication with each other. 

 

And the minister gave some fairly compelling arguments in his 

introduction, second reading speech, about why it was 

necessary to basically listen in on suspicious phone calls, the 

argument being that there are times within the correctional 

centre when inmates may be conducting business that’s not 

legal, and that there have been examples of ongoing gang 

activity and drug dealing that’s gone on within our four 

provincial institutions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s fair to say that in many 

respects the opposition doesn’t have a difficulty with this 

particular piece of legislation, but there’s some what-ifs that I 

think we need to aware of. Now I understand from the Bill that 

was introduced in the House by the minister that there will be 

some organizations or agencies that inmates will be able to 

communicate with that won’t have this ongoing monitoring by 

the correctional officials and that, as I understand it, this will be 

put into regulations. 

 

And I just want to make some suggestions about who inmates 

should be able to communicate with without the state listening 

in on their conversations. Obviously legal council would be one 

area that inmates should be able to have a private discussion 

with and not have Big Brother listening in. 

 

The other group or other area where people may want to have 

counsel is with a religious person who is providing them with 

some ongoing support. And I’m thinking of a priest, a minister, 

a reverend — that kind of person — a spiritual advisor, an 

elder. There may be times when an inmate for whatever reason 

needs to talk to their spiritual advisor, and I don’t think the state 

should be monitoring that conversation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also times . . . 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member for Saskatoon Nutana for yielding momentarily. 

Earlier this day I had the joy of introducing some Trews from 

Govan: my older brother, Ray, and his wife, Joanne. Ray left to 

get the vehicle, but he didn’t get younger. That’s in fact his son, 

Steven, or their son, Steven, who has been able to join us now. 

So joining Teigan, Melissa, Tristen, and Joanne is my nephew, 

Steven. 

 

And it’s indeed an honour, a treat for me to have Steven come 

and see the legislature and see some of the work that we’ve 

done. I know that in visiting briefly with the rest of the Trew 

clan came here, they really enjoyed their tour of the Chamber 

and enjoyed to watch the proceedings. So, Mr. Speaker, through 

you I want to ask all members to join me in welcoming my 

nephew, Steven, for his visit to the legislature. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So there may be 

other people that an inmate may want to speak to. And I think 

that we need to have guarantees that those conversations won’t 

be listened in upon — lawyers obviously, spiritual advisors. 

I’m also thinking of ombudsmen, child advocate, independent 

officers of this legislature, as well as perhaps there have been 

times when inmates in the local correctional facility have 

contacted members of the legislature in their office. I think that 

those conversations that they may have with a member of the 

legislature shouldn’t be monitored. 

 

As well as I know that there have been many times when 

inmates have been trying to make arrangements with an 

addiction centre to take treatment. I don’t think those 

conversations should be monitored, as well as conversations 

perhaps with a psychologist that an inmate might be having 

ongoing discussions with. 

 

I think that there are many, many times in an inmate’s life that 



6212 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

they should be able to have private, confidential conversations 

without some official at Corrections and Public Safety being 

able to monitor those conversations, Mr. Speaker. So we will 

want to be assured and we will want to know, you know, who 

exactly can an inmate have a conversation with without having 

the state monitor that conversation. Which then brings me to 

another area that I think we need to address. 

 

There’s no question that this legislation raises a lot of questions 

which I’m not sure are adequately addressed and answered. 

One of those conversations . . . Will outside parties with whom 

inmates may want to have a conversation with, are they going 

to be aware that their conversations are being recorded? I think 

people will want to know that. 

 

Another question is, will this legislation withstand a court 

challenge? Now I know the government has indicated that this 

type of monitoring system is available in British Columbia and 

I think Alberta. But I would be interested knowing whether 

anyone, the civil liberties league, whether any of those 

organizations have launched any kind of court action. 

 

And I think the other compelling question is, who exactly is 

going to determine that an inmate’s conversation is going to be 

monitored? I think that will be an important question to have 

addressed by the minister. And we all know that there was a 

pharmacist recently that accessed personal health information 

of a former client inappropriately, and I guess an important 

question is what safeguards are going to be in place to prevent 

Corrections officials from monitoring conversations just for 

simple curiosity. And we all know that citizens, we can be 

curious at times. 

 

Now the other question that needs to be addressed are the fees 

and costs of this monitoring system. Because as I understand it, 

all outgoing telephone calls pay between $1.35 or $1.85 plus 

long distance calls to pay for this Texas company’s system 

that’s going to be put in or has been put into our facilities. And 

of course we know that inmates, when they do phone their 

family members, often those charges are reversed. But perhaps, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some people that inmates should be able 

to speak to. I’m thinking of a spiritual advisor, government 

ministries where they may need to access services as they’re 

leaving the correctional facilities. There may be some 

institutions that an inmate should be able to talk to, phone, and 

they don’t necessarily have to bear the cost of that telephone 

call, particularly if they’re calling locally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that the government has led 

people to believe that this fee is being put in place, this 

telephone fee is being put in place to operate this system, and 

it’s being done to enhance public safety. I think that it’s pretty 

clear that the fee is being put in place to pay for the 

government’s initiative, where they brought in this telephone 

system from Texas. And they’re expecting the users of that 

system to pay for it, and that would be the inmates, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions as I said that I 

think we’ll want to address when we get into the heart of the 

legislation. I know some of my other colleagues want to put 

their comments on this Bill on the public record. With that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would move that we adjourn the debate on this Bill 

at the present time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 158, The Correctional 

Services Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak this afternoon to 

The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010. As the minister 

remarked in his second reading speech commencing this debate, 

the original Act was passed in 1973, Mr. Speaker. Those of us 

who can cast our minds back that far and remember the politics 

and the culture of the day — and I think I can to a certain extent 

do that, Mr. Speaker — will note that the environment has 

come a long way. I know many people are frustrated, and I 

think I share that frustration personally with the lack of political 

will to make significant changes in the way our economy 

functions and the way our society works so as to avoid 

environmental detriment, if not perhaps disaster in some areas, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we look to what’s happening in Haiti today. Well 

yes, it’s partly an earthquake; it’s partly a governance issue. But 

look at the country that they share the island with and the 

difference between those two countries, and you see the 

importance of caring for and being stewards for the 

environment, maintaining your forests and all they support. 

And whatever the cause or effect, the interconnection between 

the relative affluence, prosperity, and good governance and the 

Dominican Republic, compared to those circumstances in Haiti, 

there is a relationship with the environment and the care that is 

taken care of the environment, which I think can even be seen 

when one flies over that island, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in 1970, 1973, environment was not a word that a person 

on the street used in conversation. The environment was a term 

that might be used by certain scientists. It might be used by 

engineers. It might be used by others as part of the jargon of 

their profession and occupation, but the environment was taken 

for granted. The environment, to people earlier in the 20th 

century, was like water to a fish. It was just there and not 

considered. It was lived in but not considered. 

 

And in the 1960s still and into the 1970s, the world was our 

garbage can in every way. Now I know sometimes we see a 

driver in front of us empty their ashtray onto the street, and for 

some people, the world still is their garbage can. But that was 

the common sense that we lived in a very large place. The globe 

was a big place; earth was a big place. Its resources could not 

be depleted. Its air could not be polluted. And pollution was a 



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6213 

new concept in the early 1970s. 

 

These are sort of sea changes in how we think when the world 

in which, the cultural world and how we think culturally about 

the environment, about where we live as humanity, the world 

we share with other species of life, the way we think about that, 

the way my children think about that from the earliest days of 

their lives is dramatically different than the way that I would 

have thought about the world, growing up. And I was part of 

the generation that, among other changes about the way we 

viewed women’s role in society, the civil rights movement, 

even how, the willingness to question the wisdom of a 

government going to war, all significantly changed in the years 

that we call the ’60s but maybe go actually from ’63-64 to 

1973-1974. 

 

And it’s in this new world that governments first started to 

think about pollution, about environment, about conservation of 

resources. And so in the ’80s, we had the wildlife protection 

legislation come from a Conservative government — the 

legislation that protected millions of acres of wildlife habitat in 

the province of Saskatchewan, which this Sask Party repealed 

in the last sitting of the legislature over the objections of 

numerous conservation and nature groups, First Nations in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I just want to say in passing, Mr. Speaker, because I do 

want to return immediately to the Bill that’s before the House 

today on the environment. I want to say in passing that I 

consider it — and it’s only my personal opinion; it doesn’t 

really matter but I want to express this opinion because I spoke 

at length, I think a couple of speeches on the wildlife protection 

amendment Act, or at least spoke on a couple of occasions 

during debate of the day one day and spoke again at some 

length on the Bill — that the removal of the minister 

responsible for that Bill from cabinet was an unjust and wrong 

response. 

 

This is a government that was going to pass that Bill, and did 

pass that Bill — over the objections not only of the opposition 

but of conservation groups, including a group led by the 

Conservative minister of the Environment who brought in the 

Bill — would not withdraw the Bill, stubbornly, pig-headedly, 

obstinately pushed for that Bill and then blamed the minister. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of us on this side of the House were 

ministers and were responsible, and sometimes current 

ministers like to pretend that we’re still responsible because 

they don’t want to take responsibility for the current situation in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So some of us can speak to ministerial responsibility. And we 

know that the wildlife protection amendment Act that repealed 

the protection of millions of acres of wildlife habitat was not 

the Bill of the minister of the Environment of the day, just like 

this is not the Bill of the Minister of the Environment of the 

day. It was a government Bill, Mr. Speaker. It was a 

government Bill. 

 

Now it may have been the minister’s responsibility to explain 

the legislation to the public and to her department. That was her 

responsibility. But the Bill, the responsibility for the Bill, rests 

with the entire government. But the government doesn’t take 

responsibility for its legislation even though it insisted that it 

pass, even though it turned down every opportunity offered to it 

by the opposition to withdraw the Bill and deal with the 

concerns that the public had raised with the Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, instead the government insisted on passing 

that legislation, ill-advised legislation, in the view of — well 

not just this opposition, but — editorial writers, First Nations 

quoted in Hansard by members of the opposition, leaders of the 

environmental movements of the province of Saskatchewan; 

and to, instead of protecting wildlife habitat, move the minister 

responsible for introducing the Bill into the legislature back to 

the fourth row of the government benches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

That is not the . . . It’s a bit of an injustice, Mr. Speaker. And 

there’s a bit of a very small sport, you know, I think, you know, 

there’s the MLAs in the legislature, and there’s a few pundits in 

the press gallery, but you know, there is a very small circle of 

people who participate in the sport of handicapping ministers of 

the Crown. You know, this person, good minister? Or did that 

person step in for that minister and do such a good job you kind 

of wonder why that minister still has that job? Why isn’t that 

person in that job? 

 

And when you do that handicapping, at least on our side, the 

minister of the Environment was far, the former minister of the 

Environment was far from, far, far from the least competent 

member of the front benches of the Saskatchewan Party 

government, far, far from that, you know. Whether she would 

argue that, whether we would argue that she was the best 

minister in the Sask Party government, I don’t know. But she 

was far, far, far from the worst, Mr. Speaker. But she had, as far 

as I can tell, she had the job of carrying forward legislation that 

the government was ill-advised to introduce in the first place, 

obstinately pushed through. And then, and then we don’t lose 

the legislation, we don’t protect the wildlife habitat; we lose the 

minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t seem to be right to me. I wish the 

government had done it the other way around. I wish the former 

minister of the Environment was still answering questions in 

question period and we didn’t have the repeal of the protection 

of wildlife habitat in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I wish that was the case. 

 

Anyways, you’d think that it would be a line of progress, Mr. 

Speaker, from the 1970s, early 1970s. I think the current 

Minister of the Environment might take an offence. I’m not 

saying that he would do badly in that handicapping process, Mr. 

Speaker. I didn’t mean to suggest that at all. I didn’t mean to 

suggest that at all. I don’t think we had to choose between those 

two, Mr. Speaker. That’s my point. That’s my point. 

 

Anyways, Mr. Speaker, you would think it would be a 

continual line of progress from the 1970s when the awareness 

first started to dawn about the environment and pollution —new 

concepts really at the time, Mr. Speaker — a continual line of 

progress from the ’70s to the ’80s to today. But it’s not been a 

continual line of progress. 

 

Matter of fact, and I just talked about steps back, steps back 



6214 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

from where we were in the 1980s. This government decided to 

take an enormous step back and repeal legislation that had been 

brought in, not by our predecessors so much, Mr. Speaker, but 

by predecessors of the Sask Party government, Sask Party 

members, many of whom, I understand, still card-carrying 

Conservatives, go on to the federal Conservative Party. It’s the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan that brought in 

this legislation protecting this land and it is their inheritors that 

gave up this inheritance, this protection, Mr. Speaker. So the 

line is not a continual line of protection. 

 

And on another environmental topic, Mr. Speaker, because I do 

not want to wander very far away from the Bill, the matter of 

greenhouse emissions, Mr. Speaker, and the targets. I won’t 

speak to the targets set by the NDP government. That 

government was defeated. We know, Mr. Speaker, the current 

government likes to remind us of that on occasion. 

 

And I don’t want to speak to the climate change fund 

established by the NDP government. That government was 

defeated, Mr. Speaker, and this government has found other 

things to spend that money on. I’m not quite sure what they are, 

Mr. Speaker, but they have found other places to spend that 

money. 

 

But I do want to speak to the promise that was made by the 

Sask Party on their greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s not a continual line of progress. It’s not a continual 

line of progress, Mr. Speaker, because they broke their own 

promise and said, well no, that was just for the election, Mr. 

Speaker. That was just for the election that we set those targets. 

Those aren’t our targets. Matter of fact, what are their targets, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

But to return from the environment, staying on the questions of 

the environment but return to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the Bill is a 

successor, like the wildlife protection amendment Bill, an 

amendment to current legislation that starts back in 1973, is 

amended again in 1988 by a government that, whatever its 

problems with conserving the finances of the province, seemed 

to have some understanding about the conservation of nature, 

Mr. Speaker, because they did not repeal the 1970 legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. They amended it and arguably expanded it to 

allow for container collection and recycling of other containers 

than were provided for in the original 1973 legislation. 

 

That money . . . And I think it’s the member from Cannington 

this is making this comment, and I think it needs to be put on 

the record. The minister did put it on the record. But if the 

member from Cannington wants me to refer to it as well, that 

money has been at least recently used as a funding source for 

beverage container collection recycling programs operated by 

Sarcan. 

 

Now the minister makes the point that amendments to The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act — also made 

by the previous minister of the Environment that the 

government is so proud of that she has been moved to the 

backbenches — have not been incorporated or have not been 

proclaimed. They incorporate the liquor control Act, the 

previous legislation to this Bill, current legislation. But the 

amendments have not been proclaimed, and it is the wisdom of 

the government that it would be easier to bring in a new Bill 

into this legislature and pass new legislation than to proceed 

with the proclamation of the amendments, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

sure why that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, and I expect we will not 

find out until this matter gets to committee, but that may be 

some time down the road because although I don’t really have a 

lot of comments or remarks to make this afternoon, I know 

other members may have more to say. 

 

But the primary reason, the primary motive for this Bill seems 

to be, Mr. Speaker, to retroactively change property and civil 

rights of residents of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That is certainly the power of the legislature. That is the 

principle of parliamentary sovereignty. As long as it’s 

constitutional, Mr. Speaker, as long as it doesn’t violate the 

Charter of Rights or some other aspect of the constitution of the 

country, as long as it’s constitutional, this legislature, within its 

constitutional jurisdiction, is supreme. And if this legislature 

decides that the rights of certain citizens to redress and to 

compensation through the courts are to be expunged, 

expropriated, taken away with or without compensation, this 

Legislative Assembly can do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can’t remember if it was Will Rogers or Mark Twain that 

said that no man’s life or property is safe when the legislature’s 

in session. And I think that’s a bit of an exaggeration, and 

certainly not a phrase that I would adopt, Mr. Speaker. But this 

is the type of legislation, I think, that the humorist was referring 

to, the type of legislation that says, well, yes, these were the 

rules — these were the rules. But we didn’t understand the rules 

that we passed, and now we don’t like the rules. 

 

And we don’t like the way the rules have operated for a number 

of years because we have certain obligations, perhaps, under 

those rules. And well we don’t want to live with those 

obligations. We don’t want to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well the member from Cannington is trying to drag a senator’s 

spouse into the debate. I don’t know why. 

 

But we don’t want to live under those rules any more, and so 

we’re going to change them. And we’re not going to just 

change them going forward, Mr. Speaker. We do that all the 

time. That’s what we do here, to a certain extent. Certainly in 

the fall, Mr. Speaker, when we’re not dealing with the budget, 

that’s what we’re doing, is we’re changing the rules going 

forward. And that of course raises debate about what should the 

rules be, Mr. Speaker? What should they be at all? 

 

Changing the rules, going backwards, is unusual for us, Mr. 

Speaker, and I don’t know if this government’s done this 

before. I wouldn’t say that there haven’t been governments of 

every stripe in the history of the province of Saskatchewan who 

have done this. And I’m not arguing that, in principle, that it’s 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. But I think it needs to be noted more than 

just in passing when it’s done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, we can — and I think this maybe 

was the member of Cannington’s point — we can blame 

lawyers for figuring out how the rules actually read, Mr. 

Speaker, and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, 

if the member of Cannington is right and the rules actually read 

the way that successive governments have thought they have 

read, then there’s no need for the legislation, Mr. Speaker.  



November 24, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6215 

I think the concern about the legislation is that the rules are 

going to be interpreted by a court, or there’s a good probability 

that the rules are going to be interpreted by a court contrary to 

the way the government believes the legislature intended. But 

that, Mr. Speaker, is fine, and as I said, it may be acceptable.  

 

It’s certainly principle of parliamentary supremacy that we can 

just change the rules. But I think the Assembly is reluctant to 

do that. I think sometimes when the Assembly has done that in 

the past, it has been fairly controversial, probably more 

controversial than these suggested amendments. 

 

I think the member from Cannington might rise and enter into 

this debate. I know it’s unusual for a government member to 

come into a second reading debate, but I think the member of 

Cannington has a lot to say. Or at least I’ve inspired him, 

during my remarks, to make some statements. 

 

The minister in his remarks on the Bill, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010, refers back to a decision in 1998 by the 

Supreme Court of Canada. And I think a lot of legislators 

across the country will remember this decision, Mr. Speaker. It 

had a radical, if not revolutionary, effect on how governments 

raise revenues. Because it was the thinking of government prior 

to that decision that you could have cost recovery and maybe, 

you know, you didn’t have to be too precise about what the 

costs were compared to the revenues. And the revenues might 

exceed the actual costs. But that would still be a service fee that 

would be charged, and that would be something that 

government could set, you know, as an acceptable fee. No issue 

about it if you’re actually not even recovering your costs. 

 

And then the Supreme Court of Canada said no, well, if actually 

you’re recovering, paying into the general revenues, perhaps, 

monies beyond what it actually costs to provide that service, 

well that’s not a service charge, not when it’s done by 

government, Mr. Speaker. That’s a tax. And so someone with 

some time on their hands and some incentive to do so now 

queries whether — and queries in a legal statement of claim, 

Mr. Speaker — whether the service charges imposed under The 

Litter Control Act may in fact be not a service fee but a tax. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I think the minister has calculated what the costs of this 

might be. The surplus charges, the part that isn’t cost related, 

isn’t cost recovery, those charges in respect to this litigation 

referred to by the minister in his remarks is $2,200. The 

minister’s concerned — and maybe it’s because of legal 

counsel involved; I don’t know — that we could be seeing class 

action in this matter. And if there was such an action, the claim 

would be over $1 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s nice to see actually, just as an aside, this government 

minding its pennies so well because often we don’t see that, Mr. 

Speaker. Matters that arose today that — in question period — 

that I wonder whether the pennies are being minded quite as 

well as they are by this action in respect to introducing this Bill.  

 

The minister said, the potential financial liability going 

forward. Now this liability is a going-forward liability, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll come back to that. A potential financial 

liability going forward would be $350,000 per year at risk every 

year the legislation’s not changed. Well that doesn’t require 

retroactive change, Mr. Speaker, because that’s a future 

liability. So that doesn’t justify the retroactive nature of this 

legislation. In fact this legislation wouldn’t have to have a 

retroactive effect to prevent that evil from occurring. 

 

Now I think that’s right, but it seems to me that the minister’s 

remarks conflate the potential loss if the legislation is not 

retroactive with the potential loss if there is no legislation at all. 

And if I’m correct about that and a distinction can be drawn 

here, the cost, the risk . . . Because this claim is not proven. I’m 

not even sure how far it’s advanced. The claim seems to have 

been reviewed by lawyers in the Ministry of Justice and the 

Attorney General who have recently been reviewing legislation 

about liquor beverages anyway, Mr. Speaker, and to save the 

Minister of Justice from breaking the law for even more 

months. 

 

It’s been reviewed by lawyers in the Ministry of Justice and 

Attorney General. The minister doesn’t refer to a statement of 

defence. So the response to the claim appears to be — and 

maybe if the member for Cannington joins the debate he can 

advise otherwise — but it appears to be the government’s 

response to the claim is not a statement of defence. The 

response to the claim is this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s a little early in the day, unless the lawyers are more 

than of the opinion, as the minister says, more than of the 

opinion the actions merit . . . If they actually would go further 

than that, further than the minister says, and says, well we have 

no defence. But that’s not what the minister said. The minister 

said, well the action has merit. But so much merit apparently, in 

the view of the government, that the government’s not going to 

defend and negotiate. 

 

The government is instead going to bring in retroactive 

legislation, which may avoid the risk of $1 million being paid 

to certain Saskatchewan citizens who have been purchasing 

beverage containers and arguably paying a tax that they are not 

liable to under the rules. And therefore to save that $1 million 

in revenue, the risk of having to pay that, the legislation would 

retroactively remove that right. 

 

The member from Cannington seemed to suggest that this 

argument is going around the rules. But if the claim has so 

much merit that the government will not even file a statement 

of defence, I think the government is conceding, the 

government is conceding with this Bill that in fact the rules may 

very well read as the claimants suggest they read, and that they 

may very well be entitled to these funds that, as the government 

says, are used to fund Sarcan recycling and recycling of 

beverage containers that have a social and environmental value. 

 

There’s no question about the value of this program both 

socially and environmentally, Mr. Speaker, and for the defence 

of this program, not going forward but retroactively going 

backwards, that the government has brought in the Bill. Now 

going forwards of course, yes, the funding for these program is 

at risk. But going backwards, well we’re not going to go back. 

Surely the government is not going to go back to Sarcan and 

say, sorry, we paid you money that we weren’t entitled to 

collect and we want $1 million back. That’s not going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker. 



6216 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2010 

So really what’s at risk here is government revenues. And the 

decision of the government is whether to put at risk that $1 

million that they would have to pay out to the claimants who 

are business people in the province of Saskatchewan, I 

understand, or retroactively change the law, Mr. Speaker. And 

the government has decided to retroactively change the law. 

 

Now when we look at the balance here and we look at the cost 

spread amongst all the purchasers who might be possible 

claimants here, there’s going to be, I think, with any individual 

claimant or potential claimant, a relatively small amount. And 

the $1 million that . . . I mean I know the government can lose 

$1 million pretty quickly, but still it’s $1 million of public 

money, Mr. Speaker. When we look at that balance, when we 

look at that balance, I expect that members of the Assembly 

who are not members of the government, members of the 

opposition may decide that in this case the reluctance that we 

have and will always have about retroactivity — and I know 

I’ve spoken a little bit at length here on the principle but — I 

think that reluctance should always be clearly expressed. It’s 

not so clearly expressed in the minister’s remarks, perhaps; I 

think it’s there, but I don’t think it’s very well expressed there. I 

think that reluctance has to be stated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It may seem a little ironic to some members of the government 

benches that the social democratic party in opposition is 

expressing this concern about retroactive expunging of property 

and civil rights of small business people in province of 

Saskatchewan. But it’s a genuine concern, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think it should be a genuine concern to every member of this 

Assembly, and it should be something that’s not done lightly. 

 

And I hope, I hope that the legal opinion that the government 

has — and I don’t expect to see it, Mr. Speaker, so I can only 

have this faith — I hope that that opinion supports this action, 

Mr. Speaker. Because it seems to have been the view of the 

government that there is no defence, that whatever the minister 

hears or says about the action having merit, that there’s more to 

it than that, Mr. Speaker. Because there doesn’t seem to be any 

suggestion that the government would raise a defence. The only 

action of the government seems to be . . . to having received 

that opinion that the minister refers to, having viewed that 

opinion the minister refers to, is to bring in not unique but 

unusual legislation in its retroactive nature. 

 

I hope that the opinion that has been delivered to the 

government — and I can only hope and trust that isn’t the case 

— supports that action, that the government did not have an 

argument to make in litigation, that the government has not 

decided to take a . . . to abandon an argument in defence that 

had merit. Maybe it wasn’t a strong argument, maybe wasn’t 

going to be the winning argument, that there was no argument 

against this claim. Because only that, I think, would justify 

making the legislation retroactive. You know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my concerns perhaps are more the concerns of a lawyer. But 

I think looking at the remarks and listening to the remarks made 

by a number of my colleagues, I think across the opposition 

bench, we are concerned about this matter of retroactivity. I 

think it’s a matter that needs to be discussed more. I know other 

members will want to address other issues about the legislation, 

which is of an environmental nature, and not just on its legal 

aspects. And for that purpose I will move that we adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The 

Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would now 

move the House adjourn to go to Standing Committee on 

Human Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 10 o’clock tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:56.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 International Holodomor Remembrance Week 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6195 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6196 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6196 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 6197, 6211 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6197 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6197 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6197 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6198 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6198 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6198 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6198 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6198 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6198 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6198 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6209 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6199 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6199 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6199 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6199 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6200 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Caring Hearts Camp Fall Retreat 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6200 

 Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6200 

 Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6200 

 Battlefords Citizen Honoured for Community Service 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6201 

 Yorkton Manufacturer Heads International Organization 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6201 

 Economic Policy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6201 

 Chris Knox Foundation 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6202 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Response to Firefighters’ Brief 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6202 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6202 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6202 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6203 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6203 

 Contract with Information Technology Office 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6204 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6205 

 Housing 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6205 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6205 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6206 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6207 

 

 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6207 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6211 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6212 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


