




















































Hansard: April 13, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 43A  TUESDAY, APRIL 13, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4757 

 April 13, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I request leave to 

make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to 

colleagues in the legislature for the chance to make a very 

special and an extended introduction. Mr. Speaker, seated in 

your gallery, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce through you and 

to you to all members of the Assembly, Saskatchewan’s 

participants in this year’s Jeux du Commerce West in Prince 

George, BC [British Columbia]. 

 

JDC [Jeux du Commerce] West is a prestigious annual business 

competition featuring the top schools and the top business 

students from across Western Canada. This particular group of 

students, Mr. Speaker — and they’re accompanied by some 

coaches — are students from the University of Regina. The 

university sent a team consisting of 53 students, 15 faculty 

coaches, 19 alumni and business community coaches. And the 

competition was held in January, Mr. Speaker. And to no one’s 

surprise, the University of Regina, the Paul J. Hill school of 

business students did very, very well. They finished in second 

place, Mr. Speaker. In fact they missed first place by a mere 

point three five percentage points. 

 

I know all members of the Assembly will want to join with me 

in welcoming these students. And just before they do that, I 

wonder if I could indulge members of the Assembly by 

introducing these students. And I’m going to call their names, 

and if they’re here maybe they’d give us a wave or even stand. 

And I’m going to introduce the faculty and coaches that are also 

in attendance. And if I miss some, I apologize, but I think we 

have the complete list. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in no particular order, we want to welcome 

Lisa McIntyre, Trevor Knox, Mikkail Sigov, Riley Meloche, 

Steven Comaniuk, Megan Armstead, Sarah Bultitude, Michael 

Truong, Tianna Yaskow, Alexandra Fox, Ally Pilkey, Kathleen 

Ing, Katherine Simaluk, Laura Fahlman, Carli Brundige, Megan 

Slinn, Karen Webb, Lucy Quach-Parker, Eric Moser, April 

Flaman, Pat Sirois, Devin Sembaluk, David Ma, and faculty and 

coaches in attendance. We have the dean, Mr. Speaker — we’re 

happy to welcome Anne Lavack to the Assembly — Lisa 

Watson, Bruce Anderson, Ernest Johnson, Tatiana Levit, and 

Megan Costiuk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want you to know that I asked these students, 

when I had a chance to meet with them, how many plan to stay 

in the province of Saskatchewan if there were opportunities 

here for them to pursue. And I think all but just a few put up 

their hands, and we’ll go to work on the other ones. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re very, very grateful to have them in the 

Assembly today. We want to congratulate them on an amazing 

achievement. We understand in this Assembly that the future of 

the province of Saskatchewan is bright indeed as we continue to 

build on some pretty amazing growth because of students like 

we welcome today in your gallery. Will all members join me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 

welcome this team with their advisers who have done so well, 

not only this year, but in the previous years in this business 

competition. It’s also a real pleasure to welcome them because I 

know many of them personally. In fact I think it might be close 

to half of them were at my daughter’s 21st birthday party just 

two weeks ago. And then with the faculty members, I have a 

special welcome for Anne Lavack, and especially Ernest 

Johnson, who has moved to Saskatchewan a few years ago from 

Acadia University and he was somebody who was recruited, I 

would say, by my family to come to Saskatchewan along with 

his wife. 

 

And we’re very pleased to have all of these people who serve 

Saskatchewan well and who are getting excellent training here 

and showing that the kinds of people that we train in 

Saskatchewan can compete against anybody in the world. And I 

want all members to welcome them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I’d like to join with the Premier and the 

member opposite in welcoming the students from JDC West. 

And I’m very pleased also with their good luck in Prince 

George. I know they did a good job. 

 

Today I want to especially pick out two people. I want to thank 

Anne Lavack for not only her work with the students but also 

her work with the FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] 

network and I appreciate all your enthusiasm. I’m fortunate to 

have one of the students now working in my office. I have an 

enthusiastic, energetic young lady who is staying in our 

province. Please help me welcome Megan Armstead to her 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly a good friend of mine, a 

good friend of our province, sitting in the west gallery, Dave 

Dutchak. 



4758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

Dave is part of the Dutchak family that’s synonymous with 

excellence in health care in our province. They are one of the 

private sector providers that provide the health care and do it in 

a way that is just, just excellent. Dave and I go back to our 

Blaine Lake days; we grew up together. In fact our fathers 

served on town council together. So, Dave, I’d like to welcome 

you to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

Dave also, from an economic point of view, has been the 

president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and 

contributed greatly to his province in many ways. He’s also, 

Mr. Speaker, a Toronto Maple Leaf fan. And I’m sure he’s 

engaged in what all Leaf fans do in April, Mr. Speaker — they 

get together and they talk about next year. So, Dave, welcome 

to your Legislative Assembly. I’m sure the Deputy Premier 

would want to meet with you sometime to talk about that. But 

I’d ask all members to welcome Dave. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me pleasure to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 

concerned citizens of Saskatchewan concerned over the 

condition of Highway 310. The petition goes on to state that the 

condition of Highway 310 is a potential safety hazard for those 

residents who have to drive on this highway each and every 

day. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by the good folks from Ituna, 

Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have today a petition 

from the Saskatchewan Student Coalition in support of the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund. That 

would be the same scholarship fund promised by the Sask Party 

in the 2007 provincial election. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Regina and 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants in the province. 

As people know, the Ministry of Education released a document 

that would dramatically reduce the number of educational 

assistants in the province and replace them with a smaller 

number of professionals. And in the view of the petitioners, this 

would result in a substantial loss of in-class support. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

This petition is signed by people from Battleford, North 

Battleford, Meadow Lake, Turtleford, and Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition to the legislature calling for the 

reinstatement of the domestic abuse outreach program. And we 

know that the domestic outreach program provided a number of 

valuable services to women victims of domestic violence 

including helping them find emergency shelter, accompanying 

to their homes, court, and hospital or police station as needed. 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to reinstate the domestic abuse outreach 

program as a provincial government service and make it 

available in all parts of the Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signature signers come from the good 

city of Saskatoon and Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With a 

waiting list of almost one full year, I don’t believe there’s any 

other community that has a waiting period and a waiting time 

like this. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

the construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is signed by the good people of Pinehouse, Air Ronge, and 

La Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that’s been circulated by the Saskatchewan 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4759 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable education 

and a call on the Sask Party government to have its actions 

match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition to support the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The petition is being circulated because the 

Saskatchewan Party government amended the retention 

program specifically to exclude master’s, Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] graduates, and graduates from outside the province 

of Saskatchewan. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the three 

largest cities in the province: Prince Albert, Regina, and 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of maintaining quality 

health care services. The petitioners note that the Government 

of Saskatchewan needs to recognize the integral role of all 

health care providers as valued members of the health care team 

and that the Government of Saskatchewan must recognize the 

value of all health care providers by having a commitment to 

adequate funding and the installation of good faith in the 

provincial collective bargaining process. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and surrounding area. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for constitutional, 

legal, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Duval, Saskatoon, 

Biggar, and Langham. And I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits and they reference the 

huge $1 billion debt growth that’s under way within this 

province. The prayers reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of La Ronge, 

Creighton, and Muenster, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film and 

television industry. This petition is signed by concerned 

residents who aren’t sure why this government seems to want to 

kill the film and television industry here in this province. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

To cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces, to reverse its decision to shut down 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, and to work 

with the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and Regina. I 

so present. 



4760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World Health Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 7th marked 

World Health Day. This year’s theme is dedicated to 

urbanization and health, highlighting the impact of urban living 

on human health and encouraging efforts to make cities 

healthier places for people to live. 

 

In Saskatchewan we are seeing what it means to have a growing 

homeless population in our cities and to understand what the 

health implications of this will be. We have a significant 

difference in the health of inner-city or core neighbourhood 

residents. Yet the Sask Party government has done little to 

address this growing problem. 

 

Nearly all of the global population growth over the next 30 

years will occur in cities. Shockingly one in three urban 

dwellers live in slums amounting to more than 1 billion people 

worldwide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in response, leaders around the world are focusing 

on improving health care. In the United States, President 

Obama recently introduced long overdue health care reforms. 

But here in Saskatchewan, the Sask Party is decreasing seniors’ 

access to drug plans, selling off surgeries, de-insuring 

chiropractic care, and now talking about user fees in the home 

province of medicare. This is a dire contradiction to what 

should be the focus of developing healthy populations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we celebrate World Health Day this year, we 

should demand a sustained public health strategy for 

Saskatchewan that will strengthen and improve our publicly 

provided medicare. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Accomplishments of Constituents 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is always my 

pleasure to draw attention to the accomplishments of Saskatoon 

Sutherland constituents. 

 

I rise in the House today to tell you about Arlene and Robin 

Karpan. The Karpans are photographers and writers. They own 

Parkland Publishing and have authored and published nine 

incredible books with a 10th to come out in April. I have two of 

their books on my shelf. The photography is stunning. The text 

is interesting. And they sure know a lot about Saskatchewan. 

 

Their most recent book, Northern Saskatchewan Canoe 

Country, has been featured in newspapers across the country 

from Vancouver to Montreal. They have contributed to over 

100 publications worldwide and they sell stock photography as 

well. They recently won the North American Travel Journalists 

Association 2009 award in landscape and seascape category for 

their photography of Saskatchewan’s own Athabasca Sand 

Dunes which was published in the Canadian Geographic 

Travel magazine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members — including the opposition 

members so rudely interrupting me — to congratulate Arlene 

and Robin for this most recent award and thanking them for the 

contribution to our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Frontier Mall Wall of Fame 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again The 

Battlefords have celebrated individuals who have contributed 

greatly to our community’s and our country’s quality of life. 

 

On Saturday, March the 20th, at the induction ceremony of the 

Frontier Mall Wall of Fame, the 11th and largest such ceremony 

in the history of the event, five wonderful people were 

honoured with a place in the Wall of Fame. This year’s 

inductees include Pearl Balych, M. Junice Headley, Ginny 

Gendall, and Marguerite and Floyd Hawley. 

 

One of the inductees, during her acceptance speech, really 

spoke for the many current and past Battlefords and area 

citizens who have been honoured by their community. Pearl 

Balych simply said, “I am what I am. I do what I can with as 

much as I can, for as long as I can.” 

 

The Wall of Fame is a highly visible tribute in a very 

high-traffic location in a community with a great deal of 

high-level spirit. So I ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the inductees into the Frontier Mall Wall of 

Fame for 2010, and congratulating the staff and businesses at 

the mall, especially special events coordinator, Rachel Magnus, 

who brought it all together for this memorable afternoon. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Agri-Tourism in Saskatchewan and Quebec 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

weekend a delegation from Saskatchewan travelled to the 

Charlevoix region of Quebec. The region, which is just over an 

hour’s drive east of Quebec City, is known for its very 

successful agri-tourism industry. 

 

Their success is based on the local production and branding of 

high-quality products and a unique cultural blend which are 

then integrated into an agri-tourism strategy that seeks to boost 

the fortunes of all partners through both local sales and the 

exports of these value-added products to new markets. 

 

The Charlevoix region of Quebec has had significant success in 

reinvigorating its local economy through this strategy which 

emphasizes economic strengths and success. They have also 

been collaborating closely with the ACF [L’Assemblée 

communautaire fransaskoise], Saskatchewan’s francophone 

community, to share best practices and lessons learned 

throughout this region in the past 20 years. 

 

Our delegation met with local mayors, tourism entrepreneurs, 

producers, and food processors in the Charlevoix region. Their 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4761 

main purpose was to witness and learn from the different 

successful private and municipal sector initiatives in this region 

of Quebec. This trip provided an opportunity to showcase 

Saskatchewan’s products in a region that has a thriving 

hospitality and food sector. These efforts could lead to 

additional partnerships between both provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan takes its place as a leader in the 

new West, our rural areas will continue to add strength and 

vitality to our province’s economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

2010 First Nations Winter Games 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

another successful Saskatchewan First Nations Winter Games 

wrapped up this past Friday. Athletes from First Nations 

throughout the province gathered in Saskatoon to play their 

hearts out and to make their communities proud. A remarkable 

3,500 athletes competed in the games — 1,000 more athletes 

than the Vancouver Olympics. Yet while this government spent 

$8 million on its Vancouver presence, its presence at the First 

Nations Winter Games was negligible in comparison. 

 

I was honoured to take part in the opening ceremonies with 

First Nations leaders including AFN [Assembly of First 

Nations] Chief Atleo, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] Chief Lonechild, and Saskatoon Tribal Council Chief 

Thomas, among others — and, just as important, the young 

athletes who were eager and excited about this amazing 

experience. It was virtually impossible not to catch their 

contagious enthusiasm. It is clear to see that these young people 

will go on to become leaders in community, business, and 

perhaps even in government. But the Sask Party government 

chose not to take part in this event. 

 

The discipline, pride, and overwhelming community spirit 

displayed by these future leaders is even more impressive in the 

face of this government’s treatment of First Nations and Métis 

people — more than two years of disrespect, funding cuts, and 

zero consultation — yet these games showed their spirit and 

strength will prevail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Chief Felix Thomas of the Saskatoon Tribal 

Council for hosting these successful games and wishing our 

congratulations to all the athletes, organizers, and volunteers at 

the First Nations Winter Games. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Tri-Town Thunder Hockey Team Wins Championship 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again great 

news from Carrot River Valley constituency. This past weekend 

saw the Tri-Town Thunder Junior B hockey team win the 

provincial championships. It didn’t come easy as the Pilot Butte 

Storm took it right to the seventh and deciding game, which 

was held in Carrot River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both teams had outstanding seasons. The Pilot 

Butte Storm lost only six games through the regular season, and 

the Tri-Town Thunder only lost three. This set up a great 

playoff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Tri-Town Thunder is made up of three 

communities: Carrot River, Arborfield, and Zenon Park. These 

towns are all based in the Carrot River Valley constituency, and 

many of the players come from the local area. This is a great 

example of how the people and communities of Saskatchewan 

get along, especially the Northeast. 

 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, it was a full barn Saturday night 

with 1,137 people showing up. The 50/50 was $3,300 which, by 

the way, I didn’t win. The Tri-Town Thunder won 4-1, but the 

score wasn’t indicative of the game as we were on the edge of 

our seats all night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Thunder now heads to Kamloops for the 

Western Canadian playoffs. I would like all members of this 

Assembly to wish them the best of luck. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatchewan Resource Statistics 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we thought we’d seen it all when 

it comes to the Sask Party’s inability to accurately estimate 

anything. But then, the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] jetted off to Montreal to speak to 

the consular corps. She went there to proudly proclaim that a 

whopping 20 per cent of the entire world’s natural resources 

come from right here in Saskatchewan — 20 per cent. Who 

knew, Mr. Speaker? 

 

According to the minister, out of all of the potash, uranium, oil, 

gas, minerals, forestry, animals, and water covering the entire 

globe, one-fifth of all of that comes from here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there’s no doubt that Saskatchewan has a lot of resources, 

but the fact that the minister’s estimate was completely off base 

was obvious to just about everyone. Here’s what The Financial 

Post had to say about the minister’s estimate: “Twenty per cent 

of the world’s natural resources? That’s a lot, considering all 

the natural resources the province is not awash in, like tin, zinc, 

nickel and others.” 

 

Clearly the minister has been taking lessons in resource revenue 

projections from her colleague from Kindersley, but surely even 

this estimate is beyond his wildest imagination. Under pressure 

from the media, the minister realized her estimate was grossly 

inaccurate, and she issued a correction stating that she was 

misquoted by her own news release, written by her own staff 

and approved by her. Isn’t this typical of the Sask Party? 

Wild-eyed cheerleading, completely inaccurate numbers, and 

off-loading responsibility every chance they get. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



4762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

Kidney Transplants 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In July of 2009, it was 

announced that Saskatchewan’s kidney transplant program 

would be suspended. To the minister: what’s the status of the 

kidney transplant program in Saskatoon now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as of now, the kidney 

transplant program in Saskatoon is not in operation. We are 

short of a few cardiovascular surgeons that would work on this 

program, Mr. Speaker, and when we are able to recruit those, 

that program will be up and running. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan need to know that if they are in need of a kidney 

transplant, that our province, if they are medically fit, that our 

province will be paying for those transplants out of province. 

We have had 12 just in the past year that have received that 

very service outside the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as of March 2010 there were three 

transplant nephrologists in Saskatchewan, and there are 106 

patients waiting for a kidney transplant. There have been 12 

patients sent to Edmonton between July 28th of ’09 and March 

of 2010 for transplants, cost unknown. The transplant 

specialists are frustrated and wondering why the minister is not 

reopening Saskatoon for kidney transplants. 

 

To the minister: we do have the specialists, and there is a need 

for the service. Why is he dragging his feet and choosing to 

send patients to Edmonton instead of reopening Saskatoon for 

transplants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with the 

Saskatoon Health Region, we are working to make sure that we 

have the proper complement of specialists in the various areas, 

whether it’s here in Regina with the gynecology oncologist, Mr. 

Speaker, or transplant surgeons, Mr. Speaker, or various 

specialities around the province that are hard to recruit. We are 

working to recruit those, and that is exactly why our 

government has moved forward and put a physician recruitment 

strategy and agency in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately for many years under the NDP [New Democratic 

Party], we saw 1,160 health care professionals leave this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We are starting in a deficit position, but 

in the first two and a half years, we’ve made great gains. 

There’s more work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, that rhetoric just does not fly with 

people who are watching this and needing the service. Sandi 

Poochay is in the gallery today while her husband Dion lays in 

Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon waiting for a kidney 

transplant. Dion was told in February in Saskatoon that he was 

a candidate for kidney transplant surgery, but he can’t get the 

surgery in Saskatchewan because the minister won’t reopen the 

Saskatoon kidney transplant unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if Dion doesn’t get a transplant, 

his wife says he will die. What is the minister going to do to 

save Dion’s life? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will not be 

commenting on individual cases in this House, but what I will 

comment on is the delivery of health care in the province. And 

what I will also say is that if a patient is medically stable who 

requires a kidney transplant, they will be looked after if it’s out 

of province, Mr. Speaker. Our government will pay for that 

service out of province if they’re medically stable. I will not 

comment on a case-by-case situation. That is the process that 

has been conducted in this province over the last number of 

months, and it’s obvious when we see 12 people, who are 

medically stable that needed a transplant, were sent out of the 

province to receive that service. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, 12 people out of 106. What about 

the others? Who is going to save them? This family needs an 

answer now. The transplant program was cut without any 

notice. Patients are being sent out of the province at unknown 

additional cost to the health system, the patients, and their 

families. The minister does have the authority to reinstate the 

program. Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to 

reinstate the kidney transplant program in Saskatoon and save 

the lives of people like Dion Poochay? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we have 

a physician recruitment agency now that will be looking around 

the world to try and attract more physicians to our province. In 

the first two and a half years, I think that we have done quite 

well in attracting 164 more physicians — 72 specialists, 92 GPs 

[general practitioner] — to our province which is a far cry from 

the record of the previous government, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

moving in the right direction. Absolutely there’s more to do, 

and we would like to see this transplant program up and running 

in the province. And when we can guarantee that there are the 

proper complement of specialists, highly trained specialists in 

the province, the program will be up and running again. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, our government has been 

there for patients when they are medically stable to go out of 

province, Mr. Speaker, and receive that treatment. That has 

been the case in the past number of months, and it will be the 

case as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4763 

Finance and Electoral Issues 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have in 

my hand a Court of Queen’s Bench judgment. Mr. Speaker, on 

June 18, 2008, Justice Kyle said, and I quote: 

 

. . . the plaintiff said the specific persons involved are Brad 

Wall, Doug Emsley, Ken Krawetz, Reg Downs and caucus 

members who discussed the withholding of the 

Progressive Conservative trust money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a direct quote. My question is to the 

Premier: did the Premier, his Deputy Premier, or any member 

of his caucus ever conspire to take the Progressive Conservative 

trust money to fix the outcome of the 2007 general election? 

 

The Speaker: — I remind the member of the rules, the rules 

that were brought into place in 2005 and prior to, that questions 

relating to political parties or Board of Internal Economy are 

not directly related to ministerial responsibility. The ministers 

may or may not choose to answer the questions. I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier in his 

role as the Chair of the Executive Council. Has the Premier and 

the Deputy Premier or any member of his caucus ever attended 

a meeting with the trustees of the Progressive Conservative 

Party trust to conspire to take the money and fix the outcome of 

the 2007 general election? 

 

The Speaker: — Again I remind the House of the rules 

implemented by the members of the fact that questions are to be 

directed toward ministerial responsibility. Anything related to 

party or board may or may not be responded to. Member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The role of the 

government and the role of the Executive Council is to act on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan in a manner which is in 

the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan. My question to 

the Premier is this: how many of the Progressive Conservative 

trust trustees named in the judgment from the Court of Queen’s 

Bench were or are members or supporters of the Saskatchewan 

Party? 

 

The Speaker: — I again remind members of rule 19(2), and the 

fact that questions should be directly related to ministerial 

duties and responsibilities. I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll move 

my questions then to the Minister of Justice who has a 

responsibility under law to represent the rule of law. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask the Minister of Justice the following question: 

since he has been appointed, since he has been appointed 

Minister of Justice, has he ever met with, talked to, or been 

aware of any meetings or discussions between the Premier, the 

Deputy Premier, any caucus member, or any senior staff 

member with the trustees of the PC [Progressive Conservative] 

trust fund over the future of the PC trust fund and fixing the 

fund? 

 

The Speaker: — Just to remind members that questions should 

be directly related to a ministerial responsibility, ministerial 

responsibility. And anything . . . The rules are very . . . The 

rules are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The rules are very clear 

about anything regarding party, Board of Internal Economy, 

19(2). Read the rules. Read the rules. Read the rules. Next 

question. Next question. Member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that ministers of 

the Crown don’t follow their own legislation. Mr. Speaker, I 

have in my hand the Court of Queen’s Bench judgment. And 

I’m going to quote again from Justice Kyle. It says: 

 

It also said that between 2003 and December 2008, the 

P.C. Party trustees, represented by Douglas Emsley, met 

with Saskatchewan Party Caucus, Brad Wall and Ken 

Krawetz. As a result of these meetings, the Saskatchewan 

Party caucus was informed that the P.C. Party of 

Saskatchewan would not receive any money from its trust 

until after the 2007 general election. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: will the Premier 

admit that he conspired to fix the outcome of the 2007 general 

election? 

 

The Speaker: — Again I’m not exactly sure where the member 

from Regina Dewdney is going with the questions, bringing 

into the Assembly judicial rulings. And in regards to the rules 

before the Assembly, ministers feel it’s their responsibility, they 

may or may not respond to the question. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

state again that the integrity of a government and the members 

of Executive Council are paramount to the people’s confidence 

in their government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was appealed by the Saskatchewan Party. And 

I want to read the final quote from Justice Kyle, and I quote: 

 

Clearly, the action against the Saskatchewan Party would 

not be allowed to proceed if it were just a publicity stunt 

or an exercise in paranoia but the dual roles of the trustees 

and the questioned changes in the trust agreement by the 

trustees raise enough questions that the matter is not plain 

and obvious and beyond doubt as the precedents require. 

In the result, therefore, I find that the application fails to 

meet the established test and it is therefore dismissed with 

costs in the cause to the plaintiff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I ask the Minister of Justice once again: has he 

ever been part of any meeting, any discussions, or is he aware 

of any meeting or discussions between the Premier or the 

Deputy Premier or any member of his caucus with members of 

the PC trust fund over fixing the trust fund to not allow the 

Conservative Party to obtain their money? 

 

The Speaker: — I just remind the members of the rules that 

were implemented, by the rules of the Assembly we’ve been 



4764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

operating under for years. And as we have already noted before, 

the questions should be related directly to ministerial 

responsibility. Anything with regards to party or Board of 

Internal Economy, a minister or any one minister of the Crown 

may choose to respond. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Health Care Negotiations 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on March 8th the Minister of 

Health told this legislature with respect to health care sector 

negotiations that, and I quote: “. . . I believe an agreement can 

be reached and I believe it will be a fair agreement for not only 

the health care workers but the people of Saskatchewan.” 

 

To the minister: what is the current status of negotiations with 

health care workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, you 

know, the status of the negotiations is between the provider 

unions and SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations]. I’ve been following it through the papers and 

through media conversations like everybody else has. A final 

offer has been put forward to the provider unions. It’s up to the 

provider unions to decide whether they want to take that to their 

membership and allow the membership to vote on it, Mr. 

Speaker. That is where I believe the negotiations are at right 

now. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly hoping — as I think 

many of the providers are, many of the employers are — that an 

agreement can be reached in very near future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, these health care providers 

look after us, our partners, our parents, our grandparents, our 

friends, and our loved ones during the most vulnerable 

moments of our lives. They are special care aides; licensed 

practical nurses; food service workers; laundry, housekeeping, 

and activity personnel; maintenance and clerical staff; 

emergency medical personnel; therapeutic and diagnostic 

technologists; recreation workers. They are the backbone of the 

health care system, and this government has refused to bargain 

with them for nearly three months since late January. 

 

To the minister: how does refusing to negotiate with health care 

workers improve patient care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to all the 

provider unions and all the providers throughout the province, 

that our government absolutely respects the work that they do 

day in and day out, whether it’s in acute care settings, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s in home care, whether it’s in long-term 

care in every one of the constituencies that we represent through 

rural Saskatchewan as well as urban Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I always, you know, watched negotiations for 

many years, and it always is a time when it’s close to an 

agreement that it becomes quite tense. Mr. Speaker, I hope that 

that’s ripening right now. I certainly hope that the provider 

unions can see fit to take this final offer from SAHO out to their 

membership and see what their membership has to say about it, 

Mr. Speaker, because I think it is in the best interest of all, not 

only the providers but the employers, as well as most 

importantly the patients, that we get an agreement — an 

agreement that is good and fair for both. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I heard the minister 

say that he was urging people to take this out to their members 

to vote on. I’m not sure how that squares with not getting 

involved. But, Mr. Speaker, health care sector unions wrote to 

SAHO on March 5th asking them to come back to the 

bargaining table, but SAHO has not replied. 

 

Now as the minister just did, and the minister will try to hide 

behind SAHO if he wants, but everyone knows the government 

is directing contract negotiations. They’ve injected themselves 

directly into these talks by instructing SAHO to refuse to 

negotiate with unions, and now nobody believes this minister 

when he claims otherwise.  

 

To the minister: if he’s really interested in a negotiated 

settlement and not just getting his own way as he earlier 

mentioned here, why doesn’t he order SAHO back to the 

bargaining table? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, in the two and 

a half years that I’ve been the minister, I will not get involved 

in the negotiations between the employer and the provider 

unions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that SAHO has put together 

what they feel is a final offer to the provider unions. That was a 

couple of months ago. It’s up to those provider unions to decide 

as to whether they want to take job action if they so choose or 

move it out and have their membership vote on it. I think that 

SAHO is waiting for that decision to be made, Mr. Speaker. 

And until that decision is made, we will I guess remain in this 

holding pattern because a final offer has been made by SAHO. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, no matter how much the 

minister tries to backtrack, he has said he wanted that offer to 

go out for a vote. And we heard that in here first. So I think you 

should accept this responsibility. He should also, Mr. Speaker 

. . . that this government, it’s quite clear, won’t negotiate with 

health care workers. But instead, even though they’ve 

mismanaged the finances, they want to spend hundreds of 

thousands of dollars advertising its so-called final offer. 

 

[14:15] 

 

It’s a final offer, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that forces home 

care workers to be available for 12 hours while getting paid for 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4765 

eight. It ties the reclassifications of licensed practical nurses to 

acceptance of the final offer, despite the fact that this is a right 

that has already been won previously, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

short-sighted agreement that creates working conditions that’ll 

make it harder to recruit and retain health care workers. But this 

government refuses to negotiate changes with the workers, 

believing that it knows best. 

 

To the minister: why is this government so determined to 

pursue this final offer? Why won’t it return to the bargaining 

table and negotiate with health care workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, that SAHO has 

put together a final offer, and it is in the hands now of the 

provider unions to decide in which direction they want to go. 

 

I would think that, you know, when you look at what other 

provinces are doing, there are a number of other provinces that 

have settled agreements, as well as even within our province 

with the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government & General 

Employees’ Union] and government workers, the agreements 

have been settled. It’s amazing to see how those numbers have 

adjusted over the last year or so, kind of reflecting some of the 

situation that economies are finding themselves in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not for me to say the SAHO offer is fair or not 

fair. I think it offers a positive offer to the provider unions, Mr. 

Speaker, especially in respect to what you’re seeing in other 

provinces. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Support for Northerners 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I was at the Northern 

Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association convention in La Ronge 

this last weekend. The government’s own budget document 

says the Trappers’ Association funding will be eliminated. The 

trappers need to know the truth today. 

 

To the Minister: since he was nowhere to be seen at the 

convention this weekend, can he tell the trappers today how 

much this Sask Party government is cutting from their budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members 

of the opposition would spend as much time looking in the 

budget to see what is there instead of concentrating on what’s 

not there, they would understand the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the real question is what are we doing to build the 

economy of northern Saskatchewan? A 70 per cent increase to 

the Clarence Campeau Development Fund, Mr. Speaker, $1.4 

million in order to build three brand new enterprise regions to 

drive the northern economy. And certainly, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, we’re finally prepared to continue our 

answer. $1.3 million to build new enterprise regions to drive 

economic development in the northern economy, Mr. Speaker, a 

70 per cent increase to the Clarence Campeau Development 

Fund, money for the fishery industry, and certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, more on the way. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example of 

the Sask Party government’s making hurtful cuts without 

having any idea what they’re actually cutting. In their desperate 

attempt to cover up their incompetence, their reckless financial 

mismanagement, the government makes hasty cuts without 

even thinking of the consequences that the people are being 

affected by those consequences. 

 

To the Minister: when will he set aside his scripted answers and 

admit that these short-sighted cuts are simply a cover-up for the 

government’s fiscal mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, the only prescriptive 

answers that I’m hearing are from the opposition. The only 

thing that I can see, the way desperation is from the opposition. 

They’re desperately trying to cover up the fact that they did 

nothing for 16 years to build the northern economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re helping the fishery industry. We’re helping 

the mining industry, the forest industry, money for Clarence 

Campeau, brand new $3 million fund for First Nations 

economic development, Mr. Speaker, and $1.3 million to build 

the enterprise regions. Who could ask for more? Only these 

people. Why are they asking? Because they don’t know what’s 

in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

clearly has no understanding of the importance of the 

Saskatchewan trapping industry. The industry generates two 

and a half million dollars of revenue through fur sales alone. 

Not only millions . . . And also to note, millions are generated 

with spinoff benefits to local economies. 

 

To the minister: why is he forcing the trapping industry, the 

northern Saskatchewan, to suffer because of his government’s 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

tremendous opportunity to debate the issue. If we want to talk 

about suffering in the northern economy, how about 16 years of 

mismanagement and neglect on the part of that former 

government with respect to the fishing industry, an industry 

which is in decline, whose very viability is suspect. They did 

absolutely nothing for 16 years and watched the thing go down 

the drain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve done more to invigorate the fishing industry 

in two years than they did in 16. I’ll be happy to talk with the 

Trappers’ Association any time about their specific needs. If 

they have a particular program they’d to apply to, a particular 



4766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

function, we will be happy to address that, Mr. Speaker, in the 

fullness of time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the northern enterprise regions 

are this minister’s answers for everything related to northern 

Saskatchewan. But he’s been talking about these enterprise 

regions since he became a minister, and northern Saskatchewan 

has had nothing to show for it. To the minister: when will the 

people of northern Saskatchewan expect more just rhetoric and 

hurtful cuts from the Sask Party government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I dare 

say that you know half of the communities that our consultants 

have been to, the member opposite couldn’t even find on the 

map. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our consultants have gone to every single 

community in northern Saskatchewan where economic 

development is under way in order to talk about the start-up of 

these three brand new enterprise regions. When will it happen, 

the member asks, his colleagues asked. It’s happening as we 

speak. An entire year of consultation led to a request for $1.3 

million in the budget to activate these regions. That actually is 

on the table today. I welcome these individuals to join us in 

supporting the budget so this good work can continue in the 

future. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member, Government House Leader 

to state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask that you review the comments in question period by 

the Opposition House Leader. He was impugning the honour of 

a number of members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

including the Premier, in accusing the members of fixing the 

2007 election and fraud, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask that you review those, that you ask . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the members to 

allow the member to put his point of order. They can . . . Order. 

They can respond to the point of order when their opportunity 

arises. Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That the 

Opposition House Leader withdraw those remarks and 

apologize unequivocally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite is making a point of order based on quotes, 

Mr. Speaker, and quotations from a legal judgment from the 

Court of Queen’s Bench, Mr. Speaker, from Justice Kyle on 

June the 18th, 2008. Mr. Speaker, I would like to once again 

read this into the record. It says, “. . . the plaintiff said the 

specific persons involved are Brad Wall, Doug Emsley, Ken 

Krawetz, Reg Downs and caucus members who discussed the 

withholding of the Progressive Conservative trust money.” 

 

The second quote I used, Mr. Speaker, said: 

 

It also said that between 2003 and December 2008, the 

P.C. Party trustees, represented by Douglas Emsley, met 

with Saskatchewan Party Caucus, Brad Wall and Ken 

Krawetz. As a result of these meetings, the Saskatchewan 

Party caucus was informed that the P.C. Party of 

Saskatchewan would not receive any money from its trust 

until after the 2007 general election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many other quotes in this 

document as well. Mr. Speaker, those were direct quotations 

from a legal document, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve heard the points of order, 

and to ensure that I come back with a fair ruling, I will review 

the Hansard and return with the ruling tomorrow. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 1235 through 1349. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1235 through 1349 are ordered. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, to you and through 

you, to introduce a number of guests that have joined us in the 

east gallery, members of SEIU [Service Employees 

International Union] West, and I ask all members here to 

welcome these hard-working health care workers to their 

legislature. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4767 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to rise and speak to Bill No. 132, an Act to amend The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and to make consequential amendments 

to the Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this Bill is full of some areas that 

concern us. One, it is saying that what they’re going to do is 

find a new way to sell Crown land that is protected under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. They’re going to find three 

new ways actually of selling off wildlife protected land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this from a government that has a terrible track 

record, especially when it comes to environment. This is a 

government that campaigned in the 2007 general election 

campaign saying they were going to reduce CO2 emissions by 

some 32 per cent based on the 1996 base year, which was the 

same promise that New Democrats were making in the election. 

They said us too. That’s what the Sask Party said then. Well 

what do they say now, Mr. Speaker? Now they say we’re going 

to reduce that. No longer is it going to be 32 per cent reduction 

in CO2 based on ’96. It’s now a 20 per cent reduction based on 

two years earlier — 1994 — so they have a lower start and a 

much lower reduction in CO2. 

 

It’s a government that can’t be trusted when it comes to 

environmental promises, and we are very concerned about 

wildlife habitat protection from especially when that Sask Party 

government decides it’s going to make some changes in The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. We’re very concerned. The 

track record is dismal when it comes to the Sask Party 

government and environment, and we’re concerned for wildlife. 

We’re concerned for the entire future of Saskatchewan lands. 

 

You know, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, 

has come into play over a huge number of years. Frankly I 

won’t pretend that New Democrats invented it. That just would, 

I think, belie the reality of the situation. Wildlife protection is 

something that all Saskatchewan people share in and should 

properly share in. But we have always . . . in the 24 years I’ve 

been a member of this legislature, every step, virtually every 

step that’s been taken in wildlife habitat protection has been a 

strengthening of protected area. It’s been a step forward in 

looking after wildlife and in enhancing protected areas, every 

step for the relatively short period of time I’ve been here; it’s 

only two dozen years. 

 

And now we have this which is, it outlines three separate ways 

that Crown land can be sold. In the explanation to Bill 132, An 

Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts, it says, “This 

amendment repeals the Schedule listing designated lands.” So 

those designations are gone. It goes on, “The province is 

positioned to adopt a new strategic approach to evaluate and 

manage ecological, social and economic values on Crown land 

in the surveyed area of Saskatchewan and ensure protection of 

critical features while enabling sale of the land.” 

 

[14:30] 

 

Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, with the track record . . . I’ve 

talked about CO2. We’ve talked over the time of this, just this 

spring session, we’ve talked about many things that the Sask 

Party government and environment have . . . It just doesn’t 

square. And we frankly have huge concerns when we hear the 

Sask Party government saying they’re going to find new ways 

of evaluating social and economic values on Crown land. Just 

what does that mean? You know, without casting too deep an 

aspersion, it feels a bit akin to me of putting the fox in charge of 

the chicken coop, with the track record that the government has 

with respect to environment. So Bill 132 causes us concern. 

 

We want, certainly on this side of the legislature, we want to get 

the legislation right. We want, we want to enhance wildlife 

protection. We want to leave our Saskatchewan a better 

province, not only for my children but for my grandchildren and 

yours and everybody. We want this province to be a place that 

we can hold our heads up high and be proud to call it home and 

to know, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve done the right thing, to know 

that we’ve done the things that we could in wildlife protection, 

to know that we’ve done the things that are appropriate, 

particularly once the Crown gets Crown land for environmental 

reasons. 

 

There’s a reason that the environmentally sensitive land came 

into Crown hands with respect to much of it, Mr. Speaker. And 

we want to make sure that we’re taking steps forward to 

enhance that protection, not steps backward, not saying, oh well 

we’ll sell this land under certain conditions. Well what’s the 

certain condition? More money? Too much money? I mean we 

only left two and a half billion dollars for them to spend, I 

guess. That was our mistake. We didn’t leave a big enough 

slush fund, a big enough amount of money in the General 

Revenue Fund for the Sask Party to burn up because they’ve 

turned an over $2 billion surplus into a . . . now it’s — what? — 

a $1.4 billion deficit. 

 

They’ve stripped all of the Crowns of its equity. We saw reports 

. . . I got home last night, saw a report where SaskTel . . . 

They’ve stripped all of the retained earnings from last year and 

this year. And what a shame that is because those retained 

earnings go into the General Revenue Fund to support the wild, 

exorbitant expenditures of the Sask Party government. But it’s 

money that belongs to all of the people of Saskatchewan. And 

it’s forcing — in that case last night — that decision is forcing 

SaskTel to borrow money and that’s going to drive up costs of 

our telephone and our Max services and our Internet services 

and the things that SaskTel provides. 

 

I predict that we’re going to see a 911 increase, an increase in 

rate that they charge us for the 911 fee, and all it is, is just going 

to be a hidden tax to try and grab a bit of money because how 

could anyone be opposed to providing 911 service? It’s just a 

revenue grab, and we’re seeing it at virtually every turn from 

the Sask Party government. 

 

And I think that this sale of designated Crown land that is 



4768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

designated as wildlife habitat protection Act, this move to 

enable this sale of some of that land under, they say, certain 

undefined conditions. But forgive us for thinking that this is 

nothing but a dollar grab on behalf of the Sask Party which 

can’t seem to find enough money to meet its spending needs. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to, in the west gallery, introduce Chad 

MacPherson who is general manager of the Stock Growers 

Association in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with great interest, he’s taking in the debate this 

afternoon. As we know, the stock growers are in support of this 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act that’s before the 

House today and, as I said, are taking great interest in how the 

debate is going today, and hoping that this Bill proceeds 

forward. So I would ask all members to welcome Chad to his 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land 

Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Back to Bill 132, An 

Act to amend The Wildlife Habitation Protection Act and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill is a 14-clause-long Bill. I say that merely to point out 

that it’s not merely housekeeping. This is a Bill that makes a 

fundamental change to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

This is a Bill that allows the Sask Party government to decide 

when they’re going to sell Crown land. It allows the 

government to set new social and economic values on the 

Crown land and without any explanation of what these social 

and economic values are. So it leaves us to question whether the 

economic value might simply be the highest bidder. 

 

You know if . . . Not to pick on anybody. I’ll take a fairly safe 

sounding Canadian name. If Canadian Tire wants to buy some 

land that’s protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, 

is it simply a matter of them making a big enough offer for the 

land, and then they can set up a Canadian Tire store or whatever 

else they might want to do there? And I want to make this 

crystal clear. I utilize Canadian Tire myself. I think it’s a fine 

company. I’m in no way trying to cast any aspersions. It’s a 

good Canadian-sounding name, and it’s a fairly decent sized 

company. That’s the only reason that I named them, but it could 

. . . You can substitute the name of any individual or any 

company. 

 

And is the question simply, how deep is your wallet? How 

much money are you prepared to pay for this Crown land that is 

protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act under the 

old rules? 

 

But under the new rules, well there’s the question of social and 

economic values on the Crown land. And what are those social 

values? Does scrub brush or a bog have social value? I don’t 

have the answer to that, Mr. Speaker. But there’s no answer in 

this Bill either. Nor is there an attempt at explaining what it is 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we do know is that we are being asked to buy, by the 

Sask Party government, being asked to buy that this is a step 

forward in wildlife habitat protection Act. And we’re very 

skeptical. The reason we’re skeptical, you don’t have to look 

very far. You can cast yourself back 15 minutes ago when 

questions weren’t being answered in question period. 

 

Again I’ve not ever, I’ve never seen that in the 24 years I’ve 

been here. I’ve never seen it where you can’t have an opposition 

ask questions and the government respond. I just have never 

seen it. And it was repeated questions. I could scarcely believe 

what was happening today. And this after the same, similar 

questions asked yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re being asked to pass a wildlife habitat 

protection Act Bill and we’re not . . . I read the minister’s 

introductory remarks when he introduced the Bill. There’s 

nothing there that reassures me on the question that I have here. 

There’s nothing in it that assures me that there’s been anything 

even remotely close to adequate consultation taken place with 

respect to this Bill. 

 

Certainly we have seen at every turn inadequate consultation on 

virtually every Bill that I’ve had the pleasure of speaking to in 

the House. And I’ve been listening to some great speeches from 

colleagues of mine. None as good as my seatmate’s speeches, 

but I’ve listened to some very good speeches here . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Top-notch speeches, as the member for Regina 

Rosemont says. And he gives top-notch speeches as well. 

 

But the reason that we’re able to, on this side, give decent 

speeches is it’s so easy to find the holes in the legislation. It’s 

so easy to wonder about what the desire of the government is. 

It’s so easy because they’re so transparent. They simply need 

money. 

 

For example they strip all of the money from the Crown 

corporations, the retained earnings now, strip it all with one 

exception — SaskPower. Every nickel. And the reason is they 

stripped SaskPower last year of its retained earnings. But this is 

a pattern that the last time we saw it was when the Premier was 

a ministerial assistant in the Grant Devine government. That’s 

the last time we saw this pattern. 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4769 

We kind of hoped that — or I’d certainly hoped that — right 

wing parties like the Sask Party would have learned from the 

history which isn’t ancient history, Mr. Speaker. It’s not ancient 

history. And I understand that there would be a philosophical 

difference between left and right wing people and parties on the 

left and parties on the right, but my goodness, surely we have 

an obligation to learn from our own mistakes. Surely we’re not 

doomed to this endless, endless cycle of repeating the same 

mistakes ad nauseam. Surely mankind is capable of better than 

that, and I know that Saskatchewan people are capable of much 

more than that and much better than that. 

 

And frankly, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’m real optimistic about 

the future for Saskatchewan. I am really optimistic on a whole 

host of fronts. I’m optimistic for the first time in quite a while. 

I’m optimistic politically. I’m optimistic that we’re going to do 

very well — New Democrats — in the next general election. 

I’m optimistic that we’re going to have a premier from Regina 

after the 2011 election. And it’s just an awesome feeling for me 

to see that having turned. 

 

I say that, and I take you back to my very first speech after the 

Sask Party was elected where I wished the Premier and Sask 

Party members well. I hoped that they could honour their 

election commitments and be deserving of a second time. 

Election commitments like in the environment where they 

promised to reduce CO2 emissions by 32 per cent based on the 

1996 level. This is an environmental issue that they’ve now 

slid, and they’ve gone from the ’96 to ’94, two years earlier 

where there was lower CO2 emissions. And the reduction is 

now 20 per cent from 1994, so it’s about half the commitment 

that was made as recently as two and a half years ago in the 

general election. 

 

And CO2 and the environment are incredibly important, and it’s 

the same file. When we look at how the Sask Party is managing 

the environment file and we see how they’re managing the 

wildlife habitat protection file, and we’re very, very, very, very 

skeptical. I just can’t begin to explain the concerns I have, and 

the lack, the fact that the consultation doesn’t seem to have 

taken place. There’s no appearance of conservation 

organizations, wildlife groups being consulted in any 

meaningful way about whether this is a step forward or not. 

 

In the absence of third party validators, what I’m reduced to 

believing is this is nothing but a cash grab by a desperate Sask 

Party government that is grabbing cash from every place that 

they can. I mean every nook and cranny. It’s all of the Crowns 

being stripped of their money. You look at municipal, 

municipalities where there was a promise to implement a 1 per 

cent, equivalent of 1 per cent of the PST [provincial sales tax], 

and that’s been held for the second — held off, fell through — 

for the second year in a row, with a promise of, well wait until 

next year. And frankly, we’ll see what next year brings. 

 

You know, from 2 billion in the bank to desperation and 

wondering how are we going to get through this year, never 

mind next year, how are we going to get through this year — 

this is a cause for concern. We know that there was very close 

to 200 million pulled back from long-term health care facilities, 

most of them in Sask Party members . . . but 200, 200 million in 

13 different long-term care homes that the funding was cut to 

build. 

[14:45] 

 

So there’s a backlog of need for capital, and I’m wondering if 

this isn’t going to fund 1 or 2 or 3 or 13 of those long-term care 

homes. I’m wondering if it’ll fund the children’s hospital that 

was so long promised and touted by the Sask Party and now, 

now that is just so far on hold. But it just looks like nothing 

more than a desperate attempt to get a few million dollars. 

That’s just what it looks like. I mean you look at this from a 

government that pulled back, and pulled back $12 million just 

from chiropractors alone in the budget; did a whole number of 

things. 

 

I don’t want to get too deep into the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

because I know that what we’re dealing with is Bill No. 132, 

the Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and make 

consequential amendments to the Act. In some ways, Mr. 

Speaker, some people would argue that this Bill is really about 

the very future of, not to put too fine a point on it, but the very 

future of the world. 

 

I don’t mean that Saskatchewan alone bears the full 

responsibility, but I do mean that Saskatchewan is responsible 

for our area, our land mass and species on that land mass. And 

if we act as good stewards, if we do the job in Saskatchewan, 

we can count on our neighbours in North Dakota, in Montana, 

in South Dakota, and everywhere else to do their part. And then 

we have real hope for wildlife right around the world. We can’t 

affect what goes on directly in New Zealand, what they might 

or might not do respecting wildlife habitat protection, but we 

can affect what goes on in Saskatchewan and, to a lesser extent, 

in jurisdictions around us. 

 

If we do nothing or if we take steps backwards that this Act 

seems to be guilty of, if we do nothing or take steps backwards, 

that just encourages neighbouring jurisdictions to also reduce 

their standards when it comes to wildlife habitat protection. 

And that’s just all so wrong-headed on so many levels. In 2010 

we cannot go in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2010 we have an obligation to present people and to the 

future, and we have an obligation certainly to enhance wildlife 

habitat protection. We have those obligations that are part of 

what we’re about. And we live in a time of so much 

opportunity, and we’re blessed. We have more material wealth 

today than at any time in Saskatchewan’s history or in the 

history of the world. 

 

We surely can’t claim that we lack resources to do what we can 

to look after critical wildlife habitat. Surely that’s not the 

argument that we’re using. And yet, and yet in this very Act we 

are finding three different ways that Crown land can be sold. 

Crown land that is covered under the wildlife protection Act 

today, when we change this, that some of that very Crown land 

is going to be assessed by the Sask Party for its value. Social 

and economic value will be assessed and some of it will be sold. 

If it wasn’t going to be sold, there would be no reason for this 

Act. There’d be zero reason for Bill No. 132 if the intention 

wasn’t to sell off some of that critical wildlife protected land. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I was instrumental in helping to — I 

don’t want to take too much of the credit for it — but I was 

instrumental in helping recruit Lorne Scott to this . . . [inaudible 



4770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

interjection] . . . I need all the credit I can get; you’re right. But 

getting Lorne Scott to this very legislature. 

 

Lorne Scott who was very, very early on, he was one of the 

founding members of the whooping crane organization that 

saved whooping cranes. Lorne Scott, who if you ever have the 

opportunity to get into his relatively humble home, you’ll find 

on the wall pictures and scrolls and letters from royalty around 

the world. Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II has written him, has 

given him awards for his work in wildlife habitat protection and 

in wildlife protection. He is known literally around the world. 

 

That’s sort of the thing that makes me hold my head up proudly 

and say, you know, I’m a New Democrat and I want to do the 

things that Lorne Scott would have me do. I want to do the 

things that not only Lorne Scott but many, many other people in 

Saskatchewan and indeed around the world want to do with 

respect to wildlife habitat protection. 

 

I am nervous as can be when I hear the Sask Party government 

say they want to sell off some of this Crown land. I am nervous 

that Lorne Scott was probably not consulted by the government. 

I am nervous that the pattern of introduce legislation, grab the 

money, and oh, we’ll maybe be able to explain it later. I’m 

nervous that that’s the pattern I’m seeing with this Bill, An Act 

to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts. It is not a 

housekeeping Act. If it was housekeeping, there would be no 

significant question. There certainly wouldn’t be a listing of 

how you could go about selling off protected Crown land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I have other colleagues that are going 

to want to engage in this discussion. I know that I’ve just 

scratched the surface of some of the problems that are potential 

problems with this Act. I’ve not seen any good purpose in this 

Act in my perusal. I hope I’ve missed something. I’m hoping, 

Mr. Speaker, that this Act is doing something positive. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They don’t call him eagle eye for 

nothing. 

 

Mr. Trew: — They don’t call him eagle eye for nothing was 

the side call. And it’s the first time I knew I was called eagle 

eye, but thank you. Mr. Speaker, I hope, I hope, I hope that 

there is something good in this Act. I haven’t found it. I know 

that I have colleagues that are going to be making calls to 

people that do care about wildlife. 

 

I know that we’re going to be asking some questions further to 

this, serious questions about how this is going to enhance the 

protection of a single species. How is this going to guarantee 

that wildlife is protected? This has to be about much more than 

commerce. This has to be about way more than the Sask Party’s 

idea of how to move an economy forward. This has to be about 

protecting wildlife. This has to be about enhancing the 

protection, the lands that are protected. As I said earlier in my 

speech, Mr. Speaker, this has to be a step forward, not a step 

backward. This has to, this has to do something positive for 

wildlife in Saskatchewan and in a greater area than 

Saskatchewan because as we know, the waterfowl for example 

are migratory and there’s all sorts of migratory birds. 

 

And in fact, I saw in today’s, maybe not in today’s paper, but 

recently I saw about a Canadian lynx that was captured near 

Banff, if I have it right, and taken down to Colorado. And it 

wound up as part of a species propagation system, but it had 

fathered, sired five of six, I think, lynx before it was trapped 

back in Canada. And it had actually worked its way all the way 

back, so we know now that Canadian lynx are migratory as well 

or at least capable of travelling. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have lots of questions around this Bill. 

And I know that I have other colleagues that are going to have 

questions as well. So I move that we adjourn debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 132. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 119 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 119 — The 

Ticket Sales Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to weigh in on debate here today this afternoon with respect to 

Bill No. 119, An Act respecting the Sale of Tickets. It’s a Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’ve had some consultation with 

Saskatchewan people that certainly needs to have more 

consultation. 

 

But it’s a Bill that’s come to this legislature unfortunately 

following the same path that so many pieces of legislation have 

taken under the Sask Party, and that’s that they put together this 

legislation and laws in a vacuum, Mr. Speaker, and the Sask 

Party doesn’t consult with anybody through that process. And 

then they put forward legislation and need to all of a sudden be 

chasing their tails and doing this consultation afterwards to see 

how they can clean up their legislation. 

 

And it comes from a government, the Sask Party that has 

broken the trust with Saskatchewan people as it relates to health 

care, cost of living, financial mismanagement, and a whole host 

of other issues, Mr. Speaker. It’s a result of broken promises, 

Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan people are saying that they 

won’t be taken for granted, Mr. Speaker, by the ways of the 

Sask Party and the damage of their decisions. 

 

Now this Bill is not necessarily of great or significant 

consequence when you look at the big issues that we are facing 

in health care and cost of living and financial mismanagement. 

And we do think that that’s where the primary debate within 

this House is best served, because these are major issues for 

Saskatchewan people, and where our focus and our attention as 

legislators needs to be. It’s certainly where the opposition New 

Democrats are taking the debate on a daily basis here in this 

legislature, recognizing that the health care needs of our 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4771 

communities and our families, Mr. Speaker, are not being met 

by the Sask Party. And in fact we’re going backwards, Mr. 

Speaker, on so many of these fronts. 

 

Yet we speak to Bill No. 119 here today, An Act respecting the 

Sale of Tickets. And we do have some comments as well 

specifically to that piece of legislation, a piece of legislation 

that again, like so many other pieces of legislation put forward 

by the Sask Party, has been created in a vacuum without relying 

on the stakeholders within our community, the businesses that 

are affected, the people who are affected. And as a result, we 

have many pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, put forward by 

the Sask Party that have unintended consequences that are not 

desirable. 

 

So we’re pleased, Mr. Speaker, that we hear signals, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Sask Party has been willing to sort of clean up 

this legislation, put forward some amendments to fix their 

broken legislation on this front, as pushed and as advocated by 

the opposition New Democrats. And this is something 

important to our province and specifically to many of the 

businesses in our province that are affected by this legislation. 

 

In principle, certainly we support the concept of stopping the 

large-scale ticket reselling by companies and automated 

systems, Mr. Speaker. We think that we want to make sure that 

we have an equitable opportunity for individuals to access 

entertainment in this province, and we want to make sure that 

individuals aren’t exploited through this process. So we support 

that principle, Mr. Speaker, but the objective of the legislation 

needs to be fulfilled, Mr. Speaker, if it’s to be good legislation 

that actually makes a change for the better. And that’s where 

this current state of this legislation gets hung up, and where it’s 

reflective of the ill-derived nature of how it arrived to this very 

legislature. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But we support the idea in principle. We do have some specific 

concerns, Mr. Speaker, and some of those would be that we 

believe that this Bill, this will be a Bill that will rely heavily on 

well-written regulations. And like so many pieces of legislation, 

this is something that is very important. It’s the devil in the 

details, Mr. Speaker. And we need to have well-written 

regulations, something that the Sask Party has proven 

themselves huge failures with, Mr. Speaker, and we see that in 

health care, in cost of living, in financial mismanagement, and 

so many portfolios and pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the government messes up the regulations, then the people 

who should be allowed to transfer tickets, for example, will be 

blocked and others that should be stopped will not be. And we 

need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that that’s not the case. We 

want to make sure that we fulfill the objective of the legislation, 

the principle of it, and in fact don’t put forward something 

that’s . . . create something that’s not practical for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

In many, many meetings with respect to this legislation, it’s 

been brought up that there could be significant challenges for 

communities and community events and junior sport. And we 

want to make sure that junior sport and rodeos, for example, all 

sorts of activities at the local levels within the heart of our 

communities across Saskatchewan aren’t affected by this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that the 

opposition New Democrats have driven home in the debate on 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there is a great deal of technical work that needs to be done 

to prevent automated systems from buying tickets to live up to 

the intent of this Bill. 

 

And the minister has said in the media that this is a 

work-in-progress and that there is . . . But there’s no solution to 

date, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the kind of information that we 

need to have at this level, Mr. Speaker, to be able to have the 

kind of worthy debate and discussion that should go on in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It’s the kind of discussion that we 

expect will occur at committee and by engaging the important 

stakeholders that this Bill affects. 

 

We need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill, you know, 

that this Bill will do nothing, or we would need to recognize 

that this Bill will do nothing to prevent scalping at the 

individual level. And we wouldn’t want that pretense to be there 

that this impacts that. It makes no change, Mr. Speaker, on that 

front. And that’s something that maybe could be discussed at 

the committee level. 

 

And we want to compare, and it should be compared, to what 

other provinces are doing, Mr. Speaker, what other jurisdictions 

are doing on this front, Mr. Speaker. Because many times when 

you’re looking at legislation, that’s where many of the best 

lessons can be learned, to see where best practice is being 

employed in other jurisdictions and what can be learned from 

the experience of other jurisdictions that have gone at what will 

be a challenge for many, many, many jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what we see is a government that has dug their head into the 

sand on this important legislation, as they have on so many 

pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And instead of consulting 

with Saskatchewan people, they’ve in fact neglected to consult, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s problematic. And we see the kind of 

changes that need to be made here. We don’t know yet what 

those amendments are going to be, Mr. Speaker, but we need to 

make sure that those amendments address the concerns of 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan businesses. And we speak 

specifically through groups such as tour operators, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out that we shouldn’t necessarily be doing 

this kind of cleanup at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. We 

should be doing this before legislation gets to the very 

Assembly. That being said, New Democrats are proud to play 

the important role that we do of providing the kind of oversight 

and scrutiny to clean up the Bills that the Sask Party puts 

forward in an ill-derived fashion, Mr. Speaker, in many ways 

that are harmful and not going to fulfill the objectives that 

they’ve set out, Mr. Speaker. So we’re pleased to play that role 

and assist the Sask Party to get that legislation right. We need to 

be doing some of this at the committee level. And we need to 

make sure we’re fully understanding what those amendments 

are going to be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I don’t want to take too much time in this Assembly to be 

talking about Bill No. 119 because the issues that we know, Mr. 



4772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

Speaker, that are most important to Saskatchewan people is the 

huge failure and broken trust as it relates to health care, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to cost of living, and as it relates to the 

financial mismanagement of the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We need to give huge priority and huge time, Mr. Speaker, and 

the significant priority that that debate should be provided 

within this legislature. And certainly we can assist in cleaning 

up legislation that was put together poorly and recklessly by the 

Sask Party, such as this legislation as it relates to the reselling 

of tickets, a principle that we support or a piece of legislation 

that we support in stopping the reselling of tickets in a 

circumstance of exploiting individuals and consumers and 

putting forward that kind of consumer protection. But we need 

to make sure we get it right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I should say that, you know, of course this government 

puts forward a piece of legislation, exampled here today, 

without any consultation. And we see this on so many fronts. 

We see it in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And with so many 

meetings last week when we were away from this Legislative 

Building, we had so many circumstances where we talked about 

the lack of consultation in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly we see it in groups such as labour and the 

mismanagement . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney may state 

his point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 

raise my point of order at the earliest opportunity after some 

further research and consideration of questions put before the 

Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I asked several questions of both the 

Premier and the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, at any time 

under rule 19(2), a member has the authority or has the right not 

to answer a question. The minister has a right, pardon me, not to 

answer a question. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, when questions are asked relevant to their 

responsibilities as a member of the Executive Council, it should 

be incumbent upon the minister to answer that question or 

refuse to answer that question, not necessarily intervened by the 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to make this point in regards to the questions asked of 

the Minister of Justice. The Minister of Justice, by virtue of his 

office, is the member of the Executive Council that is 

considered the legal member of the Executive Council, and 

that’s so stated in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. And it is the 

responsibility for the Minister of Justice to both see that the 

administration of public affairs is in accordance with the law 

and the trusts that we were talking about, Mr. Speaker, are 

within the purview and accordance within the ministerial 

authority of the Minister of Justice. 

Now the Minister of Justice at any time may choose not to 

answer questions, I indicate in 19(2). But there are serious 

concerns, raises serious concerns when it’s pointed out he 

doesn’t have to answer a question when in fact the question 

being put does fall within the authority . . . If you look at the 

legislation responsible for the Department of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker, and it does clearly state that he is the legal member of 

the Executive Council and has a responsibility for the 

administration of public affairs in accordance with the law, 

which would include those trust funds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in asking those questions, Mr. Speaker, it should be 

appropriate for the Minister of Justice to in fact answer on 

behalf of the Executive Council because he has the duty and 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to oversee the legislation, oversee 

the legal parameters of those trusts, Mr. Speaker, and to ensure 

that those trusts are upheld within the manner of the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact as indicated in the judgment by Justice 

Kyle as I had quoted earlier, it talked about, and I’m quoting 

exactly: 

 

. . . the plaintiff said [that] the specific persons involved 

are Brad Wall, Doug Emsley, Ken Krawetz, Reg Downs 

and caucus members who discussed the withholding of the 

Progressive Conservative trust money. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s talking about the trust money, and that 

trust falls within the purview and responsibility of the Minister 

of Justice in the province of Saskatchewan. He controls the 

legislation and oversees those trusts and has a responsibility to 

maintain the integrity of those trusts under the rule of law in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like you to review carefully the 

responsibilities of the Minister of Justice in regards to trusts 

which fall within the law and under legislation of this province 

regarding those trusts and to determine whether or not it would 

have been appropriate or should be appropriate for the Minister 

of Justice to answer those questions. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

On the point of order raised by the member opposite, I’m not 

sure where my learned friend attended law school, Mr. Speaker, 

but I have a feeling he probably didn’t do very well if he did. 

Mr. Speaker, as a principle of law and as a principle of how this 

institution works, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is not 

responsible for commenting on . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition 

leader, come to order and allow the member to at least respond 

to the point of order in the same manner that the government 

members allowed the Opposition House Leader to place his 

point of order. I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well I thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As I was attempting to indicate, the Minister of Justice 

has no responsibility to be commenting on every court decision 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4773 

made in the courts of this province, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

assertion by . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I think the assertion by members 

opposite that the Minister of Justice has a responsibility to be 

commenting on court decisions and matters that are still before 

the courts, Mr. Speaker, shows a fundamental lack of 

understanding as to how this institution works and as to how the 

court system works, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Justice does 

not have that responsibility, and frankly it would be very 

inappropriate for the Minister of Justice to be commenting on 

matters that are before the courts in this legislature. And I think 

the arguments put forward by the members opposite are 

ludicrous. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I have listened to the point of 

order. I’ve listened to the response to the point of order. I have 

already determined in my own mind that I am going to take a 

look and review the whole process even before we got to the 

point of order to ensure that the rules are being appropriately 

and fairly applied and I will do so. I recognize the member from 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

where our friend opposite learned his arrogance, Mr. Speaker. I 

know he’s asking where somebody learned their law, but I 

wonder where that arrogance was learned, Mr. Speaker. And I 

don’t know . . . friendship, maybe at his . . . maybe in his time 

in schooling. But anyways, Mr. Speaker, I won’t focus on the 

heavy atmosphere of arrogance coming from the member 

opposite, I’ll focus on the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just ask the member to 

move directly to the debate on 119. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the kind of arrogance 

that we recognize when we see a government that is not willing 

to consult on pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, time and time 

again. It’s that kind of arrogance that we see that derived Bill 

No. 119 and it’s that kind of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that put 

forward a Bill that has consequences, Mr. Speaker, for 

Saskatchewan businesses that aren’t appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s that kind of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that is allowing this 

government to go out and to shake their pompoms and fail 

Saskatchewan people on the important issues of health care, 

cost of living, financial mismanagements within Saskatchewan 

that are affecting people’s lives and communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s that kind of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that allows day after 

day for ministers opposite to not answer questions or be 

accountable to the public of Saskatchewan who ask those 

ministers questions, Mr. Speaker. I suspect it’s that kind of 

arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that allows this government to go about 

deriving legislation, as it relates to agriculture or First Nations 

and Métis or trappers or finances, without any consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, to the detriment of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that it’s that kind of arrogance, Mr. 

Speaker, that allows even when they do consult — such as in 

the case of the releasing of their new changes to release private 

information, health information to health foundations — that 

they actually reject the wise, independent counsel of the Privacy 

Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. So I suspect that it’s that kind of 

rich and thick arrogance that comes from the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s much to do with their failures, Mr. Speaker. 

Much to do with their broken promises. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And I should note it’s probably that kind of arrogance, Mr. 

Speaker, that allows the very minister opposite that stands there 

in his tiny Tory arrogance, Mr. Speaker, and to purport himself 

as something that he’s not in big ways, Mr. Speaker, and then to 

sign agreements with municipalities and then to go back in front 

of those very municipalities, Mr. Speaker, to show them just 

how meaningless, just how meaningless the Sask Party 

signature is on documents, Mr. Speaker. I suspect it’s that kind 

of arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that’s causing the Sask Party all 

sorts of challenges. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the specific focus is right 

now. The focus of this legislature needs to be focused primarily 

on health care and the failures of the Sask Party on that front. It 

needs to be focused on cost of living and the financial 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, that is going to cost generations 

to come with the kind of continued trend that we see from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we not only see arrogance but we see a failure to consult that 

I believe is representative of their arrogance, Mr. Speaker. And 

we see them putting forward ill-derived legislation that has 

consequences, Mr. Speaker, that are negative for Saskatchewan 

people and that do not fulfill the objective that they set out to 

do. Now we support the principle of this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. But the point is they’ve put forward legislation that is 

not practical, that does not actually fulfill that. And that’s an 

embarrassment for a government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Saskatchewan New Democrats have been and will 

continue to consult with Saskatchewan people, the stakeholders 

affected by this legislation, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to 

urge, continue to urge this government to put forward the kind 

of changes as it relates to amendments to make this legislation 

work, Mr. Speaker. Because we certainly believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that Saskatchewan consumers should not be exploited, Mr. 

Speaker, should not be exploited in the purchase of their 

entertainment. 

 

But we need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that at the same time 

we’re not hampering our community sports, our community 

events, and our local activities. We need to make sure that the 

rodeos across this province that many of the preparations are 

under way for — many meetings right now planning those very 

fine events — we need to make sure that we’re not in the way, 

making a practice that has been important and has been custom, 

to make that impractical and no longer possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

We need to make sure that the Sask Party can pull their head 

out of the clouds of arrogance that crowds their cabinet table, 

Mr. Speaker, and that they can listen to Saskatchewan people, 

communities, and businesses to make sure they understand how 

pieces of legislation affect them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 119, we support the principle of this legislation. Mr. 

Speaker, what we don’t support is its ill-derived nature, the way 

that it arrived at this legislative building without any 

consultation and the fact that it contains aspects that are 

negative to Saskatchewan people. We need to make sure we 

fulfill the objective of this legislation. And that’s where the 

New Democrats are going to stand up for Saskatchewan people, 

Saskatchewan businesses, and make sure we get this legislation 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take up any more time in this 

Chamber right now because we need to drill down on the 

important aspects of the failure of the Sask Party on health care, 

on cost of living, on financial mismanagement. And we’ll 

continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. So at this point in time, with 

much more consultation to do and many more questions to 

occur, we’ll conduct that at the committee level, and at this 

point in time I’d like to refer Bill No. 119, an Act respecting the 

sale of tickets, to committee, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the Bill 

. . . The motion brought before the Assembly by the Minister of 

Justice, that Bill No. 119, The Ticket Sales Act, be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 119, The 

Ticket Sales Act, be referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 135 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 135 — The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to join into the discussion on Bill 135, An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act, Mr. Speaker, legislation 

that’s been brought forward into this Assembly for our 

consideration. 

 

The Bill No. 135 is An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs 

Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear as we as elected officials are 

out in the community visiting people in the province, among the 

issues that are always brought up for discussion, among the 

issues that are so often in question period, are issues to do with 

health care, issues to do with services that are available to 

Saskatchewan people from a variety of health care providers. 

 

And here in Saskatchewan we have a very rich and proud 

history of the development of medicare in North America and 

the provision of health care services. And for many years, for 

many decades the people of Saskatchewan have been known as 

a group of people who look for innovative and positive ways to 

truly benefit and serve the health needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And this is done through a variety of health care providers. I 

think maybe once upon a time in strictly . . . I won’t say once 

upon a time. But traditionally when people thought of health 

care, they only thought of physicians and . . . or thought of 

physicians as paramount. And most certainly physicians have a 

truly vital, important, and central role to the delivery of health 

care. 

 

But as our health care system has evolved and developed over 

the years, a variety of other health care providers have also 

gained prominence and serve a very important role in our health 

care system. So whether we’re thinking of, in this piece of 

legislation that’s dealing with pharmacists, whether that’s the 

group of health care providers, whether it’s other individuals 

like occupational therapists, physiotherapists, speech language 

pathologists, lab techs, people working the facilities in health 

regions, whether that’s in roles of security or as maintenance, 

whether that’s various types of nursing, whether that’s in a RN 

[Registered Nurse] capacity or LPN [licensed practical nurse], 

whether it’s someone who’s a care aide, it’s clear that a 

well-functioning health care system depends on a wide variety 

of people all working together, working towards a common 

goal of serving the health care needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So it’s a good opportunity when we as elected officials have the 

chance to look at a piece of legislation that can serve a positive 

role in improving the health care of Saskatchewan people as its 

goal and as the objective of the piece of legislation. 

 

And when we’re looking today at Bill No. 135, An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act, this is a piece of legislation 

that was brought forward by the Minister of Health to the 

Assembly to address some of the changes that he sees fit in 

order to enhance the quality of health care in the province by 

increasing the safety and some of the regulations and controls 

about the dispensing of medication. 

 

I would like to state off the top that the role of pharmacists is 

very important in our health care system. We’ve seen in opinion 

polls done by various health professionals that pharmacists are 

ranked very, very high in the level of trust that people place in 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4775 

them, in the respect they have for pharmacists, and the 

relationship between the pharmacist and the patient. 

 

While it is not designed to replace the relationship with a family 

physician or another physician in a different specialty, it’s clear 

that many people in the province have a very important and 

close relationship with their pharmacist. And physicians would 

recognize that the co-operation and the respect that the 

pharmacy profession has with that of medicine is a strong 

foundation of a relationship and one that is based on mutual 

respect and mutual co-operation and sharing a mutual goal of 

improving the health care of their patients. 

 

And I think that’s a very important point to make off the top, 

that through the professional code of conduct that pharmacists 

have, that physicians have, that other health care providers 

have, it’s important to note that a primary goal is improving the 

health of their patients, improving the services that are 

provided, and doing so in an ethical, responsible, and 

well-thought-out manner. 

 

And I want to give a huge amount of credit to all the 

pharmacists practising in the province in a variety of 

communities — some large communities, some small 

communities — and in a variety of settings. Sometimes it’s a 

small-town pharmacy that’s providing a wide array of services. 

Sometimes it’s a pharmacy that only deals in the dispensing of 

medication and other over-the-counter medications available. 

Sometimes the pharmacy is placed within a larger store or 

business, whether that’s a grocery store or a large 

convenience-type store. 

 

There’s a variety of venues that a pharmacist will practise, but 

whatever the venue, it’s clear that the commitment of 

pharmacists as a profession to the well-being and the safety and 

the health of their patients is not in question. I think all 

members would agree with that and all members would thank 

the role of pharmacists in the province in leading a number of 

health initiatives, a number of projects to enhance the quality of 

care of individuals receiving medicine and prescriptions 

through their role as pharmacist. 

 

The issue that is being brought forward in Bill No. 135 — I had 

a chance, Mr. Speaker, to read the introductory remarks by the 

Minister of Health — and it has to do with the reporting 

mechanism that is in place for the dispensing of codeine tablets. 

And it’s a practice, as I understand in reading some of the 

background on this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that pharmacists 

are able to dispense a certain number of codeine tablets to 

patients, individuals requesting this, but that there hasn’t been a 

reporting mechanism in place through a central electronic 

source that allows that information to be shared between 

locations, to ensure that there is not an inappropriate accessing 

of the drug that’s being considered. 

 

So what this piece of legislation is setting out to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is to allow that information to be plugged into the PIP, 

which is the pharmaceutical information program. 

 

When we’re looking at health care, Mr. Speaker, when we’re 

looking at health care and looking at the delivery of health care 

services to individuals, a topic of great concern for patients and 

people in the province are electronic medical records. And this 

is something that various health care professionals and people 

working within the health regions in our province have 

supported. 

 

Electronic medical records hold a great deal of potential for 

gaining efficiencies in how health care is provided, for 

increasing the quality and increasing the safety for patients. 

Because it allows an individual electronic medical record that is 

being housed, for example, in a physician’s office in a practice 

that may be anywhere in the province, allowing that electronic 

medical record to be plugged in to the electronic health record, 

the larger document that can be viewed and shared through 

various facilities throughout the province. 

 

So that if an individual is visiting a different town or a different 

city and they come into a medical problem of some sort and 

show up in an emergency room, the idea as I understand it, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the health care professionals in that emergency 

room could access the electronic health record to see what 

information is available on this patient. For example if there 

were considerations about certain drugs being given to the 

patient and there were allergies or complications, a history of 

allergies or complications. And if the patient was not able to 

speak for him or herself in the emergency room, the health care 

professionals in that setting would be able to access the 

information and ensure that good, quality care is provided. 

 

And that’s the idea, as I understand it at least. I don’t pretend to 

be an expert on electronic health records or medical records. 

But I think most people in Saskatchewan would see the merit in 

principle in that type of approach and how health care can be 

enhanced, improved, made more safe through that kind of 

record and through the PIP, the pharmaceutical information 

program. If there is a similar ability for sharing that type of 

information between locations to ensure that individuals are not 

accessing more drugs than they are supposed to through the 

pharmacy, then in principle, efforts that are made, efforts that 

are made to make the system more safe enhance the quality of 

health care for patients. I think most people in this Assembly 

would agree that that is a positive thing. 

 

And I can see the need for this type of situation, Mr. Speaker. In 

many of our communities throughout the province, there are 

individuals who struggle with addictions and have various 

challenges and demons that they’re facing. And I don’t also 

pretend to be an expert on addictions or on that issue, but I do 

know through talking to constituents and talking to agencies 

that are operating in my constituency and in my city of 

Saskatoon, that it is certainly a concern when there are instances 

where individuals are going, for example, going to a number of 

pharmacies and accessing medication or drugs, tablets, in ways 

that they shouldn’t be. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest on his feet? 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Northwest has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 



4776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 

Mr. Speaker, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Paul Merriman, the 

CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon Food Bank. I’ve 

had the privilege to work with Paul, serving Christmas dinners 

down in the food bank. His father is a good friend of mine, Mr. 

Ted Merriman, who I replaced as an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] — attempting to, anyhow. And I would 

like to welcome him here today to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join the members opposite to welcome Paul Merriman from the 

Saskatoon Food Bank. I’ve had the opportunity to work with 

Paul, as well, and his staff. The food bank is in my riding, and 

so we get the opportunity to meet and talk about issues that face 

vulnerable citizens in our community. 

 

And I want to welcome Paul to our legislature, to his 

legislature. I know he’s deeply committed to making a 

difference to people in our city of Saskatoon and our province. 

So I ask all to join in welcoming him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Always a pleasure to 

have guests in the Assembly, and it’s always great that 

members are able to introduce. 

 

Bill 135, An Act to amend the Prescription Drugs Act, as I was 

stating in my opening comments, Mr. Speaker, address changes 

put forward by the minister to how the dispensing of medication 

is recorded and how that information is shared among 

pharmacists in our province. 

 

It was interesting. I was making some comments about having 

limited familiarity or exposure to this issue as an MLA for 

Saskatoon Massey Place and in Saskatoon through exposure to 

constituents and groups working in my constituency and in the 

city. It was interesting. It leads me to think about the experience 

that we saw in question period, Mr. Speaker, where my 

seatmate, the member from Cumberland, was raising issues 

about his constituency, issues that I would suggest he’s quite 

familiar with given that he’s the MLA for the area, given that he 

lives in the community of La Ronge, given that he’s travelled 

extensively throughout northern Saskatchewan as a board 

member of the school boards, as a very active and proud Métis 

man, and active in the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

For the minister to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 

Cumberland has not travelled to the communities where 

trappers might be living is quite comical, especially coming 

from the minister, Mr. Speaker, who represents Regina South, 

the capital city of our province in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

It was as though, Mr. Speaker, the minister was being tutored 

by his seatmates, other cabinet colleagues, some from rural 

Saskatchewan. And I think the advice would be something 

along the lines, well if you’re having trouble in question period, 

just say, you’re not from rural Saskatchewan. You’re not from 

the area. You can’t know what you’re talking about. Well that 

was the mantra. But when the member is actually from 

Cumberland, when the member is actually from the 

constituency that’s being discussed, I think there’s a bit of a 

problem there in the approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in looking at Bill No. 135, in addressing the role 

of the pharmaceutical information program and the changes that 

are being proposed by the government . . . You see, Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite, they have this problem where 

instead of recognizing that they’ve made an error, instead of 

recognizing there’s a weakness in a certain area, we have the 

member from Wood River, Mr. Speaker, yelling from his seat, 

taking on an opposition member for doing his job, for standing 

up for the constituents in his constituency, standing up for the 

individuals that have concerns with the hurtful cuts that they’re 

experiencing from the Sask Party government. So for members 

opposite to have a problem with that is shocking to all people in 

the province, especially the good people in the constituency of 

Cumberland. 

 

In looking at . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member’s 

anxious for me to get back to Bill 135, Mr. Speaker, and 

nothing has more relevance to 135 than the approach of the 

Sask Party government and how they treat the people of 

Saskatchewan. My colleague from Regina Rosemont clearly 

stated how we’ve seen a consistent approach of arrogance in 

how the government, Sask Party government, has handled 

constituents, handled concerns of Saskatchewan people. 

Whether that’s health care, whether that’s their horrible 

management of the provincial resources and finances, we’ve 

seen the arrogance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve also seen a weakness when it comes to the area of 

consultation. And I know when bringing forward legislation 

like Bill 135, The Prescription Drugs Act, it’s necessary when 

bringing forward this type of legislation that has such a great 

effect on how a profession operates within the province, it’s 

important to get it right and ensure that the appropriate 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4777 

consultation has occurred. 

 

And it is my sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, that in this case, in 

addressing Bill No. 135, that proper consultation has taken 

place. Because we’ve seen a number of very troubling instances 

in dealing with health care providers in the province, such as 

pharmacists, where the consultation has been so horribly 

lacking, the consultation has been inadequate, or the 

consultation has been late. It’s been after a decision has been 

made or a decision has been advertised in the broader public. 

 

One example, Mr. Speaker — and I would imagine if I was a 

pharmacist working in Saskatchewan, I would be concerned 

about this — is how the province has so recently treated 

chiropractors. How the province took the time, stated that they 

were bargaining, negotiating in good faith, coming to an 

agreement on how chiropractic services would be covered by 

the province and chiropractic care would be delivered to 

Saskatchewan people. They went through negotiations telling 

the chiropractors, the professional association representing 

chiropractors working in the province that they were bargaining 

and negotiating in good faith. 

 

What did we see, Mr. Speaker, when it came time to actually 

carry through on their public commitment to negotiate in good 

faith and come to an arrangement? What did we see? Well we 

saw the minister going AWOL [absent without leave]. We saw 

the minister not showing up, not signing the deal, and instead, 

instead being secretive and not clearly stating to the 

Saskatchewan people what their intention is around the issue of 

chiropractic care. So I know if we’ve seen that kind of 

interaction, that kind of disrespect, Mr. Speaker, to a group of 

health care professionals here in the province, I can only 

imagine, Mr. Speaker, the worry that this causes for other health 

care providers in the province. 

 

So the examples are many, whether it’s physicians, whether it’s 

the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] negotiating an 

agreement for physicians here in the province. 

 

Today in question period, we had some very interesting 

discussions, some very important and timely questions poised to 

the Minister of Health about the provision of transplant services 

for individuals needing a kidney transplant. And so there’s 

physicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if the government can’t live through . . . if the government 

can’t be believed when it comes to what they state around the 

area of negotiations for chiropractors, why should their word be 

believed when it comes to nurses bargaining or any other 

profession in Saskatchewan outside of health care? Why should 

teachers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, enter into negotiations 

in good faith with this government when it so easily and so 

willingly breaks the trust with those organizations? And to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a question . . . I know it’s a question that 

many professional organizations are worried about. 

 

In my introductory comments, Mr. Speaker, I talked about how 

health care is provided in Saskatchewan through a team 

approach. And it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan’s 

health care system many individuals are involved and required 

to deliver services. We’ve seen on this issue of weak 

consultation and not being able to trust the statements that are 

made by government when it comes to negotiations, based on 

the way they so poorly treated the chiropractors in the last 

couple of months, we can think of many other organizations of 

working men and women here in the province that have such an 

important role to the health care system. We can think of the 

absence of consultation that occurred on Bills 5 and 6, Mr. 

Speaker, how consultation did not occur in any way with the 

organizations. 

 

In fact another very clear example of breaking the trust with the 

Saskatchewan people was when the Premier before the election 

spoke about the nature of Bill 5 and about it not being required. 

But then sure enough, as soon as they’re elected, it’s very soon 

introduced, weeks after coming into office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s clear when we’re looking to the interaction of the Sask 

Party government with health care providers in Saskatchewan 

— whether that’s chiropractors, whether that’s physicians, 

whether that’s nurses, whether that’s any of the other members 

of the Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan, or SEIU 

or CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] or SEIU — 

when this government states things about negotiations, when 

this government states that it is being open and transparent with 

the people of Saskatchewan, in my opinion, based on the 

horrible track record we’ve seen with the way they’ve so poorly 

treated the chiropractors in this province, I think I would have 

some serious concerns if I was a member of that organization, if 

I was a professional working in any of those areas. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if I was a teacher, I would have many of the same 

concerns. 

 

We’ve seen it through the budget trickery in many areas with 

the changing of accounting practices midstream in the term, 

how funds needed for the wage settlements with various groups 

have not been included in the budget. Another example, Mr. 

Speaker, where the government, the Sask Party government, is 

not being upfront, open, clear, and transparent with the people 

of Saskatchewan, with the people delivering health care 

services, and I know that is a concern for many, many people. 

 

We also have the concern, Mr. Speaker, with the changes 

brought forward in Bill 135. If information is being obtained, 

information is being obtained and recorded electronically and 

then shared with other pharmacies as it would suggest in this 

piece of legislation, it very soon . . . I think the conversation 

turns to one about a concern of privacy. And based on my 

earlier comments where I stated I support the principle of 

electronic medical records and how that can increase safety and 

the quality of service given to individuals in the province, I see 

the merit in that. And in my initial reading and understanding of 

Bill 135, I see the merit in pharmacists recording the 

information of what amount of drugs they are dispensing to 

whom and the location. I see why it’s important for that to be 

shared in various locations. 

 

But whenever we are recording information as suggested in this 

legislation, especially in the issue of health care, it’s also very 

important to ensure that we have a full discussion about the 

privacy needs of Saskatchewan people. I think probably all 

members in this Assembly can think of experiences we’ve had 

in our constituency offices where individuals who’ve accessed 

health care services have come into our offices, and they’ve had 

a concern about privacy and about the sharing of information. 



4778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

I know I’ve had a number of discussions in my short time as an 

MLA representing the people of Saskatoon Massey Place. So I 

know the protection of privacy, the protection of information is 

certainly an important one for Saskatchewan people. And it’s 

for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that we have HIPA [The Health 

Information Protection Act], health information legislation that 

ensures the protection of health information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The concern I have, Mr. Speaker, on this issue of privacy and 

the protection of information . . . Once again I gave an example 

from question period with the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations, how there were some serious shortcomings in 

his answers to questions raised by the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

But the issue when it comes to privacy, I would take us back to 

question period a couple of days ago where the official 

opposition was bringing forward questions about recent changes 

that had been discussed in the media about the sharing of 

patients’ personal information who have visited hospitals, who 

have received medical services, and the availability, the 

accessibility to that information by hospital foundations. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And one of the very important questions that was raised by, I 

believe the critic was asking the questions on that, one of the 

very important questions was, what consultation has occurred 

with the Privacy Commissioner? What has the Privacy 

Commissioner said about the sharing of this type of 

information? And the answers, Mr. Speaker, to that question 

were less than clear. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the approach that we’ve seen by this 

Sask Party government to dealing with concerns of the 

protection of privacy, especially sensitive information like 

health information, the approach that we’ve seen by the Sask 

Party government is one that I don’t think allows Saskatchewan 

people to feel safe and secure when they’re sharing information 

with individuals in the health care system. 

 

And we’ve seen this, Mr. Speaker, by the Sask Party 

government’s willingness to plow ahead with changes despite 

the outcry we’ve heard from Saskatchewan people about the 

concerns around privacy, despite some of the warnings and 

concerns that have been voiced by the Privacy Commissioner. 

And when we see that flagrant disrespect — similar to the 

disrespect that we saw with how the Sask Party government 

treated chiropractors, similar to the disrespect we’ve seen the 

Sask Party demonstrate with health care providers belonging to 

CUPE, SEIU, and SGEU — when we see this approach of it’s 

my way or the highway, my approach of full steam ahead, my 

approach, one that can be characterized by arrogance as so 

appropriately stated by the member from Rosemont, when we 

see that approach on so many issues and then when we look at 

this issue of sharing information about patients accessing drug 

services in Bill No. 135, I know many Saskatchewan people are 

worried about the government’s statements that they will in fact 

take the privacy of information seriously, statements that they 

will safeguard the health information of Saskatchewan people.  

 

Because the evidence that we’ve seen just very recently, in the 

last week or so, evidence in the news, evidence discussed in 

question period, the sharing of information would not, I know 

does not, sit well with many of my constituents. And I can 

safely assume it doesn’t sit well with many, many people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So when we get into a discussion of HIPA and the Sask Party 

government’s willingness to follow the rules around HIPA, 

based on the approach of disrespect that we’ve seen with many 

health organizations, based on the actions that we’ve seen 

around the sharing of health information, sensitive health 

information about when people are accessing health services 

here in the province, I think there are some major concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I wrap up my comments on Bill No. 135, 

An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act, I want to state, at 

least for myself as an individual, in principle I can see the merit 

in this type of legislation, this type of change because I think it 

does hold the potential, it does hold the possibility of enhancing 

the level of health care provided to Saskatchewan people. It can 

do so by ensuring that we have higher levels of safety for 

individuals accessing drugs. 

 

And I think it has the potential to make positive change because 

it works with the pharmacists of the province, a group of 

individuals who are very committed to the health care of their 

patients, of their clients, a group that has high standards for 

ethical behaviour, high standards for the type of health care 

service that they provide to individuals in their home 

communities. So I know if there are additional tools, if there are 

additional abilities that we can provide to pharmacists in doing 

their work in our community, I see the merit in that, and I think 

that is a good thing. 

 

My concern, Mr. Speaker, is that this is legislation being 

brought forward by the Sask Party government. And I think, 

based on the evidence we’ve seen in recent weeks, when the 

Sask Party government says something, I don’t think we can put 

a lot of trust in those words. I think there are many, many 

examples where the Sask Party has said one thing and done 

another. 

 

The examples that I provided in this speech, Mr. Speaker, were 

around the negotiations that occurred with chiropractors in the 

province — how chiropractors negotiated in good faith, how 

chiropractors came to the table, how they heard from the 

minister that officials were there to bargain in good faith, that 

they were there to work on a deal — chiropractors that spent a 

great amount of time discussing the deal, discussing what the 

provision of their services might look like in Saskatchewan, 

who negotiated in good faith only to have the Sask Party walk 

away from the agreement once all the hard work was done. 

 

And they did that, Mr. Speaker, because of the hurtful cuts that 

they had to make throughout the province based on their own 

inability to manage the provincial chequebook, their own 

inability to manage the provincial finances, their own inability 

to manage a surplus of billions of dollars and somehow to take 

us to a deficit of over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think whenever we’re looking at any piece of legislation, 

whether it’s a very large, far-reaching piece of legislation with 

huge implications for Saskatchewan people or whether it’s 

more of a focused piece of legislation addressing issues more of 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4779 

a housekeeping nature, addressing issues of a smaller focus, we 

need to always look through it, Mr. Speaker, through the lens of 

a Sask Party government that says one thing and does another, a 

Sask Party government that said they could be trusted to 

manage the provincial finances. 

 

Well we’ve seen the complete opposite. We’ve seen pie in the 

sky fantasyland budget projections. And then we’ve seen, Mr. 

Speaker, trickery when it comes to the accounting practices in 

the province. We’ve seen trickery when it comes to the 

reporting of debt. We’ve seen trickery, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the reporting of projected expenditures to do with 

wage settlements for health care workers, for teachers. 

 

So when we have that track record, Mr. Speaker, of saying one 

thing, doing another, when we have that track record of taking a 

surplus of billions of dollars and taking us to the situation we’re 

in a deficit and because of that deficit that’s been created by the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, having to make hurtful 

cuts through a number of areas, that colours and that influences 

every piece of legislation. That colours and that influences 

every area where the Sask Party government is bringing in 

decisions that affect Saskatchewan people. 

 

Another perfect example that we saw yesterday in question 

period was the issue of Dutch elm disease. And we saw, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party government because of their own 

inability to manage the budget, their own inability to manage 

the huge surplus that they inherited, their own inability to be 

good stewards of the financial resources had to engage in a 

series of hurtful cuts, short-sighted cuts. And no better example, 

Mr. Speaker, of a short-sighted cut than the cutting of funding 

for Dutch elm disease. 

 

Well now individuals may say well what’s the big deal? It’s 

half a million dollars for cutting down diseased trees. How is 

that a big deal? Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest in 

communities like Regina South and communities like my 

community, the neighbourhood I live in, Caswell in Saskatoon, 

people care about trees. People in urban centres care about 

trees. And so, Mr. Speaker, the urban forest to Saskatchewan 

people is very important. 

 

So whenever we’re looking at any piece of legislation, whether 

it’s Bill 135 . . . And some people might say well that’s just one 

type of drug, and it’s one small group in society, and it’s just 

one profession, and it’s just one aspect of the health care 

system. Well, Mr. Speaker, those types of excuses, that type of 

rationale doesn’t cut it. It doesn’t hold water with Saskatchewan 

people because they know that the hurtful cuts will be 

experienced, Mr. Speaker, very often at the local level in small 

ways, very often at the local level in small ways. 

 

So when I look at Bill 135, I ask myself — based on the 

incompetence that we’ve seen from the Sask Party government, 

based on their inability to take a surplus of billions of dollars 

and manage it responsibly, based on their inability to do what is 

best for Saskatchewan people — why should Saskatchewan 

people trust them on Bill 135, An Act to amend The 

Prescription Drugs Act? When we’ve seen them go wrong in so 

many areas in the area of health care — whether that’s 

consultation with health care workers, whether that’s 

consultation with chiropractors, whether it’s other services in 

the community, Mr. Speaker, like the killing of the program that 

provides CVAs [central vehicle agency], government vehicles 

to community agencies, agencies that provide services to 

women who are victims of domestic abuse — when we see 

those types of cuts going on, when we see cuts to programs that 

fight Dutch elm disease in our cities, in our towns, in our RMs 

[rural municipality], when we see those types of short-sighted, 

hurtful cuts, why, Mr. Speaker, why would Saskatchewan 

people have any confidence that the changes brought forward in 

Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs Act, would be in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will provide a caveat to those comments. 

And, as I stated earlier, when looking at Bill 135, in principle I 

see the merit of this legislation, and I support this legislation. 

And if this legislation, Mr. Speaker, has gone through the 

proper consultation with pharmacists, with other health care 

providers in the province, with other groups that have a vested 

interest and a stake and a role in the daily delivery of the health 

care services talked about in Bill 135, if that proper consultation 

has occurred, it’s possible that the good advice provided by all 

those organizations, that good advice has been provided by the 

people that are on the front lines delivering medications 

involved with individuals in the community, it’s possible that 

the information received from those groups would be able to 

make the legislation proposed in Bill 135 good legislation and 

sound legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think it would be in spite of the Sask Party’s ability to 

actually bring forward this legislation in any sort of responsible, 

well-thought-out manner because, based on the track record that 

we’ve seen from the Sask Party government when it comes to 

dealing with health care groups in the province, when it comes 

to dealing with communities — whether the issue is one of 

health care or whether it’s one of municipal needs, whether it’s 

the issue of chiropractic care for the person who has injured 

their back on a workplace, whether it is the issue of educational 

assistants, Mr. Speaker, and the many, many families that rely 

on educational assistants to provide services to their children, 

Mr. Speaker, whatever the issue is — we’ve seen short-sighted, 

poorly thought-out cuts. 

 

And it’s all been because of, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s 

inability to take a surplus of billions of dollars and manage it 

responsibly. Instead we’ve seen a horrible, horrible example of 

financial stewardship. Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen pie-in-the-sky, 

fantasyland budget projections suggesting we would get $3 

billion, $3 billion in potash revenue from the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

And then this year, Mr. Speaker, compounding the damage 

done by the horrible ability to project revenue in the budget, 

we’ve seen financial trickery when it comes to the issue of 

accounting in an open, transparent, and clear way. It’s always 

puzzling, Mr. Speaker. Why would the Sask Party government 

choose at this time to change the accounting practices, to 

change the way that accounting occurs within the province’s 

finances? Why would they do that mid-term, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well to me, it would suggest that they are trying to hide 

something from Saskatchewan people. The member from 

Spiritwood suggests that they’re trying to improve the situation. 

Mr. Speaker, the only thing, the only thing they are trying to 



4780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

improve is the perception by Saskatchewan people that they are 

not completely incompetent in managing the finances of the 

province. And the only way they’re doing that, Mr. Speaker, is 

through financial trickery. It’s through changing the rules 

halfway through a term, an election term, through changing the 

way that they operate business. 

 

So when we see that approach, we see that track record in the 

area of our finances, why should we have confidence? Why 

should we trust the government on a Bill like 135 — a Bill that 

affects the health care of Saskatchewan people, a Bill that 

speaks to the concerns that many people in Saskatchewan here 

hold so near and dear to their hearts? 

 

So it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that proper 

consultation has occurred on this Bill because on so many other 

Bills, on so many issues here in the province, we’ve seen a 

complete absence of consultation. We’ve seen consultation that 

has not existed. We’ve seen consultation that has been done 

after the fact. We’ve seen consultation after it’s been advertised 

through the media that a change is occurring. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people expect more, and they deserve better than 

that type of consultation. 

 

So it’s my hope on Bill 135, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has 

engaged in the proper consultation. And I think if that proper 

consultation has occurred, I can be confident. If the proper 

consultation has occurred, if it’s been listened to, and if it’s 

been responded to appropriately, that many of the changes 

brought forward in Bill 135 could enhance the health care 

system here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, but, Mr. Speaker, if the approach of the Sask Party 

government and of the minister has been one that we’ve seen so 

far on the issue of financial stewardship, on the issue of health 

care services, on the issue of health care negotiations with 

health care providers, on the issues of environment, on the 

issues of things that affect us at the RM and local level like 

Dutch elm disease, that the consultation has been non-existent. 

 

If the approach of members opposite is that of the Minister of 

First Nations and Métis Relations where he says, oh well 

you’ve never been to that community so you can’t have a clue 

what you’re talking about . . . ignoring the fact that the person 

asking the question is actually from that community, actually 

has been to those communities, actually speaks to the trappers 

and the people being affected on a daily basis, to use these 

canned answers, Mr. Speaker, it’s typical of the canned 

approach we’ve seen from the Sask Party government when it 

comes to managing the finances and managing the programs 

and the affairs of government. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Whether it’s a large-scale program like the reporting of 

accounting and financial matters of the province or whether it’s 

a more narrow program that might affect pharmacists, might 

affect individuals that love trees, that want to save the elm trees 

in Saskatchewan, we’ve seen time and time again examples 

where this government has failed to consult, failed to listen, and 

has instead simply worked to cover their tracks — their tracks 

of fiscal incompetence, their tracks of an absence of 

consultation, and their track record of complete inability to 

manage the province’s finances. And because of that, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think that’s a track record that can be trusted. 

And when we look at every piece of legislation, I think we need 

to remember that larger picture. This is coming from a 

government who has said one thing and done another. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many other of my colleagues 

want to speak on Bill 135 and share their experience that 

they’ve had in talking with community groups about this piece 

of legislation, sharing their experience about how they’ve heard 

from Saskatchewan people that this is a Sask Party government 

whose record can’t be trusted because they’ve said one thing 

and done another, because they’ve taken the province from 

having billions in surplus to over $1 billion deficit, and because 

they are now engaged in a series of hurtful cuts. We have to 

remember that when we’re looking at every piece of legislation, 

especially pieces of legislation like Bill 135. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks, and I 

would move that we adjourn debate on this piece of legislation. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 135, The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 
Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is an honour again to stand in the House, the legislature, and 

join in the debate. It’s always interesting to hear people’s 

different points of view, and this is one that I find particularly 

interesting, Bill 103, An Act to amend certain Statutes with 

respect to matters concerning Professional Discipline. 

 

And as a teacher I read this with interest, and I do have some 

comments to make. I think that it’s important. And also one as a 

critic for Social Services, I have some comments to make in 

regard to that because I see The Social Workers Act is part of 

this. But I see that the teachers’ Act, the STF [Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation] Act is not. 

 

But I understand that the minister, in his comments introducing 

this, talked about that there were six professional organizations, 

self-regulating organizations who already have the intentions of 

this Act which really . . . And the intentions really speak to, 

meaning that a person can pursue disciplinary actions against 

someone in a profession even after they resign. And they do 

give a limitation for up to two years after they resign, and this 

seems appropriate and the fact that if they’re moving or if there 

is a concern that they can’t run from it by simply resigning and 

then that’s the end of the story. 

 

So we find this very interesting. We understand this Act affects 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4781 

some 40 self-regulated groups from around the province doing 

very important work here in Saskatchewan and in fact probably 

right across the country, but their home base is here in 

Saskatchewan. And of course we will definitely want to hear 

from these groups. 

 

The member before me spent some time, and I think quite 

rightly, talking about the concerns we have when it comes to 

the consultations, and whether it’s the Dutch elm disease that 

we’ve been hearing about over the last couple of days, or the 

domestic abuse outreach program that was cut in Saskatoon in 

the fall without any consultation from the community groups 

and that was hoisted on another community group. And the 

result of that was a letter from many of the community groups 

saying, hey, what about the consultations? And of course it’s 

somewhat ironic that this was the government that talked a lot 

about its new way of doing things that included consultations. 

And we’ve got many, many examples, and we can go through 

them. 

 

Today we saw a minister in question period who couldn’t even 

mention the word trappers. He did everything he could except 

mention those words, those trappers. I didn’t think that was 

such a hard word to say, but from somebody from the south end 

of Regina maybe they have no idea what it is to be on a trapline. 

And here he is. He’s got this responsibility. I just couldn’t 

fathom his answer. It was tragic; it was something else. 

 

But anyways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government that takes a 

lot of pride — and I think it’s misplaced pride, extremely 

misplaced pride — in their consultation process. When you 

have 40 self-regulated groups from around the province, we 

have some questions about, did they do an appropriate amount 

of consultation? It is something that I do need to . . . And I 

know that we’ll be asking in committee when this gets moved 

to committee that what is their intention? How can we be 

assured that the groups are fully behind this? 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just do want to say that we can 

relate, we can understand, and we think that this is an important 

issue to address, that it can be very frustrating for both the 

person who’s been wronged or the group that’s been wronged, 

but even more than that that the public have confidence in these 

groups that they are doing what they’ve been set up to do. 

 

It’s an important, and it’s a huge responsibility for an 

organization to be set up to be self-regulating. There is a public 

trust that’s put into these organizations that they will look after 

the public interest. They do have a board, a governing board 

that will ensure that this happens. And many of them in fact 

have a public member, a public representative. But if they’re 

stymied by the fact that a person has resigned quickly, abruptly, 

and that’s the end of it, something needs to be done, and surely 

this may be the answer. 

 

So we are thinking that this is important. And we understand 

there are implications that, if this person moves out of province, 

that there’s no record because there’s been no process, no due 

diligence, no process and so there’s no record, and so this 

person can be moving around the country. And it’s hugely 

unfortunate that the public pays yet again for issues that should 

have been looked after in due process, a sufficient disciplinary 

process. And so we think that this would be a good way to work 

through this. And as I say, we are largely in favour of this idea. 

 

And in fact this government did bring this forward earlier, and I 

understand that when the legislation came forward, in many 

ways very similar, but it was focused solely on judges. And 

when we were speaking to it we thought, well that’s an 

interesting thing that you limit it only to judges. Why are you 

limiting to judges when there are many, many self-regulating 

organizations that could benefit from this? 

 

And so when this is taken back, now we see it brought forward 

with 40 of the organizations. And I do want to thank the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin for pointing this out. My 

question though around this though really is when we have, you 

know, there are 40 that we know of that are in this Act, and I 

won’t go through all of them. In fact it’s quite, it’s interesting 

that it has many pages, but really it’s only two or three 

paragraphs for each Act. But they’re repeated throughout, and 

that’s how you do the business. 

 

Are there only 40? Are there more? And I think that would be 

the question we’d have in committee. What is the complete list 

of self-regulating organizations that could have benefited from 

this? Now we know there are six that do have. And I’ve pointed 

out that the one I belong to — the STF, the Teachers’ 

Federation — isn’t part of the 40. Now it may be because they 

do have the power amply to proceed with disciplinary action 

after two years. I don’t know if that’s the case, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We would ask that. 

 

And if there are more than these 46, the 40 that are going to be 

getting the power and the six that already have it, are there 

others out there that have refused it? And why have they 

refused it? And I think we need to know that and get that on 

record. There may only be a handful. There may only be one or 

two. But who are those that are refusing? And why are they 

refusing it? And is it something that we could all benefit from 

because maybe perhaps they are thinking that the legislation is 

flawed? And if it is flawed, then we need to hear from those 

who are refusing to have it incorporated into their mandate or 

their regulations. 

 

So I think this is an incomplete picture. And we also know . . . 

And I see that there has been some questions. For example the 

police aren’t part of this, but I don’t think the police are 

self-regulating. I would imagine that they’re not, but I’m not 

sure. People may think they are. But we have to have that 

questioned too because I think the public may have some ideas 

about which are the professions . . . And it’s interesting as we 

talk about what does it mean to be professional. And I know 

when you’re in undergraduate school, I remember back in my 

days, going through, and I would say teacher training but that’s 

not a very professional way of referring to yourself because 

you’re not trained these days. But we had a lot of discussions 

about what it means to be in a profession, and your 

accountability and the transparency. 

 

Not all of the major occupations that we look towards are 

actually professions. They may be quasi-professions. But I’m 

thinking of the police may be one that straddle that line because 

we do look to police officers to behave and to hold themselves 

in a very professional manner. We often use that kind of 

language. But are they, do they belong to a self-regulating 



4782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

organization? I’m not sure. 

 

And of course we have the trades, and we see this. And I do 

have to make some comments when we have this government’s 

attack on the trades, through Bill 80, that clearly we have some 

questions because here is a way of establishing occupations. 

 

And many people would look at these as professions, whether 

you’re an electrician or a carpenter or a millwright, that you’ve 

actually learned an awful lot and you have huge standards and 

accountability that you have to hold up to because you have 

people’s lives in your hands. And we talked about not only their 

own, not only their workers that they’re working beside, but 

when they complete a project that people will believe that it’s 

built to the standards, the building codes that we all appreciate. 

 

So I think it’s interesting that this would be a question that we 

would have. Who are these groups? What do they make up? 

Because when you’re holding people to account in their work, 

we don’t want to be leaving somebody out and finding out later 

that it wasn’t well thought out. It wasn’t well thought out. And I 

can tell you that this government does have a track record of not 

doing all their homework all the time. 

 

And as I’ve said, this is the second time we’ve revisited this 

Bill. First it came with the judges. Now it’s come back with 40, 

39 more. Are there others that should be included? And we 

don’t know, and we think that’s unfortunate. And so we will be 

asking about these exceptions in committee. 

 

I do want to take a moment though, particularly to talk about 

some of the groups. And I know that one group that’s in here 

that has caught my attention, of course, are the social workers. 

And I find this very interesting. And I think that this is one that 

where we have seen some concerns, some very extremely 

inappropriate activity. And of course some of the social workers 

have been disciplined, whether it’s for things that have 

happened within the department . . . You know, I’m thinking 

particularly of a case of fraud and that person was a member of 

the professional organization and was brought forward that 

way. 

 

But ironically I’ve come to appreciate that many of the people 

who do the work of social work in the Department of Social 

Services are not registered social workers. In fact a very low 

percentage of people in the Ministry of Social Services actually 

belong to their professional organization. 

 

And I was surprised at that, coming from the teaching 

profession where every teacher must belong to the STF. You 

know, you do your training; you’ve got your degree; you get 

your certificate, your professional certificate. All these steps 

happen along the way, and you belong to the STF. That’s just 

the way it is in a public school system. And then to find out that 

the Government of Saskatchewan has a practice of hiring or not 

following that kind of professional standard is kind of shocking 

to me. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And I understand this has gone on for a long time, but I think 

that if we’re doing this kind of thing, let’s do it right. Let’s take 

a look at this. Because I think that a lot of the problems that 

we’re talking about here in terms of why people would be . . . 

And it would create a false expectation in the public that, for 

example, that you might be able to take social workers, hold 

them account through their professional organization, only to 

find out that they don’t belong to their professional organization 

and that they weren’t really doing social work but it sure looked 

like social work. It did everything, you know, it looked like 

social work. It was the kind of thing that the public would 

expect was social work, and you find out, no they don’t have to 

belong to social work. 

 

And in fact I understand — and if I’m wrong I could be 

corrected but I don’t think I am — that in fact there are more 

social workers who are registered with the professional 

organization working for the Ministry of Health than for the 

Ministry of Social Services. I think this is something that needs 

to addressed if we’re talking about accountability. 

 

And we know particularly this ministry is now wrestling with a 

major issue around vulnerable children, foster children. This is 

an important issue and we’re looking forward to seeing the 

work come out of this. 

 

And I do hope, I do hope that they have an opportunity to take a 

look at the professional organizations that should be 

representing those people who are working with our most 

vulnerable, and those are our families and our children. And are 

they belonging to a professional organization? I find it just so 

odd that they don’t have to. 

 

And so here you are creating an expectation by passing a Bill 

that these 40 groups are, will be, if you are a member of these, 

or somebody might think that you’re a member of this group, 

and they find out that you’re not actually a member of the 

group, so it really didn’t matter if you passed this Bill. This is 

really problematic. So we should be looking at these 40 groups 

and saying, are you required to belong to the group, the 

organization, when you do the work? 

 

I think that we create a false hope that there will be more 

accountability in our society. We know teachers are. We know 

that many organizations . . . We know doctors are. We know 

nurses are. But, as I said, Mr. Speaker, I was shocked. I was 

really quite shocked when I found out that social workers don’t. 

 

And I know, I know their professional organization, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers, would really like 

to see this addressed. But it’s a tough one, but it’s one I think 

that this government needs to take head-on because if you’re 

creating this expectation that there will be more discipline, 

more accountability within the professional organizations . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cumberland on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4783 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in your gallery is a 

member from my community, La Ronge. His name is Mark 

Williment. He’s the superintendent of education with Northern 

Lights School Division and he’s here for meetings and I’m 

pleased to see him in the gallery. And I would just like to take 

this minute because La Ronge is such a far northern community 

from our beautiful Regina, the city, I would just like to make 

sure he knows that he is welcome in his legislature and I would 

just like all members to join me in welcoming him to his 

legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — So to continue, and I’ll be wrapping up in just a 

few minutes. But I do want to say that I will be looking for, I 

will be looking for some answers to these questions. And I 

know that, as I said, the question around the social workers is a 

huge one because we are facing an issue, a crisis in our foster 

care system and people are looking for accountability. 

 

And it’s not just about how you mete out punishment. But how 

do you ensure that there is due process when it comes to 

discipline and that it’s not just overlooked? And not only can 

you escape it from when you resign, but you escape it right off 

the bat by not having to join. How does that work? How does it 

work that you’re not required to join? 

 

And so of these 40 organizations, I’d like to know, within the 

province of Saskatchewan, are these folks required to join? And 

I look at someone that the province would hire. And I’m 

thinking about the forestry folks. Are they required to belong to 

them? There’s an example. And many others that you would 

wonder, are they required to belong? Because if you are 

creating the expectation that something can be done, it better be 

done. And it better be looked after from the beginning to the 

end. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think this is important. And as I said, I’ll 

just make sure that the notes are taken well, that I’m curious 

about all the self-regulating groups. We talked about three 

groups. We know that there are 40 in this list. We know that 

there are six that do have them. What about the others? Are 

there others that are refusing to sign on? Why and why not? 

 

You know, we talked many times about unintended 

consequences and this government in many ways have 

demonstrated over and over again. You know, they’re kind of 

blind to unintended consequences, especially when you see the 

kind of work on their budgets. And they go headstrong right 

into it, and we have to be more careful, have to be more careful. 

 

So I think that this is important that we look at this in a very 

careful way, and so we’ll be asking these kind of questions. 

And of course we are, as I said earlier, largely in favour of this 

idea, but we do have some questions. 

 

And I know that many of my colleagues have spoken to this, 

but I think that we are prepared at this moment to move this to 

committee. So I would move that we move Bill 103, An Act to 

amend certain Statutes with respect to matters concerning 

Professional Discipline, to committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 103, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate Bill No. 103, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 124 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 124 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

make a few comments on An Act to amend The Legal 

Profession Act. And, Mr. Speaker, just an overview on this 

piece of legislation, the legislation put forward by the minister 

to address some streamlining and some . . . in terms of the 

sentencing process of serious misconduct of lawyers in the legal 

profession. Mr. Speaker, this deals with the public, in most 

cases, who make the complaints. And the lawyers in those, 

facing those complaints deserve an attempt to have them have 

some certainty and resolution in a timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is good legislation. We see this as a positive step, any time 

we can have public complaints make their way through a 

system in an orderly and streamlined fashion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now also similarly this legislation would allow the Law Society 



4784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

to appeal a finding of the conduct of an investigation 

committee. And that again, Mr. Speaker, along with the timely 

fashion of dealing with these concerns, seems to be a positive 

move. 

 

The thing about this whole exercise though, and in terms of 

where the minister in his opening remarks said that this would 

meet the Law Society’s dues and objectives as they were to 

reflect them clearly in legislation, it is when we get these kind 

of pieces of legislation that we wonder how that government 

can go so off the rails when it comes to other pieces of 

legislation that they attempt to bring forward, be it in the 

environment legislation or in the labour law legislation. It’s 

quite telling in those areas in terms of where you have 

consultation, where you have people expressing needs, and then 

the government moving to try and address those, as opposed to 

where they simply go forward and put in legislation without 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and again legislation, we’ve had many examples 

of legislation or actions by this government of, for example, 

dealing with bodies not unlike the Law Society body. The 

Labour Relations Board, where in that instance the government 

simply fired members of that board and the signal that it sent 

and the criticism that that has drawn now from various parts, 

most notably the ILO [International Labour Organization] 

commenting on that situation, an unfortunate situation that 

causes people to question the objectivity of something as 

important as the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Now again here we have the Law Society putting forward and 

having quite clearly some objectives, and the government 

moving on those and listening to those, Mr. Speaker, and 

saying, you know, we need to change this Act. We need to do 

some things to streamline this to make this more effective, to 

make this work, so quite the situation that we have occurring 

here. On one instance, when it comes to dealing with lawyers, 

we seem to take the approach, much like earlier on today where 

the Deputy House Leader got up and says, I’m a lawyer. He 

said he was a lawyer and that somehow we should do this, that 

because he was a lawyer, we wanted to jump through hoops, 

and that it would be a . . . But maybe that’s what’s telling, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Maybe that’s telling, that that kind of arrogance can exist when 

it comes to dealing with peoples’ issues in the province, as 

opposed to when they come to dealing with something like The 

Legal Profession Amendment Act in Bill 124 where we see that 

government . . . It’s quite telling in terms of what their views 

are, in terms of coming forward and saying, when we deal with 

the working people of this province, we will simply go and tell 

them this is the way it will be, be it in bargaining, sort of a take 

it or leave it.  

 

And when it comes to the legal profession, is it any wonder then 

that the Deputy House Leader would come and make 

comments, and arrogant comments, you know, indicating that 

I’m a lawyer, and somehow that sets him above other people in 

the province. Now I think I would want to remind that member 

that you earn that kind of respect. It’s not automatic that you get 

that. And I’m certain that perhaps over the years he will learn 

that, and that arrogance hopefully will fade, Mr. Speaker, and 

we won’t have to listen to that sort of nonsense in here 

anymore. 

 

So even though we see this and see that the Law Society’s 

concerns hopefully are being addressed, we still have more 

work to do here to consult. But it is at least an appropriate, I 

would say, move. But even though somewhat . . . I guess there’s 

just a little bit of irony here in terms of when we see the way 

some legislation is handled, the way for example we deal with 

the Law Society, or for example as I’d mentioned when we deal 

with the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Now again, in the Labour Relations Board, many times in that 

where the Premier injected himself into that by saying that the 

board shall, you know, certainly follow the Sask Party line, 

follow the Sask Party philosophy. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

concern because we often, most of us wonder what that actually 

means. And to put themselves in such a role to interfere in the 

quasi-judicial boards or in societies that govern themselves and 

set their own standards . . . And should be perceived, because 

it’s important that not only that there’s a perception that there is 

fairness and equality and justice, or that justice is being done, 

but the perception has to be there. So not only that, I guess, that 

it is being done. And when you break that trust, when you break 

that trust with people, they don’t really forget that too soon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a statement in there that the minister made 

and that is that in effect, that the legal profession exists to serve 

the public interest. And no more, Mr. Speaker, could we on this 

side agree with that. And in terms of that, and I think a few of 

that, some of that is coming forward in terms of the rule of law 

that we must, in a democratic society, we must have faith in our 

system. We must have faith that the people who uphold our 

laws are going to uphold them. Otherwise, and it’s a delicate 

balance, and we see many places in the world that in fact that 

doesn’t happen, and we see the outcomes of that with the 

destabilization of governments and people not having their 

rights protected, human rights abuses. 

 

So it is important when people at first would simply say we’re 

in government and we get to, we will do what we want. There is 

more to government than simply doing what we want, Mr. 

Speaker, and I guess that is of concern. And I think we also, 

earlier in the day, witnessed the Health minister as well in 

question period, we were talking about the health care workers 

and the bargaining, and the Health minister entered saying that 

he was not being involved, respecting arm’s length SAHO, but 

then inserting himself and saying that he was, inserting himself 

and saying that in fact that the union should go out and take the 

offer to their members. 

 

Now I don’t know if he knows, in having said that, whether that 

the unions have taken that offer out to the field. I’m not certain 

if he does. But again these are some of the ironies I see in the 

government’s statement that the legal profession is there to 

serve the public interest. And they should not only, I think, be 

telling other people that another . . . someone like the Law 

Society that that is what is happening, but they should 

themselves, that they should themselves live up to that standard 

and live with that, that not only that we as legislators are here to 

serve the public interest. 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4785 

And again I would just say that the Law Society, the Law 

Society operates, is attempting here to operate in an open and 

transparent fashion. And I think that is another thing that I think 

that the members opposite should probably — in putting 

forward and doing legislation like this — that that would be 

something that they would be well served to acknowledge and 

practise. 

 

And so if you have on that, Mr. Speaker, as I was talking about 

the perception of equality before something like the Labour 

Relations Board, the Human Rights Commission, and in fact the 

Law Society being able to deal in an appropriate manner to 

carry out their business, and that is so that the public, the public 

who complains, who has complaints, and the lawyers facing 

those complaints, both parties deserve the certainty and timely 

resolution of their disputes, Mr. Speaker. And that is important. 

So the parties to all boards, all boards that come and where 

people have to appear to argue their disputes, the parties must 

have, must feel that they have a sense of certainty, not only in 

the timely resolutions of their disputes, but they have to have a 

confidence, a perceived confidence that they will be dealt with 

fairly, that they will be dealt with fairly. 

 

So again as I mentioned, the good, admirable qualities of the 

Law Society agree to the open and transparent way in which 

they deal with that. The Law Society posts any findings of 

misconduct on its website, Mr. Speaker. There is all sorts of 

times that they would try and look for a place to be transparent 

because that is important. 

 

And I think it somewhat puts questions into our ability and into 

the things that we have to do as our job, when in fact there is 

any attempt to block information and attempts to not provide 

information. These are not good days when we do that. Now 

again we find this government may talk about transparency for 

other . . . the Law Society or whatever. But it would be, it 

would be, Mr. Speaker, it would be quite the thing if they in 

fact, they practised, they themselves practised the transparency 

as the legal profession, perhaps is that they want the legal 

profession to do. 

 

But again, I think what we see is a government obsessed with 

secrecy, Mr. Speaker, and we notice daily the spin that they 

attempt to put on the difficulties. The obvious, Mr. Speaker, the 

obvious thing is the budget that we had where, quite unlike 

what they are asking of the Law Society to hopefully that 

they’re trying to accomplish, here we have a government that 

goes and spends money, the Sask Party spends money on 

billboards and tells the public that the debt is going down, that 

they have paid down the debt, when we hear daily now in the 

newspapers that the debt is going up, that the . . . I guess this is 

the kind of thing that people wonder as to what would be 

occurring, what is meant by that. 

 

It causes a great deal of confusion when we have those sorts of 

statements and we have Professor Howe from the University of 

Saskatchewan saying that this definitely is a deficit. It puts into 

question the work that we do here. 

 

So I think the intent, the things that I see happening in this Bill 

that they are trying to do to meet the things that the Law 

Society’s objectives, where they clearly have some objectives 

that they want met and wherever there is some work to do, work 

that has been done to do this. And again just to make the . . . to 

streamline, to streamline this process, the sentencing process for 

serious misconduct and again that is a, that is a positive, 

positive step that we have happening here. 

 

So again on one hand we have legislation where the 

government quite . . . It leads us to wonder why it is that they 

would act in this way, why they would say in one hand because 

we’ve got some lawyers and again as the House Leader, the 

assistant House Leader, perhaps a little insight into the thinking 

about why this might be good about having us think that 

somehow because he holds a law degree that that puts him in 

some way different than the rest of the members in this House. 

 

And that’s a sad, it’s a sad day here, Mr. Speaker, because we 

come here from all walks of life. We bring things that are . . . 

Saskatchewan is a diverse province. We bring with that to 

represent our members. We come from . . . That is our 

democracy. To have somebody in here in this place attempt to 

say that somehow they should deserve some extra respect 

because of their profession is a sad day. It’s a sad day for us and 

it’s not the way I would think or see us doing business here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have our differences, as you no doubt daily are 

aware of, but that sort of attitude I don’t think we need in the 

House here. I don’t think it has any positive. I think there are 

different ways to make an argument without somehow 

impugning some lack of knowledge on the other part because of 

whether we hold a law degree or not. I guess that’s something 

that that member, that insight is really, I guess, unfortunate. I 

was going to say disturbing but it’s, I guess, it’s basically 

unfortunate. 

 

Now again and it also comes just as I look back over the last 

session and this session, it’s their reactions in terms of how they 

react to different situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here we have 

the Law Society promoting certain concerns that they have, and 

the government reacting to that, the Sask Party looking at that. 

Yet when we asked questions about an unsafe crane on a 

construction site, what did the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour have to say? Where did you get the 

information? Where did you get the information was the first 

thing they came back. 

 

An unsafe crane on a work site, and the first thing that they 

would be concerned about is not safety of people, but where did 

you get the information. And it was similar with the corrections, 

where we had . . . And that is definitely where there’s an 

offender mistakenly released. And what was that that we went 

through? Numerous things about threats from police. The 

member has made it into the Parliamentary Review — very 

unfortunate. And this is very telling about what we have sitting, 

the arrogance that we have on that side. And that’s just from 

actions, and we haven’t even gotten to the part about the 

arrogance of just the feeling of the right to govern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a sad day in some ways for us all. Every once 

in a while we see this type of legislation which addresses 

concerns and is important. We will still continue to also, as 

well, consult with the legal profession to ensure that these 

changes meet their needs and that they are serving the public. 

Because as soon as you have new legislation, one thing we all 

know for sure, Mr. Speaker, is that no legislation is static, that 



4786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

there are continuously improvements, continuously we strive to 

do better, and it is the way we do that. 

 

So my concerns are still those is that will we see that the 

objectives that on the surface may look to have been met, the 

objectives of streamlining the sentencing process regarding 

serious misconduct. Have they been met or will someone come 

forward with a suggestion without having to question whether 

the other, whether those members . . . And I would imagine that 

the complaints here made or suggestions made by the public, 

which attempts to deal with the public, I am certain that they 

were not met with. 

 

At least for the members of the Law Society who sit there, and 

is not their first thing to say, where did you get your law degree 

from, in a popcorn box or whatever. I wouldn’t think that that 

would be the way they would . . . [inaudible] . . . They would 

probably sit down and listen carefully to the arguments that 

were being made so that they could make necessary changes. 

And I think that would be the appropriate way to deal with that. 

And I can see in some ways that that has been done here other 

than for the unfortunate remark we heard earlier in the day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we have the Law Society needing to find, to appeal the 

finding of conduct investigation in the Court of Appeal. And 

again that the Law Society’s ability to appeal the finding of a 

conduct to the appeal court again seems to be, under the 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, an appropriate move. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill has many changes that we will be going 

through. There is also the issue of trust accounts and in closing 

down trust accounts, some of the rules that will need to be 

looked at. And there are some amendments. We’ll still be 

having questions around that. 

 

Another interesting section, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 35.1. 

Again: 

 

“Conduct investigation committee 

35.1(1) The conduct investigation committee [and this is 

the following section is added after section 35, 35.1] is 

established consisting of a minimum of six persons 

appointed by the president of the society. 

 

(2) The conduct investigation committee appointed 

pursuant to subsection (1) shall consist of benchers, 

members or former benchers, but a majority of members 

of the committee must be benchers. 

 

(3) [Again] The president shall appoint a bencher as 

chairperson of the conduct investigation committee and 

may appoint one or more benchers as vice-chairpersons. 

 

(4) For the purposes of subsection 36(1.1), a member of 

the conduct investigation committee whose appointment 

pursuant to subsection (1) has ended, and who is 

investigating or has investigated the conduct of a 

member pursuant to subclause 42(2)(b)(i), continues as a 

member of the conduct investigation committee for all 

purposes relating to that investigation, but [again] is 

eligible to be a member of the discipline committee for 

all . . . purposes. 

 

And: 

 

(5) Subject to this Act and the rules, the conduct 

investigation committee shall: 

 

(a) determine all matters necessary to convening, 

holding and adjournment of its meetings; 

 

(b) determine its procedure; 

 

(c) establish a method by which it shall decide 

questions; and 

 

(d) determine generally the transaction and management 

of its business”. 

 

Again there will be things that we need to address. We need to 

look at that. There are many different amendments in here. The 

numbers, we definitely would have to go through and have 

some serious questions. And again, the move regarding the 

ability of the Law Society to appeal a finding of the conduct 

investigation committee to the Court of Appeal, I would venture 

to say is a positive, a positive step. 

 

But as all things, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have to watch that work its 

way through as people come forward. We wish all the best. It 

seems there has been some good work done here in terms of 

consultation and perhaps somebody over there has determined 

that the right to consult is important. The ability to consult, 

which is so sorely lacking in so many other areas that I could 

begin listing here where people have, on an ongoing basis, had 

to come forward. 

 

Now the latest, I suppose, really alarming, most alarming is the 

Bill 80, the construction labour relations Act, amendments 

where people are called in on the morning — on the morning. 

And it’s interesting that the Premier was at the building trades 

convention earlier on. They had his picture in their convention 

booklet and he came there and was asked certain questions, 

whether there would be changes and he said no. And this is an 

interesting sort of pattern that we have here because there’s, on 

record, the Premier also saying that there would be, that 

essential services legislation was not required. So none of these 

things are required. We can go back and see a track record here 

of things that are hidden. 

 

The lack of transparency again that this Act, these amendments 

try to address and the unfortunate situation we have occurring 

now with the matter before the courts and the $3 million PC 

trust account which does bring a lot . . . And a lot of people are 

talking about that, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what that means for 

our province. Have we let the fox back in the henhouse again 

and we’re up to the same old tricks, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Are we creating more problems? And people ask, the members 

opposite ask, well when we bring forward issues around the 

Premier bringing alcohol, delivering alcohol to the legislature, 

whether this is important, I think it is important. People have 

the right to know that. This is an important position to hold in 

this province, and I think people have the right to know that. 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4787 

So again the issue is directly to transparency, transparency and 

openness, and openness in dealing with these sort of issues. 

And we should be upfront about those because, when we ask 

other people to do what we cannot do ourselves, it is hardly, it 

just doesn’t carry the moral weight that we certainly could in 

these kind of situations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just the important points here, around here . . . 

the minister has said that this legislation was requested by the 

legal profession. He has reacted to that. And again it’s so hard, 

as I mentioned earlier, when we have a Premier asking others to 

do what he so flippantly himself perhaps would not do and that 

is in the whole areas of transparency and the whole areas of 

consultation . . . and the feeling that must exist when in fact we 

have to have international bodies comment and say that we 

have to redo our legislation that we have spent innumerable 

hours. I personally have gone through — I can’t count — 

perhaps 60 hours of questioning before various committees on 

various Bills 5, 6, 80, Mr. Speaker, and to what avail, to what 

avail? We’ve heard answers from everything about dark trees 

casting shadows over Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know what is the interesting thing that they should 

understand is that the material, that the questions that we asked 

in committees could be submitted to a body like the ILO or the 

Supreme Court. And so I can wonder what the judges or the 

people at the ILO were doing when they were reading and what 

they would do with the statement like dead trees casting 

shadows across Saskatchewan in an answer to a labour 

question. 

 

Now we will have many of those. And I’m wondering if they 

were scratching their heads and thinking that perhaps there are 

more problems here than just the consultation that isn’t 

happening on the Bills. Perhaps this goes a little deeper in terms 

of the seriousness that they take, the attitude that is displayed 

with some of the Bills compared to what we have here when we 

have the Law Society saying, you know, we need some things 

done. We’d like the right to appeal a finding of the conduct 

investigation committee. We think we need a timely resolution 

so the complaints can go through. 

 

And yet we look at other, the treatment in other areas, and it is 

an all-out attack. It’s an all-out attack just like the attack which 

the Premier himself has said, you know, he’s going to go to war 

with unions. And that’s the way he launches his career as 

Premier of this province. And people wonder why we have the 

turmoil that is on a daily basis growing outside of these walls 

where people are continually having to shake their head in 

wonderment and wonder whether the Sask Party’s governing 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we often hear that this place is for the people, though, 

because when we introduce people we say welcome to your 

legislature. But those words on a more daily basis are sounding 

hollow to a good portion of the residents of Saskatchewan. 

They’re sounding very hollow to a large number of people in 

our province because they simply are not ringing true and that 

there’s in fact an abuse of process happening. And I think we 

are seeing where those members are getting caught with their 

hands in the cookie jar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunate, unfortunate situations arising where we are finding 

ourselves with certain Bills being dealt with, with appropriate 

consultation, with people coming forward, with asking people 

in the province what should be done, as opposed to an 

ideological agenda that is bent on destroying rights and human 

rights and all sorts of rights, international law rights that are 

trampled on in . . . with this government, head bent, just simply 

moving forward without any consultation, thinking that they 

have all the answers and that they are above any sort of 

reproach or that they would have to listen. 

 

And again I would just say that the Deputy House Leader 

probably best captured that earlier today about saying, you 

know, I am a lawyer and somehow that my arguments will be 

based on that. Not basing it on arguments that he might have to 

make which were — as I listened to him — very weak 

arguments, but in fact that somehow the weight of his 

profession would carry him through. Now that’s a sad, very sad 

day that you’d have to reach into that kind of bag of tricks but 

anyways, I guess, to each his own. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, the important statements that the 

minister made that the legal profession exists to serve the public 

interest, I think a good message for some members opposite. I 

won’t mention any in particular but that they should take that to 

heart. And again New Democrats on this side, we agree with 

that sort of statement. And also we agree very strongly with any 

attempts at more transparency and to give people the feeling 

that justice is being done for them, that if you have a complaint, 

it doesn’t go through two steps. We’re bringing this down into 

one step, that in fact that there is a concern for people that their 

complaints are heard, that they’re dealt with in a timely manner, 

and that we will move forward and everybody will have a faith 

and a belief restored in the system that is here for us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the admirable qualities which I have 

stated about this, the thing about the Law Society’s objectives, 

that the Law Society again — and I believe I mentioned this 

before — the things that they put up on their website and not 

. . . I wouldn’t say that it is just the Law Society that attempts to 

do that. Any number of groups of any of our professions that 

operate in this province strive for that because they strive for 

that, Mr. Speaker, because they want to achieve the highest 

degree of excellence, and I think we all try and do that. 

 

We try and do that for all the people and because that’s what we 

should be here for. But we find that not occurring on a number 

of fronts. It then becomes, when something positive is done, we 

look at it and wonder what it is that they are doing because it 

becomes questionable. And a different sort of light shines on 

anything that, any legislation, that comes forward that has some 

positive, positive things in it because it then appears that in 

some ways that this government is picking favourites, picking 

people that they think they need to curry favour with. 

 

And I would hope that they’re not simply doing this just 

because it is the Law Society because those are the kinds of 

questions now that come forward because you think, well now 

this is simply because it’s the Law Society. And so the Law 

Society . . . One of the things the Premier did not say was that I 

am going to war with the Law Society in any way . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay. That was one thing that was not said, 

that I am going to war with the Law Society. He said that to 

unions, but not here. 



4788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

So again I think of . . . And we’ve had some incidents that we 

can all look at, again lack of consultation. And so therefore we 

wonder why the different treatment. Why the different 

treatment that we would have in terms of Law Society versus 

unions in our province or the Labour Relations Board in terms 

of the government’s attempt to put forward their position or the 

government’s attempt to say here’s what we will have done. So, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It being now 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until tonight at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4757 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4757 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4757 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4757 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4766 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4768 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4776 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4776 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4783 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4758 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4758 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4759 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World Health Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4760 

 Accomplishments of Constituents 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4760 

 Frontier Mall Wall of Fame 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4760 

 Agri-Tourism in Saskatchewan and Quebec 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4760 

 2010 First Nations Winter Games 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4761 

 Tri-Town Thunder Hockey Team Wins Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4761 

 Saskatchewan Resource Statistics 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4761 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Kidney Transplants 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4762 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4762 

 Finance and Electoral Issues 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4763 

 Health Care Negotiations 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4764 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4764 

 Support for Northerners 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4765 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4765 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4766 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4766 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4766 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4767 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4770 



 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 4772 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 4772 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4774 

 Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4774 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4780 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4783 

 Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4783 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


