




















































Hansard: April 13, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 43B  TUESDAY, APRIL 13, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4789 

 April 13, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. It now being 7 

p.m., we will resume debate on Bill No. 124, The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2009. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe I’ve made 

the remarks necessary and reviewed the legislation. And other 

than . . . There’s still more to be said, probably on the $3 

million and the $19,000, but I believe that the comments I had 

for Bill 124 I have made. And with that, I would adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Saskatoon Fairview has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 

No. 124, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 

2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to join in the debate this evening. I appreciate the 

reading of the Bill in French, a feat that I, at one point in my 

life, could have duplicated reasonably well but unfortunately, 

without practice, not anymore. Now he was absolutely correct. 

This is a discussion regarding Bill 115, An Act to amend The 

Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, to make certain consequential 

amendments and to appeal The Laws Declaratory Act. 

 

Now interestingly, when you look at this Bill, there are a 

number of items in the Bill that one might refer to as innocuous 

in that some of the changes are fairly simple. If you look at one 

of the clauses, it says: 

 

S.S. 1998, c.Q-1.01 amended 

2 The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 is amended in the manner 

set forth in this Act. 

 

And so they simply are stating that they are amending the Act. 

Short title 

1 This Act may be cited as The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). 

 

And so certainly there are some things that you’ll obviously 

agree to in legislation. One of them might be as simple as a 

name change, and we don’t have issue with that. And you might 

think that this entire Bill is innocuous at first glance if you 

looked at it in a silo and if you had sort of no idea about what 

was going on in other parts of government and if you fail to 

understand motivations and other legislation brought forward, 

previous promises that were made and broken. 

 

And I’ll refer specifically to some of them because there’s a 

very important part of this Act that I’d like to discuss briefly 

here, and that is the language on page 6. Like I said, at first 

blush it talks about things that seem fairly innocuous and 

wouldn’t be cause for alarm. But you have to understand some 

of the history around politics in Saskatchewan in the last few 

years. 

 

Now we had proposed by other jurisdictions an agreement 

called TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement] a number of years ago. The members opposite, the 

Saskatchewan Party, then in opposition, stated very clearly that 

they believe that we should sign on without looking into the 

detail, without consulting with the public. It was their knee-jerk 

reaction to sign on, and they called for it immediately after it 

was proposed. 

 

Now what a responsible government will do and what was done 

at that point was, we took some time to study the agreement or 

the proposed agreement. And what we learned was a number of 

things, one, that certainly what is allowed in TILMA is an 

opportunity for other entities, be they corporations or trusts, to 

sue the government for a lack of economic progress. And so 

you might have a situation where somebody wants to build a 

hotel on the banks of the mighty Wascana. And if the Wascana 

Centre Authority, the city of Regina, and — by extension, I 

guess — the province denied that opportunity, the company that 

put forward the proposal could in effect sue different levels of 

government. And the penalties — now I’m going strictly from 

memory on this — but I believe the penalties to government 

could be up to $2 million. And so you have a situation where a 

corporation could come in and say well we want the hotel. The 

Wascana Centre Authority said well that would be right in front 

of the legislature, and we don’t agree with that, and so we’re 

not going to allow it. The company could then sue that level of 

government for up to $2 million for stifling the progress, for 

stopping the economic opportunity. 

 

And so we propose that it was too onerous and virtually 

impossible to manage an agreement where you could . . . It was 

so open-ended that you could sue a government of some 

jurisdiction — be it municipal, provincial, or otherwise — for a 

huge financial sum for simply not complying with your wishes. 

 

And so we certainly did some homework there and found that 

it’s not something that we were interested in, and stated that 

quite clearly. In fact we did as, again, responsible government 

should do, and that’s we took it to the people, and we held open 

discussions where people could present a case one way or the 



4790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

other — pro or against. And we found out that the vast majority 

of people who presented also opposed the idea and opposed it 

for a number of reasons. 

 

Certainly a jurisdiction like Saskatchewan who, at this point in 

our history and beginning five or so years ago, led the country 

in job opportunities on many occasions, so you need to have 

some ability for labour movement and mobility. And so we 

agree with some aspects of it, but it was so onerous in terms of 

the penalties and in terms of how open-ended it was for a 

corporation to sue a government that the people sort of agreed 

that it was something that they didn’t agree with. 

 

Another level where people didn’t agree with it was because it 

had enormous direct potential to cause the decomposition or the 

decommissioning of our Crown corporations. And so it would 

cause an opportunity where a corporation could sue the 

provincial government because it had created, in their mind, an 

unlevel playing field for a Crown corporation in spite of the fact 

now that they all compete in an open market situation. 

 

But that was another reason, certainly, that we believed at that 

time — and so did the vast majority of people in Saskatchewan 

— that TILMA wasn’t something that we were all that 

interested in signing on to. And you might look at this 

legislation, if you didn’t know the history of TILMA and the 

like, and think that it’s not that big a deal. But we have an 

interesting situation now where the Saskatchewan Party 

government, at that time when they found that there was both 

overwhelming evidence and opposition against the TILMA 

agreement, before the last election, said that TILMA is 

something that we’re not interested in signing. We won’t do 

that. 

 

But very interestingly, we have asked questions, as members of 

the opposition, very recently as to whether or not this 

government has signed on to an agreement called WEPA 

[Western Economic Partnership Agreement], whether they’ve 

signed on to what amounts to an AIT [Agreement on Internal 

Trade] agreement or something that is very similar if not 

identical to the TILMA agreement. And you know what’s 

happened, Mr. Speaker? We can’t get the answer. In spite of the 

fact that you submit a written question and you submit it to the 

office where it’s a yes-or-no answer . . . It doesn’t take any 

research. Either they’ve signed on or they haven’t. Either the 

Premier’s signature is on that document or it isn’t. And so it’s 

exceedingly frustrating for an opposition and for the people of 

Saskatchewan upon whose part we’re asking these questions, 

because they deserve to know if their government has signed on 

to an agreement that exposes them to these negative principles. 

And so I find that very interesting. 

 

And then of course, Mr. Speaker, you see this legislation 

introduced. And if I could, I would read the part of the 

legislation that I think causes some issue. On page 6 it says: 

 

“Interpretation of Part 

89.1 In this Part: 

 

„award‟ means an award or order for costs, or for a 

monetary penalty, made by a presiding body pursuant 

to a Domestic Trade Agreement. 

 

And so that enables what I had talked about briefly earlier, 

where you have an entity of some kind — corporation, trust, 

individual — who is able to sue the government and get an 

award for costs or a monetary penalty up to the $2 million that 

I’d mentioned that is made by a presiding body pursuant to a 

domestic trade agreement. 

 

So this is exactly what we were afraid of back in 2005-06, I 

believe it was. So again this legislation is not perhaps what it 

seemed. Certainly the Saskatchewan Party said that we should 

sign on in a knee-jerk fashion and learned later that it’s not 

something that they were interested in doing, so they said they 

wouldn’t do it. But I would argue that this document says 

otherwise, and it says otherwise in legislation because it’s 

enabling an individual, a corporation or trust — some entity — 

to get an award for costs or for monetary penalty. 

 

And additionally on page 6 it says: 

 

„certified copy‟ means a copy of an award certified to be a 

true copy by the official or body designated in the 

regulations as responsible for administering a Domestic 

Trade Agreement. 

 

Now it goes on to say that: 

 

„Domestic Trade Agreement‟ means: 

 

(a) the Agreement on Internal Trade entered into on or 

about July 18, 1994 by the governments of Canada, the 

provinces and the territories. 

 

Certainly something that’s happened in the past, and you think 

well it’s, you know, not that big a deal, but then it goes on to 

say: 

 

any other agreement established pursuant to Article 1800 

of the Agreement on Internal Trade described in clause 

(a); or 

 

(c) any other Domestic Trade Agreement designated in the 

regulations. 

 

And so what this does is open up an opportunity for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, perhaps municipal governments, 

to be sued by a corporation in a TILMA-type agreement. 

 

Now they can call it what they want. They can change the 

acronym. They can move a couple of letters around, but the 

spirit of that agreement is identical. And here we have 

legislation that proves that they’ve gone back on their word, 

that they started out in a position where they said, do it. You 

don’t need to even read it. Just sign it because it’s going to be 

good for trade. Then they find out that all the evidence is to the 

contrary. So is popular opinion. And just prior to the election, 

they say it’s not something we’re interested in doing. 

 

Now we have a Premier who won’t tell the people of 

Saskatchewan whether he signed it or not, and they introduce 

legislation that enables it to happen. And so you have to ask 

yourself, what’s the motivation? Why would they bring forward 

this legislation now? What’s the purpose? And I think any 

reasonable person would believe that they have an agenda. 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4791 

[19:15] 

 

And again it continues: 

 

“Filing of award 

89.2 If an award is made against the Crown, the person 

entitled to the award may file a certified copy of that 

award with the court if the Domestic Trade Agreement 

permits the award to be enforced in the same manner as 

an order against the Crown made by the court. 

 

It goes on to say, 

 

“Enforcement of award as judgment or order 

89.3 On the filing of an award in accordance with 

section 89.2, the award [And get this, Mr. Speaker. This 

is the very important part. The award] is enforceable as 

if it were a judgment or order of the court”. 

 

And so it solidifies very clearly for the people of Saskatchewan 

that this opens up the province of Saskatchewan and its 

municipalities to a TILMA-type agreement. And I don’t know 

if they thought that they could sneak this past or if they have 

some hidden agenda that they want to put forward. I would 

argue that — unless they come forth and admit that they’ve 

already signed the agreement or say unequivocally that, no, they 

haven’t signed the agreement — that there’s a hidden agenda 

because by definition an agenda that you won’t tell the people, 

is hidden. 

 

And so certainly the people of Saskatchewan don’t agree and 

would find it exceedingly frustrating to learn that the opposition 

in the province of Saskatchewan can’t get answers from the 

Premier’s office on this. It can’t. We asked the question, but 

you won’t answer it. 

 

Well as I’ve mentioned, it’s a simple answer. It doesn’t take six 

staff members 24 hours a day for three weeks to figure it out. 

It’s a simple yes or no. He can scratch his head for three 

minutes and say, gee I think I remember signing something like 

that when I was in Vancouver. I think I remember that. And put 

that on paper and send it back to the opposition so that we can 

take it to the people. I would ask this government what the 

Premier of Saskatchewan is afraid of when he won’t answer a 

question, a written question, on a simple question like, did you 

sign the agreement or not. 

 

And I think quite clearly you don’t have to be a lawyer from 

Meadow Lake to understand that this opens up the province of 

Saskatchewan for that TILMA agreement. Now they can call it 

whatever they want, like I said, but it doesn’t change the fact 

that that’s what this is. And so it is yet another example that this 

government, the Saskatchewan Party will do and say anything. 

 

The Minister Responsible for Agriculture, the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, said quite clearly after he got some tough 

questions in the rotunda one day that, you know, when you’re in 

opposition you can do and say anything, and for a number of 

years I did just that. That’s what he said. But when you’re in 

government, you got to get it right. You got to be responsible. 

 

And so now you understand how you could say that, no we’re 

not going to sign on to TILMA before an election and, after an 

election, introduce Bills like Bill No. 115 that opens up directly 

the province to an opportunity to be sued for being in 

contravention of a TILMA-type agreement. And so this 

legislation, as I said, is not what it seems. But this isn’t the only 

example of when that’s happened. 

 

The Minister for Health, the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, before the election was asked directly, do you 

think that essential services is something Saskatchewan needs? 

And he said no; it’s not required. Within a couple of months of 

taking office, they introduce essential services. 

 

And so it’s a direct parallel to what’s going on with Bill No. 

115. It’s exactly the same thing. And it speaks to credibility. 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton took out an ad in the 

newspaper in Prince Albert that said “A vote for Darryl is a 

vote for the mill open and people working.” Now as we’ve 

learned in the intervening time since then, the two and a half 

years that they’ve had to do something in the forestry industry, 

there’s been nothing done. And so again a direct parallel with 

Bill No. 115, where you say something before an election, and 

right after the writ’s dropped, you abandon the principle with 

which you made that promise. They abandoned it. 

 

Now in some cases the motivation is clear. The motivation is 

clear. In this case, it hasn’t become crystal clear until now. It’s 

written right here. It’s written right here, and it says 

Saskatchewan as a government is now opened up to a judgment 

that is enforceable “as if it were a judgment or order of the 

court.” And so what we’re doing as a province is holding a gun 

to our own head. 

 

We’re opening up the province for a TILMA agreement. Now 

why would any government, any body — whether they’re a 

Crown corporation, whether they’re a private corporation, 

whether they’re an energy trust, whether they’re a 

small-business owner — why would anybody who governs a 

body, company, entity, open themselves up and make it clear 

that any award on an internal trade agreement is enforceable as 

if it were a judgment from the court? Why would you do that? 

And enacted in legislation where you say yes, we agree that we 

will accept a judgment of a court when it comes to an internal 

trade agreement. It is absolutely senseless. And it’s contrary to 

what was said before the last election. 

 

Now we can go on in terms of credibility on legislation, 

regulations, and budgetary issues because I got a call from a 

chiropractor outside of Prince Albert who said directly that she 

talked to the Premier at his golf tournament. So she was a 

supporter. She bought a pass and attended the golf tournament 

and asked him directly, the Premier of the province, asked him 

directly: will we be de-insured? Is this something you’re going 

to continue to insure? And you know what the Premier told her? 

He told her yes; we’re going to continue to insure. And she 

phoned my office absolutely livid because, in the same way that 

they’ve done with Bill No. 115, they’ve gone back on their 

word. And this case . . . well I believe it’s him in this case as 

well because it’s going to be his name as a signator on TILMA. 

But again it’s the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan who 

goes to his own golf tournament and tells a chiropractor 

something that turns out to be absolutely false. 

 

Now you have to ask yourself, did he have control over whether 



4792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

or not chiropractors would be de-insured? As the President of 

the Executive Council of Saskatchewan, the Premier of the 

province, would he have been able to say, well you know, Mr. 

Health Minister, I think that’s something that we should 

continue to fund because I made a promise? I made a promise 

to a chiropractor at my golf tournament in Waskesiu that that’s 

something I wouldn’t do, so we can’t do it. We’ll find the 

money somewhere else. Maybe we’ll find savings in 

communications. Maybe we won’t send so many of our 

operatives into different entities of government — be they 

Crown corporations or ministries — as communication people 

to shadow the real communications people that work there. 

Maybe if we didn’t send so many of those people in there, we 

wouldn’t have to de-insure chiropractors and I wouldn’t have to 

go against the word that I’d given that chiropractor. 

 

Now again if you can’t trust the Premier of the province to keep 

his word on something as simple as that, how would anybody 

trust him on Bill No. 115? How would anybody trust that he 

hasn’t gone to Vancouver and signed on to an agreement? I 

think it’s virtually impossible for the Premier of the province to 

convince anybody because he won’t answer the question. We 

asked the question, in a simple written question of which they 

have five days to answer. They have five days to jog the 

Premier’s memory to find out whether or not he signed his 

name on the dotted line. And he won’t answer the question. 

 

Now he also won’t answer the phone of the chiropractor, but 

I’ll pick up my phone and I’ll answer it, and she tells me that 

he’s gone back on his word directly. And so when it comes to 

the small things, if you can’t get those right, how can you get 

the big things right? 

 

There are numerous other occasions when this has happened. 

They made a promise — I don’t know if it was a solemn 

promise, but certainly it was a promise — to provide 1 per cent 

of PST [provincial sales tax] to municipalities. Now how is it 

that you would think that you have any credibility when you say 

that the reason you’re providing the 1 per cent of PST is 

because it’s a direct measure of government’s ability to pay, 

because the more PST the government takes in means the more 

opportunity they have to pay, because there’s a direct 

correlation between economic development opportunity and 

income for the provincial government to the PST. It rises and 

falls with the fortunes of the province. And it certainly has done 

that here because over the last two years they’ve had record 

revenue, record revenue. 

 

But you know what? They’ve also had record broken promises, 

and they can’t keep this one. 

 

So again when you can’t trust them with a promise on Bill 5, 

you can’t trust them on the pulp mill, a chiropractor can’t trust 

the Premier at his own golf tournament, you can’t trust them on 

PST to municipalities — how could you trust them to get it 

right on an interprovincial trade agreement? How could you 

trust that, when they won’t answer the question out of the 

Premier’s office and when they introduce legislation that 

directly allows the Government of Saskatchewan and opens it 

up to be sued by an entity and have that suit be enforceable as if 

it were a judgment or order of the court? Why would you do 

that if you hadn’t already signed on to WEPA, TILMA, AIT? I 

think that the answer is clear. 

Now there are other examples, and I’ll certainly continue to list 

them. Before the last election, the members opposite at every 

opportunity talked about the duty to consult, the duty to consult 

with First Nations-Métis people on things that directly affect 

them. It has become the mandate of the federal courts to do it, 

to follow the duty to consult, and to ensure that that happens. 

 

Now I question — and the members opposite can certainly 

correct me if I’m wrong — but I would question that they 

haven’t consulted First Nations-Métis people on this TILMA 

agreement that they’re bringing forward the legislation for. 

Certainly I would welcome any of them to suggest that they 

have and to provide the list of the date and time when they’ve 

met with people to discuss it. But I can guarantee you because 

they, on many occasions in opposition, said that you need to 

complete the duty to consult, you need to follow through on it, 

you need to do it . . . But on every occasion, as the government, 

they miss an opportunity. And do you know what I’ve found, 

especially lately, but since the start? That this government never 

misses an opportunity to miss an opportunity. And so they’ve 

done so again here. 

 

If you want to talk strictly about consultation, there are certainly 

other occasions with which they’ve also failed to consult with 

people on different Bills. We had what can only be described as 

a fiasco here when we voted off the Bill regarding the horses of 

the Bronson Forest because, as a good opposition does, we did 

our homework. And we did something the government refuses 

to do on virtually every piece of legislation they bring forward: 

we consulted. We went out and talked to lawmakers, First 

Nations and Métis groups in the area, municipalities — be they 

rural, small urbans. And you know what they said? They said 

that you ought to include the duty to consult as part of that Bill. 

And so when we put it forward, we asked the government if 

they would agree to it, and they said no. We had a vote here in 

the House. And it’s on record for anybody who wants to see it. 

They said no; they didn’t want that in the legislation. Now the 

motivation for that is absolutely baffling, but they didn’t want it 

in there. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And so we called for a standing vote. And you know what 

happened in the standing vote? They consulted with each other. 

The only consultation that they do on any Bill, they consulted 

with each other and they figure out, well you know, this 

actually might make some sense. It might be a good thing to put 

into legislation that the Government of Saskatchewan has a duty 

to consult on the horses of the Bronson Forest Bill. 

 

And so you’ll note that there’s no reason, no reason whatsoever 

to trust the Saskatchewan Party government has done their 

work, their homework on Bill No. 115 as it relates to 

consultation with any group. And certainly it would appear that 

they have gone back on their word in terms of TILMA. I think 

the evidence is here, and I think that’s what’s gone on. 

 

And so it’s painful that on virtually every Bill that we speak to 

we talk about what’s gone on with consultation, and we learn 

that when we do our homework, as we do, but there’s been 

none. Time and time and time again, they refuse to consult with 

people on legislation. One only has to look at the record on a 

committee that they had last week, as it relates to changes to 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4793 

health. They had people running all over the place because 

again they didn’t even consult with their own officials to figure 

out what the order is that the changes should be presented in. 

And so if they can’t get the small things right, how can they get 

the big things right? 

 

Now there are some other portions of this Bill that might be of 

some interest to folks in Saskatchewan, including references to 

law from 1870. And one would ask or might ask how that’s 

relevant today. Well it’s relevant because as a province . . . and 

I believe that we’re in the same boat in terms of this situation as 

Alberta is, and I believe that we’re in the same situation as 

Alberta is as a province because we were both part of the 

North-West Territories and joined confederation in a similar 

fashion. But what has happened here — and folks at home 

might be interested to know this if they don’t already — is that 

we sort of adopted British law. And it was the British law that 

was written. I believe it was written in sort of 1886 or that time 

period, and I don’t know if it was finalized in and around 1870 

as the laws that we adopted, but it’s something right around that 

time period. Now so you might read page 8 and wonder why 

they’d have a reference to it, but it says the following, quote: 

 

Repeal of certain provision 

9 Section 11 of The North-West Territories Act, being 

chapter 50 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1886, 

as it existed on September 1, 1905, is repealed to the 

extent that it applies to matters within the legislative 

jurisdiction of Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s sort of it in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, because that’s the 

portion of the Act that says that we’re governed by laws that 

were adopted into the North-West Territories in 1886 from 

Great Britain. Now it’s in the Bill 115 here, and it’s important 

for a couple of reasons. On rare occasions even to this day, 

there are opportunities or occasions, as rare as they might be, 

where something is brand new. There’s a situation that we find 

that there hasn’t been a ruling on in Canada, in the 

Commonwealth since that time. And so you go back. And it 

does happen, I’m told. You go back to the law that was enacted 

in 1870. 

 

And so it’s again seemingly innocuous or housekeeping in 

terms of the Bill, but when it’s used on occasion, it’s vital. And 

so when you have a democracy and a legal system that’s based 

on precedent, it’s important that you continue to have the laws 

on the books in one manner or another because, as you may 

know or will understand, there aren’t a number of books at 

every library from 1870 on the laws of the province of 

Saskatchewan. So it’s important to keep those current, and this 

Bill does that on page 8. 

 

Now section 4 of the Bill is a section regarding the 

identification and change in law as recommended by the Law 

Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. Now the Law Reform 

Commission of Saskatchewan is a commission that was started 

sometime in the late ’70s. And it was brought forward because 

government at the time believed that we could use as a 

jurisdiction a body that would look at cleaning up the laws of 

the province, whether it’s making them current, whether it’s 

removing redundancies, whether it’s ensuring that Bills are 

properly numbered in clauses, subsections and the like. And so 

a body was struck to make sure that that would happen, and it 

was the Law Reform Commission. And so they, from time to 

time, will make recommendations to government for changes. 

And so it would appear that section 4 does just that in this Bill. 

And so that’s something that we certainly agree with. 

 

Now again a good deal of this Bill is housekeeping and would 

suggest that there isn’t much to it. And again if we didn’t have 

the historical perspective and the understanding of what’s gone 

on in politics in Saskatchewan and with the Saskatchewan Party 

over the last few years, you wouldn’t perhaps be all that 

concerned with page 6. 

 

But that’s not the case because as we’ve learned over the last 

number of years . . . when you have a government who will say 

one thing before the election and do something exactly the 

opposite right after, when you’ve got a Premier in a province 

who will tell a chiropractor at his own golf tournament 

something that turns out to be false when he had full control 

over the item the entire time, when you’ve got a now Minister 

of Health who would say that essential services aren’t needed 

and then one of the first acts of the new government is to bring 

in essential services legislation which turns out to be notorious, 

and notorious not in a good way. 

 

This government has become fond of international attention 

whether it’s in New York for terrible posters that depict great 

tragedy, whether it’s in international courts where they get ruled 

against for legislation that, as we’re learning here now, they 

said people of Saskatchewan didn’t need. We didn’t need Bill 5 

according to the Health minister. And within 30 days of taking 

office, they bring it in. They bring it in and were ruled against 

in an international court. 

 

Now I don’t know how you can pretend that that ruling doesn’t 

exist, how you can pooh-pooh it and say well you know, it’s not 

that big of deal. We’ve had better days. Saskatchewan, you 

know, shouldn’t be too concerned about the ruling of the ILO 

[International Labour Organization]. But what some people 

may not know is that the ILO is a part of NATO [North Atlantic 

Treaty Organization], and so when you have a ruling against a 

government by an international body you ought to be 

concerned. You ought to be concerned. But this government 

shows no concern. And so when that’s the notoriety that we get 

on an international stage, it concerns me that we might be 

seeking the same notoriety and end up with the same notoriety 

on this Bill because we might be one of the only jurisdictions in 

the world that would open ourselves up to be sued by 

corporations because we don’t adhere to an internal trade 

agreement. 

 

And so I think the people of Saskatchewan have already 

certainly weighed in on whether or not they support the idea of 

a TILMA agreement. They quite clearly don’t. 

 

And so when you’ve got a body like the United Nations — 

sorry, not NATO — when you’ve got a body like the United 

Nations making rulings against you, you ought to be concerned 

about it because they’re an organization put together to oversee 

basic human rights in the world. They’re made up of a number 

of nations. The representative group that ruled against the 

Saskatchewan Party in this issue was made up of business 

representatives, made up of independent representative from 

many different jurisdictions, and made up of . . . One quarter of 



4794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

the folks on the ruling body are labour groups, groups that 

represent working people throughout the world. And so when 

you’ve got a group like the United Nations making rulings on 

fundamental human rights in Saskatchewan, you should ought 

to be concerned about it as a government. You shouldn’t ignore 

it and pretend it didn’t happen. 

 

And so I have grave concerns about the TILMA agreement as 

we appear to be moving legislation . . . as the Saskatchewan 

Party government seems to be forcing legislation forward that 

would open us up for this very, very negative result in a suit 

against our province. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

to adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Prince Albert Northcote has moved adjournment on debate on 

Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 130 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 130 — The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money 

Judgments Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I’m pleased to enter into the debate regarding 

Bill No. 130, which is The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act. As I understand it, this Bill is 

to ensure that the enforcement of money judgments is 

something that can be dealt with when, certainly when we hear 

from frustrated creditors who’ve obtained a court judgment 

which states that they’re entitled to compensation or restitution, 

but they find it very difficult or impossible to enforce. So we 

know that this Bill is to assist those creditors in enforcing the 

judgment. 

 

We also hear from worried debtors that they will be left without 

sufficient income to support themselves and their families 

without the use of the family vehicle to transport themselves to 

work and so forth. And there are also concerns about the 

powers of sheriffs when it comes to enforcing judgments, and 

of course how they interact with the public in the course of 

enforcing the judgments. 

 

[19:45] 

 

There’s no question that this is a difficult, emotional issue for 

everyone involved, whether you are the debtor or the creditor or 

the sheriff who is attempting to enforce judgments. 

 

Now the minister in his comments said that the legislation was 

needed to modernize the legislation in the province, and we 

certainly agree with that. There is a need for clarity when it 

comes to enforcement of money judgments. And we know that 

the government has also brought together, in one piece of 

legislation, rules that have in the past been scattered throughout 

several pieces of legislation, and we agree that it’s important 

that all of the rules are congregated in one particular Bill. 

 

But the minister promises that this is more than just 

consolidation, in his remarks. He says that the two Bills — 

because this is the consequential amendment Act — but the two 

Bills will remove a host of procedural burdens and legislative 

inadequacies in the process. 

 

Unfortunately the minister in his remarks, which were very 

swift and speedy, did not explain in any kind of succinct 

manner what those burdens and inadequacies were. So he didn’t 

provide the public through the Legislative Assembly any detail. 

And he didn’t explain how this new Act and this companion 

Bill of 129 will address problems that citizens have had in the 

past. And we think it’s prudent when ministers bring pieces of 

legislation into the House that they provide some context, some 

information, so that . . . in words that the ordinary person on the 

street can understand. And in this case, the minister didn’t 

provide any examples of situations where people would not 

have been able to enforce a judgment in the past and will now 

be able to do so. So he didn’t tell us how this legislation was 

going to assist people who in the past weren’t able to enforce a 

judgment — how this legislation would make it possible now. 

 

So we think that that’s problematic because he didn’t outline 

any specific provisions in the two Bills that would make it 

easier for creditors to enforce judgments. Instead, you know, 

we’re once again, Mr. Speaker, in this unfortunate position 

where the public and members of the legislature have to take 

this government at its word. And we know that sometimes 

that’s a very tricky situation for the public because of word that 

has been given in the past is not the word that is actually 

implemented when the government gets around to 

implementing policy. 

 

And we know this because the government gave its word prior 

to the election that there wouldn’t be a need for essential 

services legislation, for instance. And then within days, this 

government broke their word and brought a Bill into the 

legislature, declaring most people who work in the public 

service essential. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a government that, 

when they came to power, they promised that they were going 

to certainly address rural health care. And in fact what we’ve 

seen in rural Saskatchewan is a significant increase in doctor 

vacancies in rural Saskatchewan and we know that regularly on 

weekends, plastic garbage bags are put on signs indicating to 

the public that their rural hospital is not available for services. 

So this is a government also that promised that there was so 

much more we were all going to be. But unfortunately, as 

there’s so much more that we’re all supposed to be, in the 

constituency that I represent the cost of living has increased 

dramatically for people, particularly people in the service sector 

and people living on fixed incomes. 

 

And I have to tell you in my 23 years as a legislator in this 

province, I’ve had more tissue given to constituents who are 

having a very difficult time making ends meet. And these are 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4795 

proud people, Mr. Speaker, proud people who go to work every 

day or worked every day in their lives. And they are dealing 

with some fairly dramatic increases in rent because they aren’t 

homeowners, and it’s making it almost impossible to get by. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s problematic when you see men and 

women who are proud men and women who have given their 

lives to the workplace. They’ve set aside a little bit of money 

for their retirement, but basically they were in lower paid, not 

professional jobs, lower paid private sector jobs. And they are 

in the position where their rents have increased so dramatically, 

and they have no place to go. There is absolutely no place to go 

in terms of finding a cheaper apartment. 

 

And I can say to the members of the legislature with certainty 

that in my 23 years in the Legislative Assembly, I . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well you can say it’s too long, and maybe, you 

know, that’s up to you. But in my 23 years representing the 

people of my constituency, I have never had as many people 

come into my office that are finding it very, very difficult to 

make ends meet. And I think from a public policy point of 

view, that’s something that we should all be worried about 

because we need to represent all of the people, Mr. Speaker, not 

just some people, which takes me to my next point. 

 

Now as I said earlier, this government has broken a lot of 

promises. This government came to office with a lot of promise 

and there were a lot of people that voted for this government 

because they thought their life was going to get better. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, their life has not gotten better. 

 

And when I say that people have come into my office in tears 

because of their rent increases, some of these people work in 

health regions and they have not had a collective agreement for 

several years. They’ve been deemed essential service and they 

don’t have the ability to withdraw their labour, which I think 

really should be a basic human right. I really believe it should 

be a basic human right that, you know, at a point if the majority 

of the people in the workplace determine that they want to 

withdraw their services to put pressure on the government, they 

should have that right. And people in this province who work in 

the health sector, the public sector, no longer have that right 

because of what this government did and promised they would 

not do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I’m trying to say is that Saskatchewan 

people have very little reason to take the Sask Party government 

at its word that this legislation is going to improve the 

enforcement of money judgments. And they need details. 

 

And that’s the other thing that I’m hearing daily from 

constituents, that what they thought they were voting for is not 

in fact what they got in the end. And I’m hearing that from 

constituents, and I’m saying this very clearly to the members 

opposite, that what people — some people — thought they were 

voting for when they put their X beside the Sask Party brand, 

they thought that they were going to get a government that 

listened to them, was going to pay attention to them and was 

going to honour them. Honour them, Mr. Speaker. Honour 

them. And they do not feel particularly honoured at the moment 

when they have a very difficult time making ends meet. 

They’ve seen their rents increase dramatically. Their utilities 

have gone up. And they’re not really sure that the government 

is working hard on their behalf. 

 

So when I say that Saskatchewan people have little reason to 

take this government at its word that this legislation will 

improve the enforcement of money judgments, of course the 

proof will always be in the details. And the details were not 

provided by the minister when he entered this legislation into 

the House. 

 

Now the minister did specifically mention that Bill 130 will 

amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. And when 

you look at that section of the Bill you see that where 

maintenance orders are in arrears, maintenance orders would be 

added to the judgment registry being created under Bill 129. 

And I think all members of the legislature, if they have any 

experience with their constituents, will know that maintenance 

enforcement does comprise a significant portion of the 

casework that comes into our constituency offices. And once 

again, Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely sensitive, often difficult 

and emotional issue for everyone involved. In many cases, 

maintenance and disputes over maintenance goes on for years, 

and so some attempt to link the payment or nonpayment of 

maintenance to the issue of custody or access to the children, 

and there are hard feelings on all sides of this issue. 

 

Now I can say that my experience with the maintenance 

enforcement branch has been an excellent experience, and I 

think the branch has done a lot of very good work over the 

years, certainly collecting money for payees. And in many 

cases, we know that the people who are receiving maintenance 

are women who have children, and we also know that in many 

cases their involvement has allowed an impartial person to deal 

with the issue of maintenance and allowed former spouses to 

concentrate on other matters in their interaction, such as the 

well-being of their children. And then of course in other cases, 

people decide that the problem is the maintenance enforcement 

office itself, and that certainly has not been my experience on 

most occasions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s good that the legislation maintains the 

priority given to the enforcement of maintenance orders over a 

number of other money judgments. However we’ll have to look 

at the legislation very carefully. And this is where it will be 

important for the Minister of Justice to be forthright in his 

comments. 

 

And I think that it would be, it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that 

when comments or speeches are being written, second reading 

speeches are being written for ministers, I certainly would 

appreciate if there could be some more emphasis on content so 

that the public and members of the legislature could have a 

second reading speech that provided us with some details so 

that we understood the implications of the legislation that is 

being presented by the government, and also we could 

understand some of the public policy implications or public 

policy that the ministry is trying to address. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have to look at this 

legislation carefully to ensure that in fact there is a 

strengthening of the maintenance enforcement framework rather 

than a weakening of the legislation. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 

I would move adjournment. 

 



4796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Saskatoon Nutana has moved adjournment on Bill No. 130, The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 112 — The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to rise and enter into 

debate on Bill 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 

2009. 

 

I want to start by talking a little bit about the role of the Justice 

of the Peace here in Saskatchewan. Yes, justices of the peace 

are not in fact judges and are not usually lawyers, but they do 

play a very, very important role in our society. 

 

Some of the duties of the justices of the peace include 

administering oaths for criminal charges laid by the police or 

the public. They confirm or cancel police-issued processes, 

including promises to appear, appearance notices, or 

recognisance orders. Justices of the peace review and sign 

court-issued processes like summons, warrants for arrest or 

undertaking. They review, justices of the peace review and 

issue subpoenas compelling witnesses to attend court. They 

administer oaths for affidavits, affirmations, and declarations. 

Justices of the peace also consider applications for search 

warrants. 

 

Justices of the peace can release people under conditions who 

have been arrested and are being held in custody. They can also 

conduct show-cause hearings, or we also call them bail 

hearings, to determine if someone should remain in custody 

until they’re dealt with by the law. 

 

In the absence of a Provincial Court judge, justices of the peace 

also have a role to play. They can accept guilty pleas from . . . 

in sentencing an accused person charged with an offence 

punishable on summary conviction. Justices of the peace can 

receive an accused person’s election for their mode of trial. 

They can grant an adjournment of a matter. 

 

[20:00] 

 

So actually in Regina and Saskatoon, there are specially 

designated and trained senior, currently there are specially 

designated and trained senior presiding justices of the peace, 

and they have the authority to conduct trials for offences under 

various provincial statutes including traffic, liquor, and wildlife 

offences. In Regina and Saskatoon, they can also conduct trials 

for offences under various municipal bylaws, including things 

like parking, noise, and domestic animal violations. 

 

So sort of in reviewing what some of the things justices of the 

peace do, what these proposed amendments to Bill 112, An Act 

to amend The Justices of the Peace Act, 1988, one of the 

proposed changes is allowing practising lawyers to become 

justices of the peace. Historically, practising lawyers have not 

been eligible for appointment as JPs [Justice of the Peace]. So 

the government’s proposed legislation right now is suggesting 

that practising lawyers be appointed as justices of the peace 

provided they are not practising criminal law, and they are not 

otherwise in a conflict of interest. 

 

There’s also some other . . . so if people aren’t . . . so people 

becoming justice of the . . . That’s a hard word to say here 

tonight, justices of the peace. So there’s no conflict of interest. 

No person who is an employee of the Government of 

Saskatchewan or a Crown corporation can become a JP nor can 

an employee or a member of a police service within the 

meaning of The Police Act or the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police]. A person who is a member of the Corps of 

Commissionaires can’t become a JP nor can a member of the 

board as defined in The Police Act, 1990 or an elected member 

of a council or a municipality. So these are one of the proposed 

amendments in terms of who can’t be a Justice of the Peace. 

 

But this proposal now allowing practising lawyers to become 

JPs actually may in fact allow the opportunity to increase the 

pool of justices of the peace. In looking at some of the 

comments of my colleagues on this particular piece of 

legislation, one of the former ministers of Justice actually said 

this was a very hard position to fill sometimes in rural 

Saskatchewan. And so a move to increase the pool by allowing 

practising lawyers to become justices of the peace, on the face 

of it, it looks like a very good thing to do. 

 

Actually I think it’s not just justices of the peace where there 

seems to be a labour force shortage. All across Saskatchewan 

and all across Canada, this province and this country are facing 

labour force shortages — actually all around the world. We 

have an aging population. Baby boomers in about 2013 were 

sort of set to retire en masse. That’s when the real crunch would 

start. It’s getting harder and harder to fill existing positions. So 

it’s not just with justices of the peace; it’s all across the board 

here in this province. So allowing the pool to be a bit bigger is, 

I think, probably a very good move. 

 

This Act, one of the other amendments allows for justices of the 

peace, changing the retirement age from 65 to move it up to 70, 

which is a good thing. Actually a few years ago the former NDP 

[New Democratic Party] administration removed the mandatory 

retirement age. We recognize that the older we are, that many of 

us, many people still have very valuable contributions to make. 

So in this, making this provision of retirement age from 65 to 

70 actually puts justices of the peace in line with Provincial 

Court judges. So this is a good move for sure. 

 

Not only though, I mean we recognize, we definitely recognize 

that more mature citizens in our province have many 

contributions still to make. And often a Justice of the Peace 

tends to, can be a second career for some people. So moving 

this age up is a very positive move . . . [inaudible interjection] 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4797 

. . . Sorry, it’s very easy to get distracted by the noise around 

you.  

 

The mandatory retirement or the notion, the notion actually too 

of when the NDP administration removed the mandatory 

retirement age, it actually wasn’t just about — and this can 

apply here — it’s not just about recognizing that more mature 

members of society have something to contribute, but that not 

everybody wants to leave the workforce when they’re 65. There 

needs to be mechanisms to ensure the people have the 

opportunity, not to just, you reach an age and it’s done, and you 

retire fully and completely at that moment.  

 

I think about my own family. My mom was at home with seven 

kids, so she worked non-stop all the time, but my dad retired, 

took early retirement when he was about, well, in his 50s. 

Sorry, I can’t remember the age he retired. I know I was 18 

when my father retired, and he is approaching his 80th birthday 

in the next couple years here and still has much to contribute. 

 

But that opportunity to be able to provide employees who are 

nearing the end of their work term but aren’t quite ready to go 

yet that opportunity to slowly step out of the workforce, so they 

still have some chance to be engaged but can mentor, make 

room in some respects for new employees, but also provide 

some mentoring. So this notion that we don’t just push people 

out of the workforce at 65 is a very good one. And the NDP 

addressed that a few years ago. 

 

This Act, or the amendments, one of the things that this Bill 

112, An Act to amend The Justices of the Peace Act does 

actually is some housekeeping items around gender-neutral 

language — changing his and her, or changing him to her, those 

kinds of things.  

 

I spent many years as a reporter, and when I first started my job 

as a reporter, I actually thought people were a bit silly for being 

sticklers around gender-neutral language. I thought, what’s the 

difference if you say his and you’re referring to everybody? So 

early in my career I really believed that gender-neutral language 

was one of those just politically correct, silly things. But as I 

gained a little bit of experience, and actually when I became a 

mother, was when the notion what language does for us as a 

society really hit home for me. 

 

I was an at-home mother for seven years with my daughter, and 

this is when, in those very early days, language became very, 

very important to me. When I tell people that I was at home 

with my kids, they’d say, oh you’re not working. Or there’s 

always the comment, are you a working mother? Well you 

know, yes, every mother, I would argue, is a working mother. 

So language, I learned early in my role as a mother that 

language really does make a difference. So addressing the 

gender-neutral language here, I think, is a good move. 

 

What often happens with language, it shapes how we think 

about ourselves. But language also shapes how others perceive 

us. So again the more often people talk about mothers who 

don’t work, you begin to internalize that a little bit. So again 

addressing this gender-neutral language, it might seem like a 

small thing or just a housekeeping thing, but it’s really very 

important. 

 

I have a friend who has a daughter with Down’s syndrome. And 

when we talk about, again, language and we refer to people who 

have special needs, I know that statement or that language 

drives her absolutely insane. Her children have needs just like 

every other child has. Her daughter who has Down’s syndrome 

doesn’t have special needs; she just has needs as all her other 

children do.  

 

So language is absolutely critical. And as I said, it might just 

seem like a housekeeping detail, but I think that that’s a very 

positive step for sure. 

 

So I just want to again . . . So these might not seem like big 

changes, and I think on the face of it, we’re in support of all of 

the things that these amendments the government is proposing. 

But I think that there’s much to be said about some of this. In 

my short time in this legislature, there are small things that this 

government is proposing that have some pretty good 

ramifications for ensuring we have a pool of justices of the 

peace, but my big concern here is, who has this government 

consulted with? 

 

And if it’s not on this Bill, it’s on all kinds of other things. 

We’ve seen that this government has a track record of cutting 

then consulting, or making changes without really talking to the 

people who are impacted by the changes, whether it’s Bill 80 or 

just recently the Saskatchewan Communications Network. This 

was a government who has decided to get rid of a key pillar of 

the film and television industry without talking to the people in 

the film and television industry. 

 

This government has a track record of not talking to people who 

are impacted by decisions. When you’re making changes to 

legislation that have ramifications on all the rest of the 

province, you need to know what you’re doing and the impact it 

will have on those people. 

 

So again, SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] 

might just seem like a public broadcaster to the government, but 

it is a key tool for leveraging funds from outside of this 

province and a key pillar of the film and television industry. 

There’s multiple prongs to the film and television industry. And 

this industry over 20 years has been built and grew up, and has 

languished the last couple of years, in part because of what’s 

gone on in the rest of the country and the world — the 

economic crisis. 

 

But other jurisdictions have worked to address some of these 

issues and are head and shoulders above us. And so for this 

government to kick the film and television industry when it’s 

down, and will be chasing film and television producers out of 

the province, it’s a very sad day here in Saskatchewan. And 

there’s a lot of people who are dreading May 1st. 

 

Aside from the film and television industry, there’s a lot of 

viewers in rural Saskatchewan for whom SCN has proven to be 

a very important connection to the rest of the province. And 

SCN actually was a vehicle for sharing some of our 

Saskatchewan stories. We spent almost $8 million on the 

Olympics to promote Saskatchewan abroad, and SCN does that 

on a daily basis to Canada and the rest of the world. So we 

spent $8 million for two weeks. And SCN — a small, a meagre 

investment — that has been doing this for a long, long time. 



4798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

So again, one of my big concerns with this legislation is 

although the changes seem fairly modest and reasonable, you 

always want to make sure that the people who are impacted by 

changes have been consulted. And again, this government 

doesn’t have a great track record in that regard. 

 

Dutch elm disease is another one. My sister is an urban forester 

in Saskatoon, and on budget day was absolutely appalled to 

hear that this program was being cut — 20 years of investment 

in saving our elm trees in Saskatchewan potentially down the 

toilet in a very short amount of time. Again this goes to the 

need to speak to people who are impacted by decisions. Good 

public policy is shaped and made when we make sure we’re 

talking to the full depth and breadth of people who will be 

impacted by public policy. 

 

So again on the face of this, this Bill looks like it’s reasonable. 

And changing the mandatory retirement age for justices of the 

peace from 65 to 70, putting them in line with Provincial Court 

justices, I think is a very good idea. Again, we recognize the 

contributions that our more mature citizens can make. 

 

I think the housekeeping details that I talked about, the 

gender-neutral language, again, I can’t emphasize how 

important that is. It seems like a minor issue, but language says 

a whole bunch, sends all kinds of messages to people. So I think 

that that’s a very positive change. 

 

Allowing for barristers or lawyers to be able to be justices of 

the peace is also a very good move. I mean we need to increase 

not just justices of the peace, but we need to ensure that we’re 

addressing labour force shortages, and this seems like a very 

reasonable way to do this. And from my understanding, in rural 

Saskatchewan justices of the peace can be very hard to find, so 

any vehicle that allows that opportunity to find more or increase 

the number of potential justices of the peace I think is a very 

good move. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So I believe that my colleagues will likely want to wade into 

this debate and probably have much to say, so at this time I’d 

like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 

No. 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with pleasure that this 

evening I rise in this Assembly and to join in on the debate on 

Bill No. 104, An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedures Act. Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked over some of the 

information that has been provided in this Bill. And it’s an 

opportunity for people to weigh in in their opinion to debate a 

Bill that will actually allow our police officers and our police 

force to mail out offences, tickets to people. Should they be 

violating that thing? 

 

No one is opposed to making sure that people follow the law. I 

think that’s very clear that’s the role and that’s why . . . And I 

see the Saskatchewan police chiefs have supported this and it’s 

come forward from themselves. And I think that’s good to see, 

that we see opportunities where we allow some input from 

agencies that have an impact. But that’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. We see this opportunity for them. 

 

And I just want to go back and reflect different opportunities 

where people haven’t had an opportunity to give their opinion 

or to be consulted or to make sure we’ve checked out with the 

experts out there, are we moving Bills and are we making laws 

that are fair to everybody and that everybody has a right to be 

heard? And, Mr. Speaker, this government, when it comes to 

that area, falls very short of that amongst the people in our 

province. We know that. 

 

People trust a government. They elect the government. And I 

think when they elect that government they put trust into that 

government. They want a government to do the best it can on 

behalf of all people. And the people really expect that from the 

Sask Party government. They expect them to make sure that 

whatever it is that they promise and they say they will deliver 

before an election, they expect that to happen after an election if 

they’re successful, Mr. Speaker. It’s a trust thing. If you make 

promises and commitments, it’s something you should fulfill. 

 

And we have an opportunity here to amend an Act. But again I 

want to go back to that 104, a Bill to amend. Well it’s about 

trust. And I say that. It’s about making sure that people have an 

opportunity to debate it. And that’s the role of the MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] in this Assembly. But 

you know it goes much deeper. And I want to go back to that. 

 

Some people really want to feel like . . . First Nations, Métis, 

Saskatchewan residents, voting members, anyone that really 

will be impacted by any type of Acts that we amend in this 

House and laws that are passed, again I want to go back to this 

very clearly: I want to make sure that they’ve had an 

opportunity to give input, to talk to their MLAs that represent 

them. And I think it’s an obligation of the MLAs to make sure 

they’re going out and talking to the people and listening to the 

people. That is how we find out. I know we’re elected in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, to represent and to do the best we can. 

We’re provided documents and Bills. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s sometimes troubling when I 

hear people telling me that they feel like their trust has been, the 

trust that they put into a government has turned their back on 

them. And it is a trust. This government and the Sask Party 

government has an obligation to those people and all people in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. And trust is something that’s . . . 

Once you lose the trust from a people or from an individual, it’s 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4799 

hard to win that back. 

 

And people make mistakes, but sometimes you can come 

forward and say, I’ve made a mistake. I’m sorry and it won’t 

happen again. And you can gain the trust of people. But if you 

constantly apologize and you apologize and you still go out and 

do the same mistakes without consulting people, they no longer 

feel the apology is sincere. And they start to feel like they’re 

being taken advantage of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is opportunities. And people really 

want to feel like when they’re saying their piece and they’ve put 

their concerns forward to their MLAs. And whether it’s 

members opposite or the government, there’s a trust. They elect 

us, all of us, and there’s a trust that we will do what’s best for 

our province with laws that we pass, with I guess, amendments 

we make to the Bills, like Bill 104. These Bills are what the law 

is of the land. 

 

And we have an obligation and a job to do as MLAs, and I take 

that job very serious, like I think some of my colleagues do and 

I hope the members opposite do. These are serious times. 

People are looking at the government and they want to reach 

out. But I know a lot of them are losing their patience. The trust 

factor, the duty to consult and accommodate and just to be 

heard, and when you don’t give those people an opportunity to 

be heard — whether it’s a Bill like 104 or it’s any legislation 

that we want to pass in this House or whether it’s a program, 

Mr. Speaker — I think the people want to be heard and have a 

right to be heard. 

 

And we have an obligation as MLAs to do all we can to fight 

for those individuals, to makes sure that laws that we pass and 

Bills that are passed in this House and debated, and I guess, at 

the end of the day, come into being the law. And there’s a 

process for that. But when that all happens, they want to be 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that we have gone through a process. And 

the process sometimes is a long debate and people have 

questions. And some people have different questions and they 

wonder, and other people will raise them. 

 

I look at an Act like this, 104, and it’s going to give the police 

an opportunity, should there be an accident and they can’t serve 

someone with a ticket immediately, but after they do their 

investigation, they find grounds to lay charges against 

somebody. Well before, they had to go out and they had to find 

that individual. And they may look at the last address and they 

might try to find them and a lot of time is used up. And 

sometimes, you know, the time that’s used up actually takes 

away from emergency services that those police officers could 

be responding to, versus trying to track down someone to give 

them a summons or a ticket. 

 

But it has to be done. Somebody has broken the law. An 

investigation happened and at the end of the day charges need 

to be laid. And that’s a process. There’s a law for that, which 

we passed in this House, and we make it very clear. We ask the 

police force to do their job, you know, to do a competent job. 

And I think they’ll try to do the best job they can to make sure 

that someone that has broken the law faces the charges and goes 

before a judge, and to just allow them an opportunity. 

 

And I mean, we’re going to debate that and I think we’re going 

to go through quite a bit of discussions. And I’ve heard 

members talk about it before. But to actually have an 

opportunity now to, via mail, to mail out a summons or a ticket 

to someone’s last address, well that is another opportunity 

where they don’t have to utilize their resources. And manpower 

is huge and we know the cost of that. So in some circumstances, 

it’s all right to do that, and I think it makes sense. 

 

But I wonder, have we consulted? And who has the government 

talked to? And have they thought this Bill through? And is there 

a good rationale to why we are going this route? And are there 

pros and cons? I think there is to every situation. I don’t think 

everyone will be happy when they receive a ticket in the mail. 

And maybe it’s, I don’t know, it’s speeding. It’s cameras that’s 

caught them, red lights. We’re seeing different things happen, 

whether it’s an accident and after an investigation is complete, 

again like I said, then in the mail is a ticket. 

 

I think some people will be very upset, and I just have to 

assume that because maybe they’re not expecting a ticket and 

didn’t realize it’s coming, but now it was mailed to them, versus 

having it handed to them or later. So there’s going to be 

different pros and cons to it. And you know there’s so many 

examples that I could use. Any time you’re going to affect 

people in our province, and I think this one will affect a number 

of people. Now you know people who, you know, everybody 

makes a mistake, a wrong judgment. You know, sometimes that 

happens. You know, you make a mistake and you should’ve 

stopped at the light, and it was an amber light and you went 

through it, and all of a sudden it went red, and you get caught in 

the moment. And you have to face those. And sometimes you 

made a call and you maybe tried to hit the brake, but you didn’t. 

For whatever . . . you went through it. And that happens. 

 

Sometimes we’re travelling on our highways and, you know, 

we’re busy to get to a meeting, our foots are kind of heavy. And 

we think, well you know, we’ve got to get to this meeting, sir, 

and I’m on my way, and we try to find our excuses when we do 

get pulled over. 

 

And sometimes, you know, I’m seeing signs more and more, 

Mr. Speaker, with aircraft. That they’re using aircraft to 

monitor speeds and they’re giving warning signs and they’re 

telling you. So I’m assuming after that process has happened 

and an aircraft has caught somebody speeding, I’m just having 

to assume that they have to go and locate the individual and 

serve him with a summons or a ticket, whatever it is at the time. 

 

I guess maybe this Act . . . And I think we’ll find out as time 

goes on. Well is this Act and the amendments in this Act, is it 

going to allow the police just to mail that ticket out? And, you 

know, I realize a police officer sees someone doing a violation, 

they put their lights on and a siren sometimes, and they pull 

them over and, you know, they give them a ticket. And they 

have a conversation and the police officer might ask, why were 

you doing this or what was your reason? And maybe they were 

going to an emergency. Their wife’s have a baby; I don’t know. 

Things happen and there’s different things. They’re rushing to a 

hospital for an emergency or something’s gone on why they’re 

in a hurry. You sometimes have an opportunity to talk to the 

police officer and sometimes, to be honest with you, they’ll 

make a judgment call and maybe you get a warning or you get a 

lesser charge that you could be charged with. So I think that 



4800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

police officer has an opportunity, and he’ll decide which charge 

is warranted at the time. And I assume they have some 

flexibility, so I will just go with that. 

 

But if that happens and you’re speeding and radar picks you up, 

and that’s what I’m wondering about this, Mr. Speaker, and you 

receive a ticket in the mail with this . . . If we pass this Bill and 

now you get a ticket in the mail, is it going to be kind of 

surprising? Well where was I speeding? Are people going to 

have a process to appeal it? 

 

And I was looking through some of the information been 

provided and people are going to have an opportunity to appeal 

it or go before a judge if you don’t want to do the voluntary 

payment. But what happens if you truly say you didn’t receive 

the ticket in the mail? And then I look at registered mail. 

They’re sending it maybe registered mail and you have to sign 

for it at the last address you gave, whether that was on your 

driver’s or for whatever reason. So there’s a lot of things, Mr. 

Speaker, to take in account here. And to be sure, what’s the 

intent of this amendment? 

 

And, you know, we hope that all our citizens are law-abiding, 

and that’s what we want to encourage. And I think we want all 

of us to follow and obey traffic laws. And sometimes I, you 

know, a person like I said earlier, gets in a hurry and, wrong 

move, should have hit the brake instead of hitting the gas to get 

through that amber light, and it’s red. So there’s different 

situations that will come up. 

 

So whether a person receives that and wants to appeal that 

before a judge and have an opportunity to argue, like I was 

saying, if it’s a police officer who pulls you over, you 

sometimes would be able to say what your reasoning was, why 

you were speeding a little too much, or he gives you a warning. 

And there’s different circumstances I think that would happen. 

 

But this way, you would receive a ticket immediately. And then 

you would have to go before a judge, and there’ll be a court 

date and I imagine a voluntary payment, I’m assuming. Or you 

go before a judge and you say why, you know, I’m appealing 

this or I disagree with this. And I was not speeding; I don’t 

know why I got this. Where was I speeding? Well, you know, 

there’s different ways that the police use now to determine 

whether you’re speeding or not. And I said aircraft, whether it’s 

radar in their vehicles. So there’s different measures. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So I think we may have some people who will argue that and 

fight it. And I want to make sure that we have to ensure that 

those individuals make sure that they have a right to be heard. 

And if they disagree with that ticket, they have a right to argue 

that ticket out, to make it very clear that they feel that it’s not 

warranted for them to have that ticket, that no, I wasn’t 

speeding. But they’re going to receive that ticket now, if it’s 

just for speeding, Mr. Speaker, or will there be other violations? 

A police officer sees you not wearing a seatbelt. Maybe you 

didn’t stop three seconds at a stop sign. Are you going to 

receive a ticket in the mail for that? 

 

Going through a red light, will you receive a ticket for that? 

Like if this is what this is, so is it a judgment call by the law to 

say an argument of nay or yea? I know I didn’t; it actually was 

green when I went through it. And I get it later. So that’s what 

I’m talking about. And I know that we have to make sure that 

those individuals have that process to be heard by a judge or to 

appeal that ticket saying, no I did not do that. Because — I’ll be 

honest with you — I guess mistakes happen. Nobody’s perfect. 

 

So what if somebody gets charged and it is an error, done in 

error, how do we determine that? The person saying, I wasn’t 

speeding; I didn’t go through a red light. So there’s a lot of 

things to take into consideration when we are changing the way 

we were handing out tickets by our law enforcement officers. 

 

And I mean they do an excellent job and I, from what I know, 

most are right upfront and if they see things happening . . . But 

there has been circumstances where, you know, they’re busy 

too and something gets by and they charge somebody and 

maybe it wasn’t so. And I’ve seen judges throw out things. And 

I know where somebody goes to court and they fight it or 

appeal it and a judge will throw it out for whatever reasons he 

finds that the charge is not warranted and he throws it out. And 

our judges have that process. 

 

So that’s part of that appeal process that I really think that 

people have to have that process and I want to ensure that that’s 

going to happen. I think a lot of people are going to have 

questions making sure that process happens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, you know, I want to go back to this, talking about trusting 

and making sure that people feel comfortable and the laws that 

are passed and the individuals that they elect to pass those laws 

to represent their best interests. And this is a trust issue and I 

want to use some examples of that. 

 

People, you know, listen to individuals. When we are running 

for re-election or we want to get into politics, we knock on 

individuals’ doors, Mr. Speaker, and we ask them to trust us. 

And we say it’s going to be different. Trust us. Support us. It 

isn’t going to be the way it was. We’re going to be different. 

We’re going to do the things that the people ask, and here are 

our promises. We’re going to write them down. And you’ll see 

them in black and white. And you know when people find out 

that these are not black and white, well you misunderstood me, 

or no, I’m not keeping that promise or whatever the answer is. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a trust issue. 

 

It’s the same thing with the ticket. The people will trust that this 

House will make laws and we’ll amend Bills to make sure that 

they are taken care of and that the laws are fair, that we give 

them an opportunity to be heard. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s so 

important to make sure that when we tell people we’ll do 

something, then we should make sure that we accomplish what 

we promise people. 

 

You can go out there and I guess you can say, we will try, and 

some people will buy that. We will try our best to do this; we 

will try our best to do that. But when you tell people you’re 

going to do something and you turn your back on them, it is a 

trust issue. And I’m sorry the government has had an 

opportunity and have turned their back on some of the promises 

and commitments they have made to people. 

 

So there’s questions and examples, Mr. Speaker, that I’m using 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4801 

when we look at Bill 104. And we’re going to give our men and 

women in uniform an opportunity to mail out tickets so that 

their time is utilized dealing with more serious emergency calls 

that they have to deal with but, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s a 

trust thing. We’re entrusting the men and women that represent 

our law enforcement to make sure that they’re following the 

law that are provided for them and to work within those areas of 

the law that give them the authority to lay charges and present 

tickets on individuals. But we are changing the way we do that, 

and by amending this it is going to give the law enforcement to 

mail out tickets. 

 

And it’s going to be interesting to see at the end of the day, as 

individuals receive those tickets in the mail. And I hope I’m not 

one of those individuals. And I imagine my colleagues on this 

side hope they’re not individuals that receive any of them, but, 

you know, sometimes things happen and people see us doing, I 

guess, breaking the law or speeding, whatever it is. And all of a 

sudden you’re going to get again, you’re going to get that ticket 

in the mail. And I think some people are going to be pretty 

upset because they’re not going to believe, well when was I 

speeding? When did I go through a red light? Some people 

won’t believe that because they thought they had lots of time or 

I wasn’t speeding. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be opportunities. And I 

think my colleagues want to talk about the amendment we’re 

making to this Bill and I think it has to go further. And there’s a 

lot of discussion that needs to happen. Yes, lots of discussion 

that needs to happen: making sure people feel like they were 

consulted, that their input was listened to, that their concerns 

were addressed. There are many concerns. And we’re making 

changes that will affect people’s lives, and when we do that I 

think it’s important that we debate it properly and we go 

through the discussions as maybe painful as it is sometimes. 

 

And we have to use examples, Mr. Speaker, because I know 

sometimes the members opposite aren’t listening. So if you use 

examples and you refer to their promises, they listen to you all 

of a sudden. They pay attention. And that is nice to see. I do 

appreciate that. 

 

So going back, and I want to reflect on some of the past things 

I’ve heard some of my colleagues talk about — broken 

promises, commitments. And when you make a promise and a 

commitment, the idea of that is to make sure you fulfill that. 

Whether that’s with funding; whether it’s property tax relief; 

whether it’s taxes; whether it’s PST, getting 1 per cent — those 

are promises you make to the people of our province. You have 

to ensure that you follow through on that. You can’t say after 

the fact, well no, we’ve made such a mess of the finances that 

— you know what? — we can’t do that. Well that’s a broken 

promise to the people. And they don’t appreciate that and they 

don’t forget it. They don’t forget it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I see that, you know, we’re going to go and change 

Bill 104, and we’re going to give an opportunity for our law 

enforcement to mail out tickets. And you know, I know they’re 

busy. They have a job to do and I respect the work they do. Do I 

always agree with them? No, I don’t. I don’t always agree with 

the way they handle things. But you know what? Overall I have 

to admit, they have a hard job and I think they do their best that 

they can. 

And we’re giving them some tools, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity 

so that it will take and give them more time to focus on the 

emergency calls that they respond to. And they’re going to be 

able to respond to more calls, and I hope that this assists them. 

And to see the Saskatchewan police chiefs’ association bring 

this and support this, then there must be a reason why they 

wanted to bring this forward. There must have been problems 

with making sure that people are at home or finding or locating 

someone that’s getting charged or a ticket being served or a 

summons. 

 

So I imagine it’s been a tough job to find those individuals, and 

I know they use other resources, they’re not always police 

officers, to try to locate those individuals. And it’s not an easy 

job to do that. And sometimes, sometimes it takes away from 

response time that they can respond to other emergency calls 

because they have their staff out serving tickets, summons. And 

I don’t think that’s the idea of law enforcement. 

 

But I’m going to go back to a few comments, Mr. Speaker, and 

about the trust issue, because I think that’s so important. I want 

to make sure it’s very clear that the members opposite 

understand the trust thing. This is a Bill. We’re going to change 

it or propose to change it, but we’re going to debate it and we’re 

going to talk about it, and my colleagues want to talk about, and 

I know there’s people back home really wanting to know, to 

make sure that I represent them well and we make sure that 

Bills we pass, we debate in this House. And that’s part of that 

process, Mr. Speaker. We have to debate those Bills. Whether 

the government likes it or does not like it, it doesn’t really 

matter. Those Bills and amendments . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s our obligation. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — It’s an obligation. That’s right, it is an 

obligation — an obligation. You’re right. And it is an obligation 

that we have to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we’re doing the 

job that the people have asked us to do. And that means 

members opposite over there as well, Mr. Speaker. And, you 

know, we’ve seen examples of that, where people have 

complained and they come in this House, and they’re very 

concerned that their MLAs and the people representing them 

aren’t hearing them and aren’t bringing their message to the 

government. So they come here and they share their stuff with 

the official opposition and we’ll make sure that we hear those 

concerns. And that’s a trust thing. They trust we will do that for 

them and they can count on that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, trust is a big thing. Trust is a big thing. You 

know, trust is probably one of the biggest things that will, I 

think, make a government successful or take down a 

government. And I think that government is going to be taken 

down. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we can go around and we can do all 

the cheerleading I’ve heard these guys do for two years now. 

And yes, well every now and then . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think they lost their pompoms. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, you know, that’s a good point. I want 

to correct that, Mr. Speaker. I take that back. You know, 

they’ve got rid of the pompoms. I think . . . And they have 



4802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

actually lost the smiles. They are frowning more now. And 

there’s a reason why they’re frowning. 

 

And, you know, I want to use an example. I want to use an 

example, Mr. Speaker, because I want to make sure I’m 

referring to Bill 104. I want to stay on that point, Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 104. And it’s a trust issue. Bill 104 is a trust issue. We’re 

going to allow our police enforcement officers to mail out 

tickets to our Saskatchewan people. And those people have put 

trust in us that we will ensure that we’ve talked about this Bill, 

and that we’ve made sure that they’re protected and that they’ve 

been, I guess, consulted and that they’ve had an opportunity to 

be heard. They want that. And they think by electing us, and us 

in the official opposition, for now in the official opposition, 

they want to make sure that the official opposition holds that 

government accountable. And we will. Mark my words, we 

will. 

 

We have a job to do and we will do our job to the best of our 

ability for the people we represent. And you know Bill 104 is 

going to give some opportunities for our law enforcement to get 

the job done. And I referred to some of the situations that come 

up in emergency situations where, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will 

allow the enforcement officers to mail it out. And they can 

respond to more urgent calls, emergency calls, and they don’t 

have to focus on trying to locate somebody when there’s been 

an accident and a collision, and they can’t determine until the 

investigation is done who’s going to be charged. So they can 

mail out the ticket. Before, they had to do it the other way. We 

know that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think, like everything else, there’s always the 

trust issue. Trust is huge. And you know I want to emphasize on 

that. Trust is truly a thing . . . And I want to use an example to 

Bill 104. We’re entrusting that the police will, with these 

amendments to this Bill, will do the best of their ability and will 

be honest to the people. And we know that, and we trust that. 

We trust that, and we pass this on. We put the trust in them. But 

I’ll tell you, the Saskatchewan people don’t put that much trust 

in that government. 

 

Now you know I’ve had an opportunity to speak to this Bill and 

the amendments and, you know, there’s other things. I know 

I’m missing something, so I don’t want to miss anything, so I’m 

going to make that sure that I go over my list of things to make 

sure because, you know, it’s important. I want to be very 

thorough. I talked about the police chiefs, and it came from 

them as a recommendation. I think that’s very positive. 

 

[20:45] 

 

You know, I went into this area here, and we talked about an 

accident. And I talked a little bit about the accident. And after 

an accident, sometimes it could take up to four, six hours, eight 

hours for an investigation. And you have to call in a special 

unit, and that unit may not be within 20 minutes. It may take 

them four to eight hours to get to the scene. Well if they get to 

the scene and the people have been taken to a hospital or 

somebody’s gone home, who do they charge after they do their 

investigation? Well I mean they would have to go out and 

actually locate the individual and serve them with that ticket. 

 

I think this is going to give them an opportunity to mail out the 

ticket to them. I think that’s what it’ll do, but I’m not sure. But I 

know, as my colleagues ask more questions and we debate this 

Bill, that’ll come very clear. It’ll come clear to us. Those are 

other issues, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues really want to get into 

this. They’re really dying to get into the debate on this one, like 

you know, they really want to get into it. But at this time I think 

I’m prepared to move adjournment of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved adjournment on the Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 134 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 134 — The 

Opticians Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is my pleasure to be able to rise and offer a few 

comments and my observations on Bill No. 134, The Opticians 

Act. I see from the minister’s comments on the second reading 

that he says, “In developing this legislation, the government has 

consulted closely with the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic 

Dispensers Association.” And I’m frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I was quite surprised to read this. Surprised because this seems 

to be the exception when bringing forward legislation from this 

Sask Party government rather than the norm. 

 

We see a basic lack of consultation with respect to almost every 

single piece of legislation that this government brings forward. 

Or even the cuts to the budget; we see that there were budget 

cuts made without any prior consultation to any of the experts 

that had any involvement with respect to how those cuts would 

affect the people of Saskatchewan or have long-standing 

financial implications for the province going forward. 

 

My colleague had already mentioned earlier about the budget 

cut, for instance, of $500,000 to the Dutch elm disease program. 

We now see that the Sask Party government has already 

backtracked on that, knowing full well that it was a gigantic 

mistake to have made that cut of that program and the $500,000 

that that program cost because of course the $500,000 were 

used in such an amazingly efficient way that they actually 

prevented the spread of Dutch elm disease into the urban areas 

from the rural areas and provided the close monitoring and 

removal of those trees that were infected. 

 

So we can see that there were high efficiencies built into that 

$500,000 worth of funding that the Sask Party government now 

themselves recognize was a problem. And the Minister of 

Environment has now backtracked and has conceded that, well 

they were able to find $100,000 to put back into that program. 

And I’m not really sure at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to 

whether or not that program is now going to exist with 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4803 

$100,000 worth of funding, or it’s simply going to be $100,000 

worth of funding just to provide the monitoring under some 

other program, department. We’re not really sure at this point, 

Mr. Speaker, but there are many more questions that need to be 

answered about it. And we’ll certainly ask all the questions that 

need to be asked. 

 

But as we see, there were no consultations done on this and 

that’s why the government now has to backtrack. And quite 

frankly if the government was smart about the issue and could 

swallow their pride for just a millisecond, the bright thing to do 

would be to reinstate the full funding of $500,000 to the Dutch 

elm disease prevention program and ensure that Saskatchewan 

people will be able to . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Just to remind the member I’m pretty 

sure we’re on The Opticians Act, Bill 134. I would ask her to 

continue on with that discussion. 

 

Ms. Morin: — It’s my delight, Mr. Speaker, to inform the 

Assembly as to why I was making comments about the Dutch 

elm disease program, and that has to do with the fact that there 

is a consistent lack of consultations when this Sask Party 

government is bringing forward legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, there are many other examples 

I can give on the modus operandi of this government and its 

lack of consultation with bringing forward any legislation to 

this Assembly. And as well as I stated earlier also, making 

budget cuts. 

 

Well let’s look at for instance Bill No. 5. Bill No. 5 is a really, 

really good example of this, Mr. Speaker, because prior to the 

November 2007 election they were telling everyone that was 

asking, will there be essential services legislation? And what 

did the Sask Party government say? The Sask Party government 

said no. Matter of fact, the current Minister of Health said no, 

we don’t deem that necessary. Within 30 days of being elected, 

Mr. Speaker, what did the Sask Party government do? They 

introduced essential services legislation. 

 

Let’s talk about another example of consultations that didn’t 

take place prior to legislation being introduced. Let’s look at for 

instance Bill No. 6, Mr. Speaker. And it was an amendment to 

The Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker. Now again, we see from a 

UN [United Nations] agency, which is the ILO, we see that the 

ILO themselves are rendering a decision stating that that 

legislation was not necessary. And furthermore, even more 

contemptuous, is the fact that that legislation was introduced 

without prior consultation with the stakeholders that it would 

most directly affect, Mr. Speaker. So we see again there is a 

lack of consultations when this Sask Party government decides 

to do what it has its mind set on doing. 

 

Let’s look at another example, for instance Bill 80. Bill 80 is 

something that the current government, the Sask Party 

government, wants to ram through. And boy let me tell you they 

have tried everything under the sun in the last session and in 

this session to ensure that they succeed in destroying the lives 

of the tradespeople in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Now of course they’re going to throw their spin on 

that as to why they deem it necessary to make these changes to 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act. However, Mr. 

Speaker, any thinking person in this province, any thinking 

person except for the members of the Sask Party government 

can see that this is unnecessary legislation, unwanted 

legislation, and will only cause hardship for the trade industry, 

the trades people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And now why, why, Mr. Speaker, would a government, a Sask 

Party government who claims, who claims that they want to see 

the economy grow in this province, why would they do 

something to damage the lives of working people in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? People ask that. Why? Do you 

know why? Because the Premier, prior to the last election, 

made it very clear in no uncertain circumstances that he was 

going to war with the working people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. He was going to war with them, and guess what? 

Guess what? He actually kept that promise. That is a promise 

that he actually kept. He is going to war with the working 

people of this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we find that, we the NDP opposition find it 

absolutely reprehensible. And we’re going to make sure that we 

do everything in our power to protect and assist the working 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let’s talk about another lack of consultation that took 

place. And that was on for instance a Bill that was passed 

unfortunately in the last session called Bill No. 43, and it’s the 

trespass amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. Now the trespass 

amendment Act seems innocuous but whoa, whoa, whoa, 

because it’s not so. The trespass amendment Act, the changes to 

the trespass amendment Act mean that the Sask Party 

government, if they decide at any given point in time that 

people shouldn’t be able to express their freedom of expression 

or their opinion or want to make known that they’re not happy 

about the decisions of the government, that they can say to them 

that you’re not allowed to express your opinion on public 

property, wherever it may exist. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is reprehensible yet again. And I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they take a good look, a very good 

look at the decision from the UN and the ILO as to what it feels 

about the trespass amendment Act because they even rendered 

an opinion on the trespass amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, 

be sure that there will be more to come on that particular Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, because yet again we see a Sask Party dictatorship 

that thinks that they get to simply do whatever they want, 

whenever they want. And it doesn’t matter if there’s been 

consultations or not, doesn’t matter who it’s going to affect, 

how it’s going to affect them. They are going to carry through 

because they feel that they have the divine right — no pun 

intended — to do whatever it is they want, whenever it is that 

they want, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this Sask Party 

government feels. 

 

Now so as we see, they actually talk about the fact that they 

have consulted the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Association with respect to The Opticians Act. And as I said, 

I’m very relieved to see that at least someone’s being consulted 

with respect to one of the pieces of legislation that we’re seeing 

come forward in this legislature. 

 

Now I want to acknowledge the important role that opticians 

play in the province. They certainly serve an important role in 



4804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

the health system in serving the health needs of Saskatchewan 

people as health professionals experienced in providing 

accurate and appropriate vision, not to mention that they do so 

much more than that, Mr. Speaker. They’re a very concerned 

group of individuals, for not just the optical health of 

individuals in the province in Saskatchewan people, but also for 

ensuring that the equipment they use is always updated so that 

they can provide the best care possible, as we see today in 

today’s Leader-Post about another clinic receiving some 

updated equipment. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the opticians are able to 

diagnose other health-related issues through our appointments 

with our opticians as to what might be going elsewhere in our 

medical lives through these appointments that we have with 

these health professionals, Mr. Speaker. I know of various 

circumstances where opticians have referred people to their 

doctors with concerns that they have noticed when the patients 

have been in their offices. And sometimes unfortunately those 

concerns lead to a diagnosis of cancer and other health-related 

issues that are very serious, Mr. Speaker, and they were first 

picked up in the offices of the opticians of Saskatchewan. And 

quite frankly, for that I am extremely grateful, and the people 

who are fortunate enough to have those health issues detected at 

an early stage by the opticians that they’re visiting are very 

grateful as well obviously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know from my own personal experience, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a wonderful optician by the name of Dr. Diana Monea 

who has provided excellent care for my family and I. I of course 

have to wear glasses and contact lenses. My husband now 

unfortunately has had to succumb to reading glasses within the 

last six months. Not something he’s particularly happy about, 

but something that does seem to happen to all of us as we age, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And my daughter is a very wonderful circumstance of the 

wonderful care that they provide for the people of the province, 

Mr. Speaker. My daughter was born premature and had to be 

intubated because she was born premature. And so she had a 

situation, Mr. Speaker, where she was cross-eyeing. She was 

cross-eyeing with both eyes actually, Mr. Speaker, and luckily 

enough because we have such wonderful care from Dr. Diana 

Monea and because she was able to help us with early 

diagnosis, she referred us to a specialist. 

 

And that specialist informed us that the only way to correct my 

daughter’s situation was either through surgery or through the 

means of corrective lenses potentially. And I am happy to report 

that we went with the option of corrective lenses and we were 

very successful with that, Mr. Speaker. My daughter still wears 

glasses because she understands the importance of maintaining 

good eye health. But she no longer cross-eyes and has perfect 

vision. So she’s fortunate enough that she doesn’t have to wear 

these corrective lenses when she’s playing sports which of 

course makes that situation so much easier. 

 

So I want to personally thank Dr. Diana Monea for the 

wonderful care that she provided to my family and I because 

she is a cherished member of our team in terms of our lives and 

maintaining good health, Mr. Speaker. 

So we see from this Bill that it’s going to be called The 

Opticians Act, and the reason for this I was given was that the 

title, optician, is for the profession of ophthalmic dispensers, 

and it’s to be consistent with other jurisdictions across Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. And quite frankly, when you have changes like 

this that are of a positive nature in terms of being on par with 

the other jurisdictions in Canada, that only makes good sense, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course the Sask Party would like to stoop to the lowest 

common denominator on other issues with other jurisdictions 

across Canada, Mr. Speaker, and needless to say, those aren’t 

things that we in the NDP opposition want to see the 

government stoop to. Sinking to the lowest common 

denominator is not something that the people of Saskatchewan 

are looking for or want out of the leadership of their 

government, Mr. Speaker, and yet the Sask Party government 

seems to think that that is something that is desirable. It is 

something that they seem to think that that’s what they would 

like to have. 

 

As my colleague from Prince Albert referred to earlier in the 

Bill that he was speaking of, sinking to the lowest common 

denominator when it comes to environmental regulations or 

labour mobility regulations or other trade regulations that might 

have harmful effects on the people of Saskatchewan by having 

those blanket agreements. 

 

And then having a lowest common denominator situation that is 

enforced through those blanket agreements, Mr. Speaker, is not 

something that the people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

looking for. They’ve made it clear through consultations that 

were held on the issues, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately their 

voices seem to be no longer heard by the Sask Party 

government because now we see that they won’t be open and 

accountable with respect to being forthright on what they are 

going to be doing in those blanket agreements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said earlier, we’re going to continue, as well as the 

member from Prince Albert had already mentioned, we’re going 

to continue making sure that we ask the hard questions and 

pressing them to be open and forthright with the people of 

Saskatchewan. That is what they . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s a trust issue. 

 

Ms. Morin: — And it’s a trust issue. That’s a very good point. 

It’s a trust issue, Mr. Speaker. People of Saskatchewan can’t 

trust a government that they don’t know is working on their 

behalf in a true fashion, Mr. Speaker. And what we have now is 

a complete lack of trust by the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, because we’ve a government that is not being 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. We have a 

government that is not being transparent to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and therefore it’s a government 

that cannot be trusted by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s very, very disconcerting that this is something 

that has already come to fruition in such a short time since 

they’ve been elected, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately this is 

where we stand today. 

 

We also see that it is going to change the name of The 

Ophthalmic Dispensers Act to The Opticians Act to reflect the 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4805 

title used by the profession of ophthalmic dispensers in 

Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Speaker, this standardizing measure 

makes sense, and given that there was consultations prior to the 

change being made, we are optimistic that this is something that 

is desired by the Ophthalmic Dispensers Association of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it also changes, makes a change to the regulatory bodies 

named from the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Association to the Saskatchewan College of Opticians. And 

again, this is apparently going to reflect the trend amongst the 

regulatory bodies for this profession with other jurisdictions 

across Canada, Mr. Speaker. And again as I said, if this is 

something that is desired by the ophthalmic dispensers, this is 

something we certainly wouldn’t want to stand in the way of, 

and we’ll certainly support. 

 

Now the change from association to college more accurately 

reflects the regulatory function of this professional 

organization, is what the minister said in his second reading 

speech. So we are going to trust that the minister is accurate in 

his assessment of what this is going to do. 

 

Now it also talks about the fact that the Bill is going to include 

new provisions clarifying that the duty of the regulatory body is 

to serve and protect the interests of the public, not the interests 

of its members. And, Mr. Speaker, this is obviously something 

that will be . . . I mean, it is obviously always welcome news to 

the public that there is someone that is going to be looking out 

for them. And we’re certainly hopeful that this the case in terms 

of what the minister has said in his second reading speech. 

 

He goes on to say that the Bill will also appoint three public 

representatives on the council of Saskatchewan College of 

Opticians, one of whom will serve on the discipline committee. 

He goes on to say that doing so will give the public a greater 

voice in regulation of opticians. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is again 

another one of those welcome changes, if in fact this is the case. 

 

The public always wants to ensure that they have input where 

they desire to have input and that that input will then be, would 

obviously be respected, will be listened to, and will then be 

incorporated. So if in fact this is the change that is going to be 

taking place through this Bill, then again that would seem that it 

would be something that would actually be a positive move in 

the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I found this quote by the minister in his 

second reading of The Optician Act to be very interesting, and 

so I want to quote him directly. He says: 

 

. . . this government is committed to an accessible, quality 

health care system. We will provide leadership in making 

the changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system 

for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find this to be highly, highly, highly hypocritical 

of the Minister of Health especially to be saying. If it was 

anybody else on the Sask Party government benches it would be 

hypocritical enough, period. But for the Minister of Health, for 

the Minister of Health to be saying that he is going to be, that he 

wants to provide leadership in making the changes needed to 

strengthen and sustain the system for the future is ridiculously 

hypocritical. 

 

Does the Minister of Health not realize that it was his decision 

and his Sask Party government’s decision to de-insure the 

chiropractic services for the people of Saskatchewan? And does 

he not understand that although those services were looked at, 

Mr. Speaker, in 1991, when the NDP came to power in 1991, 

they were left with a massive, massive deficit of $15 billion or 

more, Mr. Speaker? The province was on the verge of 

bankruptcy. The only reason, the only reason we didn’t have to 

declare bankruptcy was because at that time . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D‟Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 

member on her feet talking used words that are 

unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker. On page 146 of Beauchesne's, 

Mr. Speaker, to call someone hypocritical has been ruled out of 

order on February 21st, 1961, June 22nd, 1961, July 5th, 1961, 

Mr. Speaker. I request that the member withdraw those remarks 

and apologize. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll withdraw the remark of 

referring to the Minister of Health as a hypocrite. I’ll withdraw 

that remark. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, that remark, what the minister said 

in terms of wanting to provide leadership in making the changes 

needed to strengthen and sustain the system for the future is 

absolutely disingenuous, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely 

disingenuous. 

 

That remark, that remark is something, Mr. Speaker, that that 

Minister of Health, that Minister of Health knew full well, knew 

full well when the chiropractors had a negotiated agreement 

with the Government of Saskatchewan, knew full well that the 

government was not going to honour that agreement. He 

allowed them to believe all the way along that they would not 

suffer the de-insuring or delisting of that service, Mr. Speaker. 

So that comment, Mr. Speaker, was entirely, entirely 

disingenuous because that is not the opinion of the Sask Party 

government. It is not the opinion of that Minister of Health, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They are not wanting to be leaders with respect to providing the 

best health care in the country. They are willing to sink to 

lowest common denominator, Mr. Speaker. That’s what that 

Sask Party government and that Minister of Health are willing 

to do — sink to the lowest common denominator. Now why, 

why do they need to sink to that lowest common denominator, 

Mr. Speaker? Because they need to find the money to cover up 

their fiscal incompetence when it comes to the management of 

the province . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind the member we’re 

discussing Bill 134, The Opticians Act. I would ask her to 

discuss that Bill. 



4806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

Ms. Morin: — So when referring to Bill No. 134, The 

Opticians Act, Mr. Speaker, and the minister’s comment in his 

second reading remarks, I’ll just repeat that so that everybody is 

clear as to why I’m talking about this particular issue at this 

time. The Minister of Health said : 

 

. . . this government is committed to an accessible, quality, 

health care system. We will provide leadership in making 

the changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system 

for the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, can you tell me how that Minister of Health 

can say that he is going to strengthen and sustain the system for 

the future when they make cuts to the surgical care centres in 

Regina? Gone. Thirteen long-term care facilities, gone. The 

children’s hospital, the funding to the children’s hospital, gone. 

So tell me how that Minister of Health can say that his 

comments were anything but disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, when 

he says that he is going to strengthen and sustain the system for 

the future. 

 

I wonder how the patients of the chiropractors of Saskatchewan 

feel about the leadership with respect to health care of that Sask 

Party government and that Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. I 

suggest it is quite the opposite of what he deems leadership in 

his comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we are. We have a Sask Party government that can’t be 

trusted. We have a minister who is entirely disingenuous with 

his comments. He seems to think that it’s okay to say whatever 

he wants, whenever he wants, when it suits the purposes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

He came back this evening from a convention, Mr. Speaker, and 

thought it was quite humorous when we asked him how the 

SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] 

convention went, Mr. Speaker. Well you know what? The 

25,000 health care workers in this province don’t think it’s so 

funny, Mr. Speaker. They don’t think it’s so funny at all. As a 

matter of fact, going without a contract for two years is 

absolutely deplorable. And this is what he calls the leadership in 

health care. And this is what he calls strengthening and 

sustaining the system for the future when he refers to his 

comments for Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act. 

 

It is completely disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 

Saskatchewan, they won’t be fooled, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 

fooled, Mr. Speaker. They might have been fooled prior to last 

election, Mr. Speaker, but you know what, Mr. Speaker? The 

icing has come off the cake. They’re not fooled any more, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re not fooled any more. They know full well 

what this government stands for. Well for the most part, except 

for the part that they’re not being transparent about. But they 

know that they’re not working in the best interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They know that the comments 

that the minister made with respect to Bill 134, The Opticians 

Act are not, are not genuine and are not accurate and certainly 

cannot be trusted. These comments cannot be trusted, Mr. 

Speaker. These comments cannot be trusted. 

 

[21:15] 

 

When you have a minister who will say one thing one day and 

then say quite another the next day, how do you trust, how do 

you trust that minister, Mr. Speaker? When you have that 

minister who represents, who represents the Sask Party 

government and is speaking on behalf of the Sask Party 

government —and best yet, Mr. Speaker, is speaking on behalf 

of the President of Executive Council who is none other than 

the Premier himself, Mr. Speaker — how do you trust that Sask 

Party government when you can’t trust what’s coming out of 

the mouths of the ministers that represent that Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the comments that the minister 

made in Bill 134, The Opticians Act, you know, at first when 

looking at it I wasn’t too alarmed by what I read. But needless 

to say that, you know, because we talk about the fact that 

there’s a trust issue here, Mr. Speaker, and that there is 

therefore a significant lack of trust for a whole host of reasons, I 

know that I personally would want to speak to a number of 

ophthalmic dispensers just to ensure that everything has been 

appropriately covered off. I want to ensure that there isn’t 

something that maybe should be amended to strengthen the Act. 

I want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that I have spoken personally 

and that my colleagues have spoken personally to a number of 

the ophthalmic dispensers in Saskatchewan, simply because I 

no longer have that feeling of trust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when I look at some of the other Bills that we’ve already 

looked into and some of the other Bills that I’ve certainly 

looked into, that trust did not become any greater. As a matter 

of fact, that trust was diminished more, Mr. Speaker. There is 

very little to none, no consultation being done with respect to 

the people, the experts, or the stakeholders that have expertise 

on the issues that are being brought forward by the Sask Party 

government. Or as I referred to the budget cuts, there was little 

or none, little to none consultations that were done with respect 

to the cuts that were made to the budget, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So the trust factor is gone, Mr. Speaker. And because the trust 

factor is gone, there needs to be a full review done with the 

ophthalmic dispensers of Saskatchewan and some individuals 

that I know, individuals that others know, to ensure that they are 

actually seeing what they want to come to fruition to be part of 

this Act and that the Act is going to cover off the appropriate 

asks that the association has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, as an opposition we are not overly 

concerned with the actual contents of the Bill thus far, but there 

certainly needs to be some careful scrutiny done because of the 

disconcerting statements that the minister makes with respect to 

being committed to an accessible quality health care system and 

yet making the cuts that we’ve seen and yet making the health 

care system in Saskatchewan fall to the lowest common 

denominator, as the Minister for Health likes to refer to when 

he was talking about the delisting of chiropractic services, Mr. 

Speaker. When the minister was asked why he felt that he could 

do this and that why, you know, he felt it was all right to do 

this, he talked about the fact that other provinces didn’t have 

these services insured as a subsidized service. He also referred 

to the fact that there are other health care issues, for instance 

dentistry and other services, that are not insured by the 

government and therefore that it was all right to cut the 

chiropractic services. 

 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4807 

What’s really interesting about this . . . And I just realized I 

didn’t get to finish my thought because of the uproar from the 

members opposite not wanting to hear what I had to say at that 

point in time, Mr. Speaker. But when the NDP opposition 

looked at the issue of chiropractic services and whether it could 

be afforded at that time in the early ’90s because of a number of 

efficiencies that needed to be found because of the bankrupt 

situation that the province was left in by the Conservative 

government previous, there was a careful review done. And it 

was shown that it was going to be substantial, substantial future 

financial implications, Mr. Speaker, substantial future financial 

implications by delisting chiropractic services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is the same that we’re hearing from the chiropractors 

now, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the services being delisted, 

and so obviously this is information that the Sask Party 

government should’ve had, that the Premier should’ve had, and 

that the Premier should’ve taken strong note of with respect to 

the decision that he made and that his cabinet made in delisting 

the chiropractic services in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, we’re seeing some hypocrisy. Well we’re 

seeing a lot of hypocrisy when it comes to the whole notion of 

health care in this province, Mr. Speaker. When we have 25,000 

health care workers that have gone without a contract . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Remind the member to talk about Bill 

134, The Opticians Act. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Yes, well when we’re speaking of the Bill 134, 

The Opticians Act, and the fact that the Minister of Health 

himself made comments in the Act that his government is 

committed to an accessible, quality health care system and that 

they will provide leadership in making changes needed to 

strengthen and sustain the system for the future, one has to 

wonder then why this Sask Party government is allowing 

25,000 health care workers to be without a contract for two 

years, Mr. Speaker. Because that surely to goodness is not 

going to be sustaining the health care system for the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When we see and speak to health care workers in this province, 

you know what they’re telling us, Mr. Speaker? They’re telling 

us that they’re frustrated. They feel disrespected. They feel 

devalued. And quite frankly a lot of them are saying that they’re 

not going to continue on, that they’re going to seek employment 

elsewhere. Now that employment elsewhere, I asked them, well 

what does that mean? Are you going to leave the province? Are 

you going to seek alternate forms of employment? And quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, it’s both. They are now looking at a 

different career choice or seeking employment outside the 

province where they don’t feel that they are so disrespected and 

undervalued by the government that they are working for, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when you have the Minister of Health making the comments 

that he did in Bill 134, The Opticians Act, which is clearly 

reflective of what the Premier’s thoughts are in terms of, you 

know, saying one thing and doing another, Mr. Speaker, it 

becomes confusing for the people of this province. It becomes 

confusing, quite frankly, for the people who have to sit in the 

opposition and listen to this every day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re trying to make headway of what the Sask Party 

government is doing or what they want to do, but they clearly 

have no vision. They have no plan. And because they have no 

vision or plan, Mr. Speaker, we see them lurching from decision 

to decision to decision based on covering up their financial 

mismanagement to the province, quite frankly, and therefore 

making bad decisions because they are lurching from decision 

to decision. 

 

I mean the two most glaring obvious examples now are, as I 

said, the $500,000 for the Dutch elm disease program which 

had a high level of efficiency built in. 

 

We’re also seeing the delisting of chiropractic services which 

we know is going to have serious cost implications for the 

health system in Saskatchewan, cost implications, Mr. Speaker, 

quite frankly that are going to be very difficult to absorb. It is 

well known to everyone, Mr. Speaker, that the Health budget is 

a substantial cost factor to the people of Saskatchewan. We are 

so very grateful and thankful that we have this wonderful 

system of medicare, Mr. Speaker, but clearly it does come at a 

cost. And, Mr. Speaker, that cost is something that we want to 

ensure is used in its best fashion, obviously. 

 

So by delisting chiropractic services we are hearing now that 

the cost implications going forward are going to be significant, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing of a higher increase of use of visits 

to doctors’ offices, visits to emergency rooms because in a lot 

of cases people simply won’t be able to afford to have their 

regular appointments with their chiropractor. And given that 

that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to see a lot more 

people in a lot of pain. 

 

It was only just a week and a half ago that we saw a woman on 

the front steps of the legislature and, Mr. Speaker, it broke my 

heart, quite frankly. It was on not the previous Thursday but the 

Thursday before. There was a woman on the front steps of the 

legislature sitting in a sleeping bag on the front steps. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was a cold day. It was very, very chilly, but she sat 

out there in tears with her documentation and her records. She 

was on two pages worth of medications for pain, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we asked her, we said, you know, why are you here? Why 

are you sitting on the cold front steps of the legislature? Mr. 

Speaker, and through her tears, she was able to explain to us 

that she’s been suffering in pain for 18 months or more, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to such horrible back pain because she 

was waiting for surgery, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Now this surgery unfortunately was something that she kept 

getting the runaround on and kept getting different stories on 

and finally felt that she had no other choice but to resort to the 

desperate measure of sitting on the front steps of the legislature 

to see if she could just attract any attention in helping her with 

her situation, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, she did attract 

attention. Anyone that walked by, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t help 

but stop, couldn’t help but stop and talk to her and be 

compassionate and empathetic because it was such a 

devastating situation to have witnessed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The sad part, Mr. Speaker, is that despite the fact that the 

minister’s office was well aware of this woman sitting out there, 

despite the fact that, I’m sure, people all over the building were 



4808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

well aware of the woman sitting out there — there were 

probably about half a dozen of my colleagues out there with her 

then, sitting with her and providing some accompaniment and 

some solidarity in her situation — but not one single elected 

representative from the Sask Party government came out to hear 

her story, to ask her what was going on, to be just even just the 

least bit compassionate. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it would have gone a long way. It 

really would have. I mean if she would have seen someone 

from the Sask Party government — some elected official, some 

MLA or the Premier — come out and ask her what’s going on, 

what’s wrong, I’m sure, I’m sure she wouldn’t have felt nearly 

as hostile as she ended up feeling in the time that she was sitting 

out there. Because she just wanted someone to hear her story. 

She just wanted someone to listen to her, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was really, really sad that the only people 

that would come out to listen to her . . . Because as I said, we 

found her — well actually my colleague from Prince Albert 

found her — on the front steps. We found her on the front steps. 

This was not someone that we brought here, you know, to set 

up some display or anything. She came here on her own accord. 

She wanted to talk to somebody. She wanted to explain her 

story. She wanted to explain the plight that she had gone 

through. She had the full support of her doctor in what she 

wanted to do. He granted her permission to give his number, his 

name and number to anyone that wanted to speak to him, and 

she was able to provide that to a number of individuals, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And ultimately it was after a few, I think it was about three, 

hours that we sat out there with her, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, 

it was a very cold, it was a very chilly afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

There was finally — after she refused to come into the building 

to speak to somebody because she knew that she needed to stay 

visible; she knew that if she came into the building that she 

would likely be ushered away into some office and perhaps not 

be able to have someone take her seriously and simply be, you 

know, shoved aside again — but she was able to finally be able 

to talk to some people from the Ministry of Health. There was 

very, very helpful people from the ministry that came to the 

building and, Mr. Speaker, they were able to accommodate her 

in terms of helping her from falling through the cracks any 

further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it was, like I said, a heart-wrenching situation, Mr. Speaker. 

It was a heart-wrenching story. It was surely to goodness 

something that was a very difficult decision for her to come to, 

as well as all the supporters that came with her, some good 

neighbours of hers. 

 

And the one woman and her two beautiful children who, I 

found out through the story that I was told, that actually sat with 

this woman night after night and day after day as this woman 

was retching from all of the medications that she had to take, 

Mr. Speaker. And this 14-year-old girl sat with her and took 

care of her and provided her the companionship and the care 

that she needed when she was suffering so badly from this 

situation. And when I think of my own 13-year-old daughter, I 

don’t think my daughter would have been able to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. So I give that girl a lot of credit. She has a lot of 

spunk, a lot of strength, and obviously a tremendous amount of 

compassion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the story ends well. We are hoping that she is 

successful in her situation and we’ll see some good health going 

forward into the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act, as I said, 

doesn’t necessarily cause us huge concern in terms of what 

we’re seeing from the content of the changes and such. But as I 

said, many of my colleagues want to ensure that we’re being 

thorough in this Act . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote not to be yelling from his seat when one of his 

members is speaking. Recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well unfortunately the volume is kind of loud 

on both sides of the House right now, Mr. Speaker. I’m having 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member not to 

comment on the Speaker’s rulings. Member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate the 

ability to be able to speak to this Bill a little further, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where we’re 

hearing from the Minister of Health himself in this Bill 134, 

The Opticians Act, that you know, the government is talking 

about being committed to an accessible, quality health care 

system and wants to provide leadership in making the changes 

needed to strengthen and sustain the system for the future. But 

we’re seeing two different stories, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And consistency would be nice so that there would be a little bit 

of predictability built in for the people of Saskatchewan in 

terms of knowing what they can expect from this Minister of 

Health, this Premier, and the Sask Party government with 

respect to the health care services that they so desire in this 

province and the medical professionals that have provided 

amazingly good quality health care in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are so very fortunate for the health care professionals that 

we do have in this province, Mr. Speaker, and are certainly 

hopeful that we are going to be able to encourage many more to 

come to this wonderful province of ours to provide medical 

services and health care services in this province because we do 

treasure the fact that we have a wonderful system of medicare. 

We do treasure the fact that we have many other health 

providers that are not necessarily insured by the medicare 

system but provide the quality care that we all need and desire, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at The Opticians Act, Bill No. 134, one of 

those services that they provide — that from my understanding 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4809 

from my own doctor, Dr. Diana Monea, is that a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan unfortunately don’t know — that the cost for 

appointments for children are actually covered off by the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, this is something that, you know, we’d even like to see 

expanded. We’d like to see the fact that it wouldn’t be so costly 

for the people of Saskatchewan to be able to get appointments 

to have a review done with their opticians because it would 

serve the public well in terms of being able to maintain good 

eye health care. And as I said, there are many other health 

concerns that can be found through those appointments and not 

just the issue of eye care. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, many individuals don’t know that children do 

not have to pay for these appointments. And I’m not certain to 

what age that is, Mr. Speaker. And the reason I want to talk 

about this right now, Mr. Speaker, is because of the fact that I 

am concerned that not everybody knows about the fact that they 

may take their children to have free eye appointments. I’m 

concerned that at some point this Minister of Health, this 

Premier, and the Sask Party government may decide that that is 

something that they don’t need to be covering any more. 

 

And the reason I say this, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve only recently 

see them cover . . . cut the dental sealant program. The dental 

sealant program was cut in this budget, Mr. Speaker. Now that 

was a program again that was designed to assist those who quite 

frankly don’t necessarily have the means to be able to afford it. 

And it was a really thoughtful and helpful program, Mr. 

Speaker. Good dental health is so critical to good overall health 

as we all know, or as we all should know, Mr. Speaker. So 

cutting the funding to the dental sealant program doesn’t make 

much sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a program that was, like I said, put into place to assist those 

who quite frankly need it the most, and yet again we see those 

individuals getting hit the hardest. Whether it’s rent increases, 

whether it’s cost of living increases or elsewhere, but it’s 

always those who have the least means to pay for the services 

they need that seem to get hit the hardest with the Sask Party 

government’s cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m really concerned about the children’s eye program in 

terms of the eye appointments being covered off by Sask 

Health. I’m really concerned that the government is going to 

look at that as a means of finding extra money to cover off the 

financial mismanagement of the government in terms of the 

deficits and the debt that they’re building up for this province 

right now, which is to the tune of $1 billion again for this fiscal 

year from what we are seeing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very disconcerting that we’re going to see, 

that we might potentially see further cuts to services that are so 

vital and necessary for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Because as I said, if we’re seeing a pattern here 

with the dental sealant program being cut from the budget, 

we’re seeing chiropractic services being delisted, what’s next, 

Mr. Speaker? And my fear is that this is exactly what’s going to 

happen with the children’s eye program, Mr. Speaker, that 

they’re going to look at this as a means of funds that they can 

apply to the debt that they are incurring for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I would implore anyone that’s listening to me right now, Mr. 

Speaker, I would implore, I would implore the opticians, Mr. 

Speaker, I would implore everyone who cares about children’s 

eye services being covered under the government’s Sask Health 

ministry, I would implore everyone to please, please, please 

ensure that you are making your concern known that these 

services should be maintained, and if anything, they should be 

expanded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see a better 

communications program being done with respect to informing 

all the citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to the eye health 

coverage for children. I’d like to see everyone in Saskatchewan 

know that, Mr. Speaker. So not only would I implore people to 

ensure that they put some strong focus on maintaining the eye 

appointments for children being covered but also that they also 

encourage and advocate stronger communications for the 

families of Saskatchewan to know that there is coverage 

provided for children’s eye health in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m, like I said, I’m not overly alarmed by 

what I see in the Bill. I do want to have those discussions. And 

because I want to be able to speak to the Bill again further in 

the future, I will now adjourn debate so that I may rise to my 

feet and speak to the Bill again. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 134, The 

Opticians Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 125 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 125 — The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it’s a pleasure and an honour for me to have the privilege 

of rising in this House and participating in a debate on behalf of 

the fine people of Regina Northeast. I think all of us would 

agree, Mr. Speaker, to have that privilege to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan in this forum is truly an honour and 

one that I think we all . . . I can tell you I think, on behalf of all 

of us, we don’t take it lightly. We take it with the respect that it 

is due. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter into this debate on 

this particular Bill, Bill 125, An Act to amend The Crown 

Minerals Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I won’t hide for one moment 

that it’s probably not one of my stronger areas of knowledge. 

I’ve probably not spent much time in the world of mining or in 

the world of mineral exploration, but we will share with the 

good folks here and this Assembly what little knowledge we 

have of the issue. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say . . . 



4810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

An Hon. Member: — You should be done then. 

 

Mr. Harper: — I won’t disagree with the member from 

Canora-Pelly, but I will still take some of his time. I will say 

that we all, I believe, fully understand how important the 

minerals of our great province is to this province and to the 

people thereof and to the economy of this province. I do 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that we have a good large deposit of 

minerals throughout our great province — perhaps not 20 per 

cent of the world’s supply but still nevertheless a large 

percentage of the minerals here. 

 

And as I understand it, Mr. Speaker, from some of my research 

is that some of the minerals that are found in our great province 

are found other places in the world, yes, but we have in a lot of 

cases a very high-quality mineral and a much higher quality 

than is found in other jurisdictions in this great world of ours. 

And I think that probably applies to for example to uranium as I 

understand it. There are large deposits of uranium throughout 

the world but they are of lower quality, and what we have in our 

great country, in our great province here, is higher quality 

uranium. 

 

And I think that’s a point worth noting, Mr. Speaker, because 

when I’ve had the opportunity in the past to travel northern 

Saskatchewan and to particularly to tour along with many of my 

colleagues the uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan and the 

processing plant at McClean Lake, and it’s really truly an 

experience when you travel up there. And you note that there’s 

basically two types of mining going on. There’s the open-pit 

mining that we’ve seen at Cigar Lake, which again shows you 

the ability for man to overcome the obstacles that often present 

themselves.  

 

As I understood it, Cigar Lake was really basically that — it 

was a lake. The uranium deposit was underneath the lake, so 

basically what happened is that the company saw the ability to 

pump the lake dry and then mine the uranium from the bottom 

of the lake through an open-pit process. And in order to ensure 

that that mine would not be flooded from just natural causes, 

the company basically dug wells all around the perimeter of the 

mine, quite deep wells, and put pumps down there so that the 

water would be pumped out of the wells and it would stop the 

water from leaking in to the pit mine. And I don’t know how 

deep it was. I do know it was a long way down, and we were 

there. 

 

When we were there, they were extracting the ore and hauling it 

out with those big trucks, and they were grading it. And it was a 

neat system of extracting the ore. Of course it was done by 

blasting. The rock was simply blasted out of the face of the area 

in which they were working, and then of course this was loaded 

with big loaders into the back of these trucks and hauled out in 

a circular fashion in order to make their way out of the bottom 

of the pit. 

 

When they got to the top, they went through a grading system. 

It was done electronically. The truck would drive under a 

scanner, and the scanner would grade the ore in the truck box, 

and then it would be dumped into the appropriate holding field. 

So it was an interesting process, and it was interesting to see 

what role that modern science has played in the extracting of 

minerals for our use in this great world of ours. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that was truly an experience. 

 

Another part of that experience was the tour of the processing 

plant at McClean Lake, and that truly was something to behold 

because basically it was a tremendous process. The ore went in 

in one end of course and water was used, a liquid solution was 

used to extract the ore. Then the ore was separated from the 

water and dried, and it was put into, at that point in time it was 

called a yellowcake solution. And it was put into drums and 

then shipped south and, as I understand it, shipped to Ontario 

for further processing. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was just to be there and to experience that 

process was something that I feel very privileged to have been 

exposed to because it’s not something I would think that 

probably most people in Saskatchewan perhaps even aren’t 

aware that it happens here, let alone have the experience and the 

ability to tour the facilities and to enjoy the process and the 

amount of investment it takes to extract the ore, the amount of 

investment it takes from the entire process to extract that ore 

and to put it into a position where it can be further upgraded in 

the industries throughout this great country of ours. 

 

Basically the same at McArthur River. That was an 

underground mine where we had the opportunity to go down 

underground and to explore the shafts there as the process of 

mining was taking place. And again, it was an interesting 

process that was used. The ore was extracted by a huge auger 

that simply drilled through the surface between the layers of 

sort of a honeycomb layer with the shafts. And the auger was 

simply drilled through the intermediate layers and the ore would 

be extracted, and then that area would be filled with cement to 

help support the mine shafts so that further ore could be 

extracted from the same area. 

 

So it was quite a process to be acquainted with and to recognize 

what a great role science plays in the extraction of this ore, and 

the ingenuity of mankind to be able to figure out a way around 

the obstacles that present themselves on that extraction. So it 

was certainly worth the experience, Mr. Speaker, and one that I 

found very, very informative. 

 

And the uranium industry is not something that’s a stranger to 

Saskatchewan, particularly to northern Saskatchewan. If you 

hearken back to the . . . I don’t remember exactly when this 

started, but certainly in the, I think it was probably in the ’50s 

when the mine was developed at Uranium City and the 

community sprang up there. It was named Uranium City and it 

was a very active operation. I believe that mine continued to 

produce until about the mid-’70s. And it was, you know, an 

important find at the time and it was an important industry to 

the North and to Saskatchewan at the time. 

 

And it’s kind of sad to go back, Mr. Speaker. I had not had the 

opportunity to visit Uranium City when it was booming and 

when the population was a larger population, and I didn’t have 

the opportunity to be there when the mine was in operation. But 

I did have relatives who lived up there and worked there in the 

early ’70s, and they of course came back with many stories, but 

more importantly with the pictures of the community and the 

activities within that community. And now to have had the 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4811 

opportunity a couple of years ago to travel northern 

Saskatchewan and to stop in and spend an afternoon in Uranium 

City and visit with the folks there and to have a tour of what 

was left of Uranium City, it was saddening. 

 

You couldn’t help but be sad because of the fact that it was a 

ghost town as such. Very few buildings left standing; those that 

were left standing were simply a shell. And the trees were 

growing up through the foundations and trees were growing up 

in the streets, what used to be streets and now had the young 

poplar saplings growing there. So it was really sad. 

 

We drove by the school, and you know the school had been 

abandoned. And as any building when it’s abandoned, it soon 

starts to deteriorate. And there was a beautiful, beautiful school 

that was the halls of education for the children at Uranium City 

of the day are now, you know, decaying and falling in. So you 

couldn’t help but be sombre as we drove around there. 

 

We did have a good meeting there. We had, I think if my 

memory serves me correct, we had somewhere around 35 or 40 

people out to our meeting. And that wasn’t bad, considering the 

population of Uranium City today is about 110. So I thought we 

had a good turnout and good discussions were held. 

 

And we had the opportunity to share with some of the folks 

there — the issue that we were dealing with of course was the 

overtime exemption issue — but we had the opportunity in a 

very informal way to listen to their concerns and their thoughts. 

And I had the opportunity also to ask them, like why are you 

staying here? What is it that keeps you here? And of course it 

was the love of the North and that was their home. For many of 

them, that was their home and they were enjoying it and, you 

know, your home is your home and they were getting by. They 

weren’t getting rich, but they were certainly getting by and 

enjoying living in that part of Saskatchewan which I’ve never 

had the opportunity to be up there in the wintertime. 

 

The summertime, it is a beautiful part, it is a beautiful part of 

our great province of ours. We do live in a beautiful province, 

and northern Saskatchewan is a probably outstanding part of 

our great province in the summertime. 

 

And I know many of my colleagues on both sides of the House 

have been up there, and I think would agree with me that it’s 

something that we would recommend, at least I would 

recommend, that Saskatchewan people all endeavour to attempt 

to experience the North but really take some time to really 

experience the North because it is unique. It is special, and to 

me it’s a great place. 

 

And mining and the minerals that we find in northern 

Saskatchewan is of course a very important part of northern 

Saskatchewan. I mean that is in many cases what’s caused some 

areas to actually be developed to the degree that they’re 

developed now, is the need to extract the minerals. First of all to 

find them, the exploration it takes to find those minerals. And 

there’s a fair amount of that that goes on up north. And we will 

see, you know, companies expend a lot of money. And they go 

big investments looking for various minerals. 

 

And when those minerals are found, there’s a very detailed 

process to develop those minerals. It’s not something that just, 

you know, they come in there with a bulldozer and bulldoze the 

earth off and there the mineral is. It’s not that simple at all. It’s 

really a detailed process to develop sites. You know, first they 

have to identify the site. They have to identify the richness of 

that site, I guess — you know, get a good idea of the quality of 

mineral that they’ve discovered. They get an idea of the amount 

that might be there, the ability for those minerals, that mine 

perhaps to produce, and would it be able to produce enough to 

warrant further investment and further development. And of 

course in many cases it does. 

 

Then what that leads to is access. Up until that point, access has 

been able to be achieved by air, satisfactory access has been 

able to be achieved by air, but there comes a point in time that 

ground access is required. So then you will see in many cases a 

road will start to be developed in order to service the needs of 

those communities that spring up around a mineral find and the 

development thereof. 

 

And in many cases it’s first supported by a winter road, a road 

that is plowed out throughout the winter months through 

muskeg — in some cases through, you know, the solid land, 

basically rock and sand, but also often the muskeg and across 

lakes. And that’s called a winter road because it’s only 

accessible in the wintertime when the ground is frozen and 

when the water is frozen. And it’s something that again I’ve 

never experienced. I’ve heard stories about it and seen pictures 

of ice roads. And they tell me that it’s an interesting experience. 

 

One would think that, you know, once the lake is frozen and it’s 

ice, it’s a matter, you know, just drive right across it. Well I 

guess there’s a lot of hazards that come up during the winter 

months. Ice pressure ridges, you know, will develop just 

overnight. Where there was no ridge before, there will be a 

ridge now. 

 

In some cases, loads, particularly heavy loads being hauled 

across the ice, has to be done very carefully because there is a 

wave. I didn’t know this. But when a heavy-loaded truck for 

example is travelling over a frozen lake, and that lake might be 

frozen 3 or 4 feet of ice and plenty of ice to support the weight 

of the truck. But below that, that water that’s not frozen below 

that, from the weight of the truck, the ice will give a little bit, 

will be a depression in the ice. 

 

And if the truck is moving too fast, a wave is created in front of 

the moving vehicle. And if that wave is allowed to continue to 

build right across the lake, it comes to the shore. The vehicle’s 

still on the ice, but the wave is ahead of the vehicle. And if the 

wave is somewhere between the vehicle and the shore and it 

runs out of room, it runs out of room to expand, so then it has to 

go someplace. And it’s not going to go down. It will come up 

and it will break that ice. And that’s when a danger then really 

is created for anybody that’s travelling that ice road, particularly 

the trucker that perhaps is hauling a heavy load. 

 

So it has to be done very scientifically, and it has to be done 

carefully to ensure that the weight of the truck is taken into 

consideration. But also the speed at which that truck travels is 

also taken into consideration so that it limits the size of that 

wave or perhaps, you know, doesn’t create a huge wave so that 

the ice can withstand the pressure at the end so that the ice does 

not break and the truck is able to make it off the ice onto solid 



4812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

ground in a safe fashion. 

 

And I understand that there’s, you know, there’s been accidents 

in northern Saskatchewan, and I understand that even ice 

conditions will change and will change quite quickly. And 

there’s, on an ice road that is being maintained, there’s always 

supervision — supervisors that watch that road to ensure that it 

is in good condition — because that road becomes the link to 

the mine, becomes the link to the exploration that’s going on. It 

becomes the link to the outside world so that goods and supplies 

can be moved in. 

 

And most often the ice road is used to move goods and supplies 

in in adequate numbers to be able to support that development 

or that exploration in a way that will be able to support it all 

summer long. Because the other alternative is to bring in 

supplies by air, which as you can understand, Mr. Speaker, 

would be very, very expensive. That would drive up the cost of 

that exploration. It would drive up the cost to the company 

that’s looking for the minerals up there, and that’s not 

something that they want to do. 

 

They want to keep those costs as low as possible because it is 

an investment, a long-term investment. It’s not an investment 

that they would perhaps be making an investment in January 

and by March or April start to reap a return on that same year. 

No, that’s not the case. In many cases, it’s an investment that’s 

done over years. And in some cases, I think probably it’s a 

decade or more from the time the investment is initially made 

until the company starts to see some return. 

 

So you can understand why it’s important that they wanted to 

control the costs, to keep the costs down as much as possible, 

and this is why a ground link becomes very important to a 

mining site or a proposed mining site or an exploration site. A 

ground link of some type becomes very important because it 

reduces the costs of moving goods and it reduces the cost of 

operation of that site. So with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we 

begin to realize how important ground links to communities in 

northern Saskatchewan and to areas in northern Saskatchewan 

soon becomes. 

 

Now it develops in stages. First, as I said, the companies will go 

up. Then, and as I understand it — I’m no expert at this, Mr. 

Speaker, but as I understand it — a lot of the exploration today 

is done by air, by scientific seismographs and so on and so forth 

that can be done through helicopters pulling the proper 

equipment over areas, or airplanes. And they get readings. They 

can read what’s in the earth and they can read the makeup of the 

earth and they improve the chances, I guess you would say, of 

being able to find the mineral to look for in a certain area. 

 

But at some point in time, when they’ve narrowed it down to 

where they believe an area that is worth exploring because they 

do believe that there’s a deposit of the mineral that they’re 

looking for somewhere down below, then they will send in a 

crew to do the exploration. And this crew actually is flown in 

and the small mining equipment, small drilling equipment is 

brought in by plane and a small crew is dropped off and they 

will spend some time there and they will do the exploration. 

 

And it’s not easy work. I’ve talked to some people who have 

worked on those types of crews and it’s not easy work because 

everything, after it’s dropped off the plane . . . I mean it’s 

simply dropped off a plane. They land on a body of water and 

they carry the stuff off the plane and pile it up on . . . the 

equipment that they require, pile up on the edge of a lake or a 

river and from there it’s . . . [inaudible] . . . by hand. It’s carried 

by hand. It’s picked up by hand, put it on somebody’s back and 

it’s carried to the location that is . . . and set up that they’re 

going to do the drilling. 

 

And they will drill down; they will drill and test for the mineral 

that they’re looking for and, you know, if they don’t find it in 

this particular site, they’ll just pick it up and they’ll move it a 

few hundred feet. But again this is all done by hand, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s hard work. 

 

And I’ve talked to some of the people who shared their 

experiences with me when I was up north there as to the efforts 

they put in. And they’re living in the wilderness. I mean they 

not only do the hard work, but they’re living in the wilderness. 

They don’t have running water and they don’t have showers 

and so on and so forth. They live in a tent and they make do 

with what mother nature provides for them, and that’s of course 

a lake or a stream nearby. And it’s dedicated work, and they I 

think are reasonably compensated for it. But of course these 

workers at that time, and I think probably even still today, 

didn’t qualify for any overtime. They were considered, I guess 

you would say, as contract workers. They were just paid so 

much a day to do the job. And, Mr. Speaker, that of course is 

another subject. 

 

But the point here is that once the company has made that 

investment and they have identified an area where they believe 

that it is worth further development, then they will provide that 

further development. But in order to maintain a reasonable cost 

factor here, there is a need then to limit the amount of 

dependency that they have on air travel and air transportation of 

goods, and they need to look at some type of a link, a ground 

link. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And the first available one is in the wintertime on the ice road, 

on what is known as the ice road because it not only covers the 

ice on the lakes that are frozen, but also will allow roads to be, I 

guess you would say plowed out, through what would normally 

in the summertime be soft areas like muskegs. Once that’s 

frozen, once that’s plowed off and the snow has been removed 

and the weather has had its opportunity, at 40 below in many 

cases, to freeze that ground down, then it becomes very solid 

and it will support heavy weights. And along with the ice across 

the lakes, they also support heavy weights. Particularly once the 

snow has been removed off the face of the lake and the 

temperature has had a chance to freeze that lake perhaps three 

or four feet deep of ice, it will support a lot of weight. 

 

But it has to be managed. That weight has to be managed as it is 

moved from the southern areas and brought up to a location. 

And I think in many areas of northern Saskatchewan, you’ll 

have a central area where it’s sort of the gathering point. The 

goods are brought in summer and winter up to a certain point. 

But in the wintertime, they’re moved from there then on that ice 

road and then moved to the sites that require the supplies. 

 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4813 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the time to do this, the 

length of time in the calendar year to do this is usually quite 

short. And by that I mean it’s probably no more than a couple 

of months that’s available at best to allow companies to have 

their supplies moved into their sites in the isolated areas of 

northern Saskatchewan. And when that is done, that is done 

through the ice road. And that is why you will see that in many 

cases these individuals and truckers and trucking companies 

that are up there, they really work virtually around the clock in 

order to move enough supplies in a very short time to be able to 

meet the needs of those particular sites for the entire summer 

months until a winter road is established again. 

 

And I think we’ve seen some stories, most recently this last 

winter being a little milder winter and particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan. And that window of opportunity to move the 

goods was narrower than normal. And therefore we’re finding 

some communities in northern Saskatchewan — particularly I 

think the story I was reading a little while ago was pertaining to 

northern Manitoba, but there’s really not much difference — 

that a lot of these communities were not able to get their normal 

supply of goods brought in on that ice road. 

 

And so now what will happen is that throughout the summer 

months they will depend more and more on freight brought in 

by air, which once again will simply drive up the costs, make it 

more expensive — more expensive to do business up there, 

more expensive to live in northern Saskatchewan because the 

goods that are normally brought in by truck over the ice road 

are now having to be flown in. And that, Mr. Speaker, of course 

is not something that anyone that’s in northern Saskatchewan, 

particularly if you’re a businessman or an investor in northern 

Saskatchewan, you would relish to see because again you want 

to keep the costs down as much as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a very important thing to remember when 

you’re looking at the investments that companies make in the 

mines and the exploration for minerals in northern 

Saskatchewan, is that they need to have, they need to have the 

ability to develop those mine sites, those mineral sites rather, 

and the ability to develop them in a way that will make it 

profitable in the long run. And you know, that is something that 

of course the company makes a decision on. But what helps, 

Mr. Speaker, what helps is the quality of mineral that they find. 

 

And that’s why I was saying earlier about it’s well known that 

in Saskatchewan we may not have the world’s largest deposit of 

minerals, but many of the minerals that are found in our great 

province are of high quality. High-quality minerals means that 

they garnish a better return on the market. They’re worth more. 

So you’re able to extract perhaps less in tonnage, but you’re 

able to get greater return for it because of the value of the 

mineral that you extract. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think uranium is probably an example that is, 

one perhaps should say a shining example of that. Because as I 

understand it is if we go into the United States, there’s deposits 

of uranium — low quality, but deposits of uranium. We also, I 

understand, if we go into the Soviet Union or the former Soviet 

Union, we’ll find large deposits of uranium, but again of lower 

quality. 

 

So yes, the deposits are there, and yes they are being mined, and 

yes they are on the market. But the quality of the product that 

the minerals that are found, particularly uranium minerals that 

are found in northern Saskatchewan, are something that makes 

it really a marketable item and in demand, in demand not only 

within our great country but around the world. And it probably 

is a demand that will continue to grow if we recognize the 

growth of Third World countries or what used to be Third 

World countries, particularly China and India, countries with 

huge, huge populations that are making great, great strides at 

becoming strong economic powers throughout this world. 

 

I understand that much of the power generated in China, of 

course traditionally as a coal . . . coal-fired or power generation, 

but they’re moving more and more to uranium and having 

uranium reactors built for the purpose of generating power. And 

that is as I understand it, I’ve been led to believe — and I can’t 

remember exactly where it was that I read this, but it was a 

while back I read it — that they’re looking at building a power 

generating uranium reactor, one a year for the next five years. 

And that’s just to hope to be able to meet the power, the 

increasing power needs of their growing economy in China. So 

when that happens of course, Mr. Speaker, it makes a greater 

demand for the product that we produce here, the uranium 

which is the fuel that’s used to create the power in the plants. 

 

And I understand that basically the direction that India is going 

to. And India is a very fast growing economy, probably one of 

the faster ones in the world. And it is also creating a demand for 

power, and they’re looking at uranium reactors for the purpose 

of generating their power. And thusly comes a greater and 

greater demand for the product that was produced in our mines 

in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think it’s safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have an 

opportunity here I guess you’d say to look at the ability to 

expand our industry here in this province in a way that is 

acceptable to all those concerned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I had the opportunity of touring 

northern Saskatchewan, it became evident to me that the 

minerals that are in northern Saskatchewan really play a large, 

large role in the development of our province or the 

development of northern Saskatchewan. Because it seems that a 

company, when it finds a rich deposit of ore, it doesn’t have to 

be just uranium, for example. There’s other ore up there. 

 

I was talking to a . . . I think Fond-du-Lac, Saskatchewan is 

where we were at. I believe it was where they’ve identified a 

large deposit of a rare earth mineral, which is something that is 

very, very much in need for cellphone batteries, for portable 

batteries. It’s a key component to the manufacturing of those 

batteries. And there’s, as I understand it, there was only one or 

two other deposits in the world — I believe one in China and I 

think there was a small deposit also in the United States. 

 

But the one up north in northern Saskatchewan here is the 

largest deposit ever identified and it was still under the process, 

I guess you would say, of establishing the size and the quality 

of the product. But what we were led to believe that it was the 

largest deposit ever, ever identified anywhere in the world and 

it was unique in the fact that it was near the surface. You know, 

there was no huge overburden or great distances to sink a shaft 

to look for the ability to extract this mineral, as much of it was 



4814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

right close to the surface. I believe that it was, the deeper you 

went, the more pure or the increased quality of the mineral. But 

I understand it was available though very close to the surface. 

So that’s just one more example of a need for an overland link. 

 

And when I’m talking to those people who were involved in the 

development of that, both the chief of the Indian band at La 

Ronge as well as some of the people who were the 

representatives of the company working there, they were 

pointing out how important the winter road was to them. 

Because that particular year that we were there, a lot of their 

supplies got hung up at, some at Points North and also some at 

Stony Rapids or just outside of Stony Rapids. There’s a huge 

parking area where a lot of their goods had got hung up because 

the ice road went out earlier than normal and earlier than 

expected, and therefore they didn’t get their products moved. 

They were sitting there waiting for the winter to come and the 

ice road to be re-established so they could move that stuff up, 

their supplies further north up to Fond-du-Lac. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is an example of the importance of a 

land link. These products in this particular case that I can 

remember off the top of my head, they were large trailers. They 

were to be used for housing of personnel. They were used to be 

set up as the office network, and they were sitting there. They 

were one year late now getting that stuff up there because the 

ice road had gone out early and they hadn’t got it that far north. 

But they did get it to Stony Rapids and again they got that to 

Stony Rapids over a land link. Now it wasn’t a very good link, 

but it was a land link. They were able to move it across country. 

 

And in talking to the chief of Fond-du-Lac and to the 

representative of the company that was developing the area 

there, first of all they pointed out the importance of the ice road, 

the winter link so that they could move their products in and to 

continue to be able to develop that site. They couldn’t do so 

without that support. But they were quite honest. They said, but 

that won’t support the development, the full development of the 

site there, and they wouldn’t fully be able to develop that site 

until they had an all-year-round land link. 

 

And it would probably be fairly expensive to build, but they 

were prepared I believe to be a part of that because it was 

important to them to have that land link to be able to move their 

minerals out, the material out. After they developed their site 

there and they started to mine, they would be able to move that 

out to a market. And with that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I think it 

was just one more example of how important a land link is to 

the development in northern Saskatchewan, to the development 

of the mineral exploration that takes place up there. 

 

And it is very important that this land link be something that is 

certainly usable, I guess you would say, in a year-round basis. 

It’s not only important for the companies up there, but it’s also 

important for the people who live up there. And I can assure 

you that there’s many people up there who would really, really 

welcome the ability to have a land link, to be able to go south to 

receive their services when required and to do so in a way that it 

was affordable, that they’d be able to drive on a road rather than 

being forced to use air service and a very expensive air service. 

 

And in many cases, I think it probably limits their ability to get 

out to northern Saskatchewan. It limits their ability to even 

further their education, Mr. Speaker, because it’s just very 

expensive for somebody from Stony Rapids for example to find 

themselves having to attend to a school, say in Prince Albert. 

And the only way, the only transportation link is by air, a very 

expensive process. 

 

And it’s coming from a community where the unemployment is 

very high and many of these parents wouldn’t have a full-time, 

year-round job, wouldn’t have the ability to be able to provide 

the financial support for their children to be able to attend a 

school and to be able to further their education. And 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, a land link would certainly lessen 

that cost and make education, even education more affordable 

to the people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s just, you know, one aspect of northern 

Saskatchewan. And I know that many of my colleagues would 

agree with me, that when you travel northern Saskatchewan, 

there’s just a lot up there. And it’s not just the things that us 

southerners think about first of all, is would be good fishing or 

perhaps good hunting. But there’s just the beauty of it, and what 

I really found interesting was the wonderful, wonderful people 

up there. They were very, very friendly, very hospitable, and 

very accommodating. And if you took a little time to talk to 

them and visit with them, it was certainly an educational 

process. I know that I learned a lot, just on a personal basis, just 

from visiting with many people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why the development of the minerals that 

are found within our borders of Saskatchewan is important to 

do so in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. It is the role 

and I would say the responsibility of government to ensure that 

that development is done in an orderly way but is done in a way 

that benefits Saskatchewan people. 

 

And yes, I wouldn’t expect a company or corporation not to 

make a profit. Of course they have to. There’d be no reason for 

them not to go into northern Saskatchewan and invest money, in 

a lot of cases probably for a decade, before they would see a 

return on that money and that they would need to be able to 

over the life of the particular project be able to show at the end 

of the day a reasonable profit. And I have no objections to that. 

I don’t think anybody does. I think everybody would encourage 

a reasonable profit. The shareholders of that company would 

want to have a reasonable profit for the investment that they 

make. And that’s only understandable. 

 

[22:15] 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, there has to be some of 

those returns from that mineral development has to go back to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s probably the role of a 

government, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that there is an orderly 

development of those minerals, but there’s also a reasonable 

return to the people of this great province because after all 

that’s something that’s invested in the Crown. And it’s invested 

in the rights of Saskatchewan people to share in the bounty of 

this land. And those minerals is just one of those bounties that 

we often perhaps take for granted. We maybe become pretty 

accustomed to having them here in this great province of ours, 

and we take it for granted. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the importance that 



April 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4815 

mineral and mineral development and extraction plays in our 

province, you begin to realize what an important impact it has 

on our economy. 

 

We’ve seen that most recently, Mr. Speaker, when in the potash 

industry which we are very, very blessed in this province to 

have great deposits of potash. And that has been recognized 

some time ago and it was touched on with some mines in this 

great province of ours. But as I understand it, there are other 

large, large deposits of potash that hasn’t been touched yet and 

that they are, potash companies are looking at the expansion of 

the industry by establishing new mines. 

 

I’m not sure how many are on the books to be established, but I 

do know that there are some. And I do know that particularly in 

the Yorkton area, the Yorkton-Melville area, that there has been 

some real serious exploration done, I guess you would say, to 

determine not only the quantity, but not only the quality but the 

location, the best location to develop a new mine. And nobody 

knows exactly — at least I certainly don’t know exactly what’s 

happening there — but I think that there will eventually be a 

mine developed there once the potash industry recovers from its 

most recent devastating financial crash. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I think we all perhaps learned 

a little bit of a lesson. I think my good friends and colleagues 

across the way in the government probably learned a bigger 

lesson as to the importance of managing the resources, the 

importance of managing the revenues from those resources and 

not relying too heavily on one particular resource. As we saw a 

couple of budgets ago, some 20 per cent of the revenue in that 

budget was to come from the potash industry. 

 

It was unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the government didn’t 

follow the advice of experts within the industry who were 

suggesting that the prices were going to soften. I don’t think 

anybody was suggesting the prices were going to totally 

collapse, the market was going to totally collapse, but I think 

there was a number of experts that were suggesting that the 

prices would certainly soften and the level of revenue that the 

government was depending upon was false and that it probably 

was what I would call a false market or a false revenue. 

 

And unfortunately the government didn’t heed that advice. 

They budgeted 20 per cent of the revenue for that particular 

year on the potash industry. And with the collapse then, the 

following collapse of the sales of potash, we find ourselves with 

a government who inherited a province of prosperity, inherited 

a province that had over a 2 billion, a $2.3 billion surplus — 

money in the bank — and quite quickly blew that, Mr. Speaker. 

They blew that money and they also blew another $1 billion just 

trying to salvage the balance of that budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that this particular government 

didn’t follow the advice of the officials and the advice of the 

experts within the industry as to the level that they could lean 

on revenues from the potash industry, but it again raises a 

question, Mr. Speaker, of the competence of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that minerals play such an 

important role in the economy of our great province of ours, 

whether it be uranium or whether it be potash or whether it be 

oil, and more recently, more recently the diamond development. 

We’ve seen I think some discoveries of diamonds in northern 

Saskatchewan that will, at one point in time in the future when 

fully developed, will probably be leading the world in large, in 

diamond deposits, again not only in the quantity, but I believe 

in the quality. And I think those are great things for the future, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, the discovery and the continued 

exploration of the rare earth mineral that is found in northern 

Saskatchewan, I think that’s great news. I think that is just 

something for the future of our great province. And for those 

still to come on stream, I guess you would say, Mr. Speaker, 

that we’ll have those minerals to be able to rely on and the 

revenues from them. 

 

You know, we have our generation, or my generation probably 

enjoyed good revenues from oil. We’ve seen oil development in 

this province. We’ve seen oil development under the former 

government really take off with the negotiations of royalties 

that were at a level that oil companies were comfortable with. 

And as a result of that, we’ve seen significant new development 

within the oil patch. That has of course tapered down under this 

government, but it was something that certainly was beneficial 

to the economy of our province, beneficial to the province, the 

government of the province with extra revenue coming in. 

 

And it shows I suppose what can be gained on behalf of the 

people of this great province when you have a government that 

properly manages the minerals in Saskatchewan and properly 

manages that on behalf of Saskatchewan people — properly 

manages the minerals, properly manages the return and the 

revenue generated from those minerals and mineral 

development. 

 

But it’s not only the development of the minerals, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s the spinoffs that are so important to the economy. It’s the 

spinoffs that you’ve got to develop, just not the development of 

the mine itself. It’s just not the digging of the shaft. It’s just not 

the erection of the buildings. It’s the spinoffs. It’s the jobs that 

are created; it’s the spinoffs that spin off from those jobs, the 

support mechanisms that are required to support the 

development. 

 

For example the trucking industry all of a sudden becomes a 

new employer; a new demand for trucking to move the 

materials, to move the supplies that are required for that 

development, that falls on the trucking industry. And just one 

thing leads to another, Mr. Speaker, the servicing to service 

those trucks. And one thing leads to another, and you have all 

of a sudden a strong economy because you have a mine and you 

have a development for a mineral that wasn’t there before. It’s 

created a great new activity. And in many cases, it’s an activity 

that’s going to last for many, many decades because usually 

these deposits are large. They’re not going to be developed just 

for a short-term basis. They’re developed on a long-term basis. 

 

And yes, there will be up and downs. We’ve seen that, as I said 

earlier, in the potash industry. We’ve seen some significant 

downs and we’ve seen some significant ups. But at the end of 

the day, it benefits the entire economy. It benefits the province. 

And when it benefits the province, it benefits the people within. 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see a government that is looking at 

making some amendments to the mineral Act here, An Act to 



4816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 13, 2010 

amend The Crown Minerals Act, then you begin to want to 

really carefully take a look at what are the proposed 

amendments and how they will affect the overall industry and 

how will those amendments affect the industry itself. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, like I said earlier, I’m no expert at this. But 

I do know that if you have a problem, the solution to that 

problem will be usually in the hands of those who have the 

problem. So in this particular case when you have a company 

who is looking at developing a particular mineral in this great 

province of ours, Mr. Speaker, and before you make any 

changes to the Act, I think you want to sit down and talk to 

them, get their feedback as to what these changes should be. 

And I don’t think it’s the role of government to force changes 

upon the industry that are unwelcome. 

 

I think in the role of government, you sit down in a co-operative 

way, to sit down and talk to those involved in the industry, 

those who are making investments in the industry and ask them 

what it is, what changes would facilitate perhaps greater 

expansion. What would facilitate perhaps greater extraction of 

those minerals from sites that are already developed and 

perhaps have been developed for a number of decades? As the 

more premium product is removed, it becomes probably, I 

would think, more costly to extract certain fringe areas and 

certain fringe quality of minerals.  

 

So is there a way that amendments within the Act would be able 

to assist the company in being able to continue to operate that 

mine and be able to extract even bigger amounts of ore, 

although perhaps reduced in quality, maybe even in quantity. 

But are there changes that would be able to assist this? Because 

it’s important that we fully utilize the minerals that are there 

and not just tap down and take off the cream of the crop and 

leave the rest for future generations because in many cases it 

may not be economically viable to go back into those areas and 

to extract what’s left there. It may be more viable to do it at the 

time that that mine is in operation, and that perhaps some 

changes within the Act might be able to assist that. 

 

And I would hope that may be what the government is doing. 

And I would like to know that the government actually did go 

out and do some consulting and talking to the industry, talking 

to those involved in the industry, talking to those who are 

making the investment in the development of that industry and 

who have made that investment, and to identify ways and 

means that perhaps the government could assist in creating an 

atmosphere there that would be economically viable for the 

further expansion of the mining industry right within the 

already established sites, let alone, Mr. Speaker, let alone 

looking for new sites and establishing new sites. 

 

I think that there’s a need to ensure that we fully utilize the 

minerals that we have already identified, that we have identified 

are there — perhaps, like I said, perhaps not in the same quality 

and maybe perhaps not even the same quantity —but perhaps 

there are some things the government can do to assist a 

company to ensure that they fully extract, fully extract all the 

mineral that’s economically viable to extract within a developed 

site. I would like to see that and be assured that that is the case 

before I see the government move on . . . or I mean — pardon 

me, Mr. Speaker — the company move on to developing a new 

site. 

I think it’s, I know, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very important 

part of our economy. The development of minerals, the mining 

of minerals, the extraction of the minerals, the processing of 

these minerals are very important to our economy. Not only 

today, it not only has been an important factor in the past, it will 

continue to be a very important factor into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that is why I think it’s so important that when the 

government is intending to make changes to the Act, that they 

make changes that are correct, they make the changes that best 

suit the development and the strength, and ensuring the industry 

stays strong and ensuring that there is continued development 

within the industry so that we can have a strong industry, not 

only that we’ve enjoyed here presently and not only for the 

foreseeable future but for many generations to come.  

 

Because we owe that, Mr. Speaker, to I think the people of 

Saskatchewan that are going to come after us. I think we 

benefited from the wisdom and the forethought of our 

forefathers when they were developing this great province of 

ours, when they were developing the minerals as they were 

being identified. We’ve enjoyed that. We’ve enjoyed the 

prosperity and a strong economy because of it. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s our duty as citizens today to ensure that we pass 

the same on to the future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I would like to see, Mr. Speaker, 

and have some level of assurance that in this process, in this 

process of introducing a Bill to amend the Act, Mr. Speaker, 

that the government has actually gone out and done that 

consultation, has actually gone out and talked to the people on 

the front lines. 

 

It’s been my experience, Mr. Speaker, that if you want to find 

out what is really going on, you go out and talk to the people 

who are deeply involved. You go out and talk to the people 

whose bread and butter it is that that particular industry is 

involved in. And that’s what I would hope this government had 

done, Mr. Speaker. I would hope that this government had 

during its process of developing the changes, developed the 

amendments that they wanted introduced to amend the Act, that 

they did so only after they’d done a reasonable consultation 

with the industry. Because it’s the industry, Mr. Speaker, and 

the players within that industry . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4789 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4789 

 Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 
  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4794 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4796 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4798 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4802 

  D‟Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 4805 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4809 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


