




















































Hansard: May 19, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 64A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 19, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5623 

 May 19, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize other members, I would 

like to acknowledge the presence today of our Acting Chief 

Electoral Officer, no stranger to the members, Mr. David 

Wilkie. And I invite members to welcome Mr. Wilkie to his 

Assembly. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, Kim 

Newsham sitting in your gallery. Kim is a Crown counsel for 

the Ministry of Justice, but today she is here in her capacity as a 

member of the board of the Public Legal Education Association 

of Saskatchewan or PLEA. 

 

PLEA is celebrating its 30th anniversary this year. Since 1980, 

people have benefited from the assistance and information that 

PLEA provides. Through a variety of programs, PLEA 

empowers people by helping them understand the law. 

 

To mark the anniversary, this week has been declared Public 

Legal Education Week in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

aware that a lot of people see our legal system as a lot of 

medieval sorcery, however PLEA provides a lot of broad, 

general information on legal matters and goes a long ways to 

demystifying the law. It is funded by the Law Foundation. Most 

of the presentations are provided on a volunteer basis by 

members of the Law Society. A number of years ago, I 

presented a series of lectures on behalf of PLEA dealing with 

wills and estates. I found it to be a particularly rewarding 

experience. 

 

I would like to commend Public Legal Education Association 

and the volunteers and donors that participate in making this 

program successful and effective. I would like to ask Kim to 

pass on to PLEA and the members and volunteers, the thanks 

from all members of the legislature. Please join me in 

welcoming Kim Newsham to her Legislative Assembly. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I‟d like to join with the minister in 

welcoming Kim Newsham and congratulating PLEA on its 

many years of good work and its anniversary. 

 

Culturally, I think there‟s two types of law in our society: very 

dramatic, visible law around publicized criminal trials and legal 

dramas; and then there‟s the law that‟s less visible but much 

more important to our everyday lives, the law of the workaday 

world of our domestic arrangements. And that is the law that 

PLEA has helped the citizens of Saskatchewan with for so long 

and for so well — the law of leases and rental agreements, 

mortgages and wills, and consumer protection. 

 

So the long-running series Law & Order is coming to an end, 

but the good work of PLEA I‟m sure will continue for a long 

time in the future. And again, I want to join the minister in 

urging all members to welcome Kim Newsham here, and 

celebrate and congratulate on the celebration of the anniversary 

of PLEA. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly, 

the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask leave for an 

extended invitation, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked leave for an 

extended invitation. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And thank you to the members for that extended introduction, 

and I apologize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is a large number of 

individuals from the Horizon School Division. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, we had the opportunity to recognize the 

accomplishments of many students and teachers and the 

officials of Horizon School Division‟s on a project very, very 

worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, high school students and chaperones from high 

schools in Wadena, Wynyard, Raymore, Punnichy, and 

Humboldt are in your gallery. I want to introduce the students if 

I might by name and ask them to stand or wave to be 

recognized. The students involved in this project are Cody Dale, 

Maria Weyland, Alberta Bear, Travis Morris, Keisha Desjarlais, 

Mark Desjarlais, Kaylee Andre, Alex Ferland, and Amber 

Chorney. One other student, Mr. Speaker, was unable to be 

here, and that is Matthew Lachica from Humboldt. And I also 

want to recognize him as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today these students were recognized, and we‟re 

celebrating the Horizon School Division‟s new treaty education 

video. The production of this two-minute video reflects the 

Saskatchewan government‟s mandate to foundationally 

incorporate treaty education in the classroom in all kindergarten 

to grade 12 classrooms. The Horizon School Division brought 

together these students from across five communities to lead the 



5624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

way and create a powerful and insightful video that highlights 

why it is important to learn about treaties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students, both First Nations and non-First 

Nations, focused on treaty essential learnings, including the 

perspectives of elders and representatives of the Office of the 

Treaty Commissioner. They were supported by teacher leaders 

and worked closely with the Indian Communication Arts 

program at the First Nations University of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students share their knowledge and 

perspectives about how, and I quote, “We are all treaty people 

in this video.” They are to be commended as leaders in creating 

such a successful production and also recognize their teachers, 

parents, families, and school officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members and the public at large to visit 

the Horizon School Division website to view this video at 

www.hzsd.ca. Mr. Speaker, I want to also recognize all of the 

parents, the teachers, elder Mike Pinay, and all of the support of 

the Horizon School Division staff for making this project 

successful. And I‟m sure once everyone has an opportunity to 

view the video, they will believe that that is just a tremendous 

job by a group of students in Horizon School Division. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming this group. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet, I would like to introduce a 

group from the Canora-Pelly constituency seated in the west 

gallery. Today, Mr. Speaker, we have seven students that are in 

grade 7, 8, and 9 at North Star School in Hyas, Saskatchewan. 

Students are, and I‟m just going to indicate their first names, 

Karlita, Amber, Courtney, Caitlin, Blaze, Jordan, and Jaymon. 

And their chaperones today, Mr. Speaker, are Stewart and Ruth 

Goossen, Bernie and Sherrel Warkentin, Sylvan and Andrea 

Penner, and Norman and Rosanna Fehr. I‟d ask all members to 

join me in welcoming this great group from Hyas, 

Saskatchewan to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Minister 

of Education in welcoming the group of young people, parents, 

teachers, and school administrators from the Horizon School 

Division to our Assembly this afternoon. I want to congratulate 

the students on the video that they have produced that will no 

doubt lead to greater understanding as all of us come to know 

what being a treaty person means in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I‟d be remiss if I didn‟t acknowledge the 

contribution of my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview, who when she was minister of Education worked 

with the Treaty Commissioner to do the curricula for treaty in 

the classroom. And no doubt with the work that‟s been done by 

the students as we implement that curriculum in our classrooms 

across the province, we have greater understanding as 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the work of the First Nations 

University of Canada. And I understand that several of the 

students are considering going to the First Nations University of 

Canada this fall, and they are now thinking about pursuing a 

university education. Mr. Speaker, the First Nations University 

of Canada has graduated many talented and very progressive 

young people from that institution, and I‟m pleased to hear that 

these young people are thinking of pursuing post-secondary 

education at FNUC [First Nations University of Canada]. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, congratulations again to the young 

people. Their work leads to our understanding as Saskatchewan 

citizens, and I think their work leads to an understanding that 

make sure that we don‟t have views that are old and that we 

have progressive views towards each other as First Nations and 

non-First Nations people. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I 

would like to welcome a fine-looking group of students from 

the Wymark School. There‟s 18 grade 8 students in the west 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re accompanied by their 

teachers, Brad Gasper, Amy Satre, Tanya Hardenna and 

chaperones, Marg Leitch, Alyson Grose, and Cheryl Eaton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Brad Gasper usually brings his school group to the 

Assembly every year, and we‟re very pleased to see that and the 

interest that they have in our legislative system. So I‟d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming this school, people from 

Wymark, and their chaperones and teachers. And I‟d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join with the Minister of Education and the member from 

Nutana in welcoming our guests here who are doing a great bit 

of work in terms of advancing the cause of treaty education in 

the classroom. 

 

I want to specifically say hello to Elder Mike Pinay who‟s, I 

don‟t know how many double-doubles he‟s consumed in the 

work he‟s done zooming around the province, advancing this 

cause, but rest assured, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a lot. But it‟s good to 

see him here today in his Legislative Assembly. 

 

And I want to say a particular word of welcome and 

congratulations to my sister, Annie Brass, her boy Lakota, and 

to my niece Kaylee. Kaylee‟s mushom is Sterling Brass, the late 

Sterling Brass, and the great defender and promoter of the 

treaty. And it‟s I‟m sure with a lot of pride that your mushom is 

looking down on you with these days‟ events in mind, Kaylee. 

So congratulations for being here. Ēkosi. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members I have the great pleasure of 

introducing some very dedicated and community-minded 

veterinary medicine professionals seated in your gallery today. 

 

With us are members of the vet crew along with their families 

and friends. The team includes Drs. Lesley Sawa, Greg 

Harasen, Karen Harasen, and Lois Herperger; technician Jenna 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5625 

Hysuik; and assistants Danielle Gauthier-Kratz and Chantelle 

Johnson, all from Regina; and Dr. Janna Schuer from 

Saskatoon. 

 

Now together with some equally big-hearted colleagues who 

came all the way from Ontario, Team Saskatchewan 

volunteered time, equipment, and supplies to travel to the 

northern communities of La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse. There 

under the direction of Dr. Sawa they set up clinics, examined, 

vaccinated, and dewormed 200 dogs and carried out 160 spay 

and neuter operations all free of charge. 

 

In addition, they provided seminars on the topics of dog bite 

prevention, parasites, and animal hygiene to local students who 

were also given tours of the surgical facilities and invited to 

observe the procedures. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this isn‟t the first time that these 

hard-working professionals have taken the time out of their 

busy schedules to provide free canine care in northern 

Saskatchewan. In fact the 2010 adventure is just the latest of 

many such trips. We owe these incredibly dedicated individuals 

a great debt of gratitude for their continued volunteer service, 

and I encourage all members here today to welcome them to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join the Deputy Premier in welcoming the students and 

the staff from the Horizon School Division and the fine work 

that they have done to further the understanding of our treaties. 

Mr. Speaker, as one of the few Aboriginal members of the 

Assembly, I have half my family that are First Nations, the 

other half are Métis people, and I‟m stuck in the middle there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly understanding treaties is really, really important. 

We know that the UN [United Nations] has done a great amount 

of work to look at the rights of the indigenous peoples. We 

looked at the notion of the Supreme Court of Canada talking 

about the duty to consult. And certainly there is a notion 

everywhere that respecting and understanding treaty rights is 

paramount to the survival of many, many governments, but 

more so to the ability of the Aboriginal people, First Nations 

people to thrive in our province. 

 

[13:45] 

 

I think one of the messages that I got from many leaders in 

northern Saskatchewan, many of whom are First Nations, is that 

the treaty people are not just hoping to survive, they‟re hoping 

to thrive. And having people understand First Nations and 

treaty rights is so very, very important. 

 

Now we need to continue to work to ensure that governments 

respect the findings and the direction and the leadership that the 

students have shown. And I think it‟s only fair that I get up and 

say thank you on behalf of the many First Nations people 

throughout Saskatchewan, through my constituency, throughout 

my family because I think this work is very valuable work. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you, I‟d like to make a couple of introductions. 

First and foremost, I‟d like to recognize the president of the 

University of Regina student association. Kyle Addison is here. 

He‟s an impressive leader. He‟s done tireless work over a 

number of months, just beginning his next term. He was very, 

very helpful on issues relating to the First Nations University, 

and we just know how important that file is today and into the 

future. 

 

He continues to, he continues to ensure that he‟s speaking on 

behalf of students, Mr. Speaker, and certainly he also focuses 

on the future for young people in Saskatchewan. And I would 

ask all members of this Assembly to join me in welcoming Mr. 

Addison to his legislature. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I‟m on my feet, I would like to 

add a number of individuals seated in your gallery who are here 

as we anticipate the passing of Bill 80 today. And certainly I‟d 

like to include among those Michael Fougere from the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association; a number of 

individuals from PCL including Kris Hildebrand; as well others 

from Graham Construction, Erick Erickson; from Merit 

Construction, we know we have Karen Low, Drew Tiefenbach, 

and Harley Friesen; and from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business, Marilyn Braun-Pollon and Virginia 

Labbie; as well from the Christian Labour Association of 

Canada, Mr. Brad Bent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 

welcome these individuals to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join the minister of 

also welcoming the people from the construction industry, 

particularly Michael Fougere, the representatives from PCL, 

Graham, Merit, and CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] to their legislature for this very important day on Bill 

80. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet, I would also like to 

welcome some members of the building trades who have to 

watch as well. We have Lorne Andersen, Gunnar Passmore, 

Kelvin Goebel. We have Larry Kowalchuk up there, Terry 

Parker, Dallas Rogers, Chuck Rudder, and any other people that 

are here. I‟d also like all members to welcome all of these 

people to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

for me, to you and through you to members of the Assembly, to 

introduce two special guests that are seated in your gallery 

behind the clock somewhere. I know that they‟re up there 

seated in the back row, and if they could give a wave when I 

introduce them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Joining us in fact from the Estevan constituency are Richard St. 



5626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

Jules and my dad, Earl Duncan, and they are in Regina on 

business. They work in Halbrite at Dempsey Laird Trucking. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, my dad has been employed by Dempsey 

Laird and the Laird family since before I was even born, serving 

as a truck driver for much of those years, and just recently 

making a transition into the office in a management position. 

And so I‟ll hopefully get to spend a little bit of time with them 

later this afternoon while they‟re in Regina. And so I would ask 

all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I would 

like to join with the minister in welcoming Kyle Addison to the 

Assembly today. Always good to have student leaders in the 

province here in the Assembly. I‟d ask all members to join me 

once again in welcoming Kyle Addison to the Assembly. 

 

And I would also like to introduce, Mr. Speaker, two guests 

who are seated behind the bar on the floor here, Anita and 

Kenneth Hall. Anita is my aunt and Uncle Ken is my uncle. 

Both individuals, Mr. Speaker, are retired and live in Saskatoon, 

though they spent most of their working years here in Regina. 

Auntie Anita was a librarian with the Regina public system for 

many years. Uncle Ken was originally from Virginia, and 

though he‟s been in Canada for many decades is still very much 

an American in citizenship and accent if you have a chance to 

speak with him. 

 

And I should note also, Mr. Speaker, that Auntie Anita, her 

father was Hans Broten, my grandfather, who served in the 

legislature. So I know it‟s been a number of years since she has 

been to the Assembly, but I know it brings back many fond 

memories for her. So I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Anita and Ken to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like 

to join the member opposite in welcoming Terry Parker and 

other representatives of the construction trades, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s an opportunity to welcome them to their legislature and say 

how much obviously their work is appreciated right across the 

province. I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to 

their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members in the Legislative Assembly, it gives me 

great pleasure to introduce in the west gallery, Penny Ward, 

Robin Schlaht, Steve Suderman, and Jess Boyachek. And sadly 

Heather Malek is not here today. I know we‟ll all miss her. 

Heather is actually on business in Calgary. But Penny, Robin, 

Jess, and Steve are all members of SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] Matters, a group that is concerned 

with the privatization of the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network and the manner in which this government has gone 

about doing it. 

Just a quick note, both Steve and Jess are from rural Manitoba 

and have been in Saskatchewan for quite some time. They‟re all 

members of the film community here, but Steve and Jess are 

now in a position where they are sadly looking at moving back 

to Manitoba, not because . . . Well just to quote what Jess has 

said: 

 

Those of us who are thinking of leaving are not doing so 

because we simply forgot about other resources like 

SaskFilm and the film employment tax credit. We‟re 

doing so because we understand our industry and SCN‟s 

vital role in it. 

 

So with that, I‟d like us all to join in welcoming the SCN 

Matters folks to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy in 

welcoming Earl Duncan and Richard St. Jules to this Assembly 

this afternoon. It‟s great to see you both here, and I hope you 

enjoy the afternoon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to have all 

members give a special acknowledgement to Victor Sawa, who 

is in the gallery. He‟s obviously from the Regina Symphony 

Orchestra, but soon also to be from the Saskatoon Symphony 

Orchestra as he provides advice around how to have the best 

music possible in our province. And I think all of us should 

acknowledge his role. 

 

Also he is very willing and able to talk to people about music, 

about film, about video games, all those things if you happen to 

go by Starbucks in the afternoon, and I think that many times 

you can get into a very good conversation with Victor about all 

of these interesting things. But he‟s a great asset for 

Saskatchewan, and I ask all of us to acknowledge him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake, 

the Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s my pleasure to welcome in the west gallery two gentlemen 

from the town of Wakaw that are joining us today. Councillor 

Gary Harrison, long-time employee of the Ministry of the 

Environment and my uncle, and Rick Kindrachuk who‟s the 

administrator of the town. And also I had the chance to talk to 

Rick this morning at the RMAAS [Rural Municipal 

Administrators‟ Association of Saskatchewan] convention. So 

please join with me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming these two 

individuals to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — If members would just permit me as well. In 

the Speaker‟s gallery we have two young gentlemen who will 

be going to Winnipeg very shortly. They are representing the 

Saskatchewan Youth Parliament at the 14th session of the 

Western Canadian Youth Parliament from May 21st to the 24th 

in Winnipeg. They‟ll be joining delegates from across the 

Western provinces at the Legislative Assembly in Manitoba. 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5627 

And in the gallery we have with us today, Nolan Blackstock 

from Saskatoon has served as a Page, Sergeant-at-Arms, and a 

Government Whip and Brett Estey from Regina, current 

Speaker, past deputy leader of the opposition and has also 

served as minister of public relations and communications. I‟d 

invite these two young gentlemen to stand and be recognized 

and invite the members to welcome to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

I‟d like to also acknowledge a few other delegates who will be 

going from Saskatchewan who weren‟t able to join us today: 

Mike Roche, who is the premier; Jordan Kostal, leader of the 

opposition; Daisy Martinez, deputy leader of the opposition; 

Tava Burton, minister of publications; Todd Blyth, Jordan 

Crawford, Laura Hochban, and Ardan Burton. We want to wish 

our delegates well at this year‟s conference. 

 

Before we move to presenting of petitions, just a special 

welcome to all our guests and just ask the guests not to 

participate in any form, even in clapping, of the debate from 

here on in, in the Assembly. I recognize the member from 

Regina Northeast. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the conditions and the safety of our highways. This 

petition pertains to Highway No. 10 from Fort Qu‟Appelle to 

the junction of No. 1. And the petition states that this portion of 

the highway is a main traffic route to year-round tourist 

destinations as well as this portion of the highway serves three 

major grain inland terminals. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu‟Appelle; Wadena, Saskatchewan; and even from Rainier, 

Alberta. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And Mr. Speaker, we know that The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands, or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in its natural state, and that the repealing of the 

schedule listing of these designated lands by the proposed 

amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, will 

endanger the protection and designation of these lands. And, 

Mr. Speaker, there are many citizens that are concerned with the 

government‟s actions. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by the future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents from Swift 

Current, Pennant, Cabri, Gladstone, Lloydminster, and Stewart 

Valley. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I rise today to present a petition from people 

who would support maintaining quality health care services. 

They want the government to recognize the essential role of all 

health care providers as valued members of the health care team 

and recognize that the utilization and value of the full range of 

professional skills offered by health care providers, and hope 

that they promote them to addressing retention and recruitment 

issues and by ensuring safe staffing levels. And this can only be 

achieved through a commitment of active funding and the 

installation of good faith in the provincial collective bargaining 

process: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the people signing this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Abbey, Assiniboia, Aneroid, Battlefords, Biggar, Balcarres, 

Brownlee, Balgonie, Clavet, Cudworth, Carmel, Cadillac, 

Davidson, Domremy, Duck Lake, Drake, Dysart, Dodsland, 

Eatonia, Elfros, Glenside, Foam Lake, Herbert, Hodgeville, 

Gull Lake, Guernsey, Humboldt, Kindersley, Kyle, Kenaston, 

Lanigan, Leader, LeRoy, Liebenthal, Luseland, Kerrobert, 

Limerick, Macrorie, Maple Creek, Middle Lake, Moose Jaw, 

Melfort, Macklin, Montmartre, Lloydminster, Nokomis, 

Norquay, Outlook, Ponteix, Quinton, Regina, Rosthern, 

Saskatoon, St. Brieux, Simmie, Sedley, Silton, Strasbourg, 

Shaunavon, Swift Current, Unity, Primate, Young, Wakaw, 

Waldeck, Watrous, Webb, Wilkie, Wishart, Wymark, and 

Wynyard. I so present. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reinstatement of the 



5628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

domestic abuse outreach program. And we know that was a 

very good program that provided a number of valuable services 

to women victims of domestic violence and their children, 

including helping them find emergency shelter and 

accompanying them to their homes, court, and hospital or police 

station as needed. 

 

And we know the Government of Saskatchewan cut the funding 

for the domestic abuse outreach program on December 31st 

without any consultation with the community. I‟d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

reinstate the domestic abuse outreach program as a 

provincial government service and make it available in all 

parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 915. This petition addresses concerns of 

Saskatchewan people about the quality of Stanley Mission road. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed and supported by the leadership and the 

community members of the community of Stanley Mission. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan students 

through a call for the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition today are 

from the city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition for financial assistance to the town of Duck 

Lake water project. The petition is again being circulated and 

signed by Saskatchewan residents because of the exorbitant 

amount that Duck Lake citizens are forced to pay by this 

government for clean, safe water. It‟s causing them hardship, 

and I‟m told by the leadership of the community that it‟s 

actually forcing people to move out of Duck Lake, which is 

shameful. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

promise to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by folks from 

Martensville, Saskatoon, and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan with yet another water issue. The government 

ministry has directed that customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

These Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. And an 

alternative water supply referred to them by a government 

agency is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized 

water at great cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, and 

availability of water, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that the members of the building trade unions have a 

proud history of craft union certification in Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the existing construction industry labour relations 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5629 

Act, 1992 has provided a stable environment for labour 

relations in the construction industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that stable labour relations environment provides 

for quality work, safe construction sites, and benefits us all in 

Saskatchewan. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the existing building 

trades contract supported apprenticeship system of training 

which results in a highly skilled workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 2009 which 

dismantles the proud history of the building trades in this 

province, creates instability in the labour market, and 

impacts the quality of training required of workers before 

entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Regina, Moose Jaw, 

Melfort, St. Brieux, Saskatoon, Torquay, Watson, Asquith, 

Balgonie, Vanscoy, Aberdeen, Prince Albert, Martensville, 

Delisle, LeRoy, Humboldt, Colonsay, La Ronge, Ardath, 

Nipawin, Melville, Bethune, Semans, Canora, Young, Duval, 

Perdue, Wilkie, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, Watrous, Kerrobert, 

Kindersley, North Battleford, Leoville, Martin, Mervin, Cut 

Knife, Battlefords, Turtleford, Lloydminster, Eyebrow, Paradise 

Hill, Waseca, White City, Porcupine Plain, and Biggar. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

Saskatchewan residents as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive almost $1 billion deficits tabled by the 

Sask Party and they reference the billions of dollars of debt 

growth projected under the Sask Party. This is a problem that 

needs to be rectified. Saskatchewan people expect their 

government to be responsible on these fronts. And the kind of 

debt growth that we‟re incurring at this point in time are simply 

not acceptable to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these petitions are signed by concerned residents of 

Estevan, Regina, Sedley, Warman, and Carlyle. I so submit. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film 

and television industry. Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by 

residents concerned that the Sask Party government has left the 

film and television industry languish for the last couple of years 

and has now kicked it to the curb with the privatization of the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network. I‟d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Estevan and 

Davidson. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 

because I am proud to say that on behalf of Minister of Energy, 

I was able to attend the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce business awards known as the SABEX [Saskatoon 

Achievement in Business Excellence] awards. 

 

More than a dozen local businesses and entrepreneurs were 

honoured last night. On behalf of SaskPower, I had the 

privilege to present the award for the New Business Venture 

Award to AlarmTek Security of Canada. 

 

Every year at the SABEX awards, a person is inducted into the 

Business Hall of Fame. This year‟s inductee was Mr. David 

Dutchak of MD Ambulance Care. Born and raised in Blaine 

Lake, Saskatchewan, Dave has followed his father‟s footsteps, 

Mike, when he started his career in EMS [emergency medical 

services] services. 

 

MD Ambulance was founded by David‟s father 34 years ago. 

Today the entire family of Michael Dutchak continues to 

provide excellence in emergency medical services in our 

province. Dave Dutchak is the CEO [chief executive officer] of 

MD Ambulance Care and in 1976 employed six staff members. 

Today there‟s over 129 people employed there from primary 

care paramedics, intermediate care paramedics, advanced care 

and flight care paramedics, as well as the health bus. Dave also 

served on the board of directors for the EMS Services Chiefs of 

Canada since 2002. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me 

in congratulating Mr. David Dutchak on the award, as well as 



5630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

other recipients. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Consultations 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there are many types of marathon 

campaigns held for many different purposes. Some raise 

money, Mr. Speaker, like a telethon for charity. Some are 

walkathons, Mr. Speaker, held by students to draw attention to a 

good cause. And some are contests, Mr. Speaker, like a 

dance-a-thon to award the winning couple a special prize. 

 

But the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday announced a new kind of marathon, something 

Saskatchewan people haven‟t heard of before. It‟s the first-ever 

Sask Party consult-a-thon, Mr. Speaker. We heard, Mr. 

Speaker, that Enterprise Saskatchewan consults with industry 

around the clock, around the calendar. Yes, Mr. Speaker, when 

it comes to consultation, the Sask Party‟s marathon man never 

sleeps. He‟s out on the road day and night on his endless 

marathon of consultation. 

 

And not just in good weather, Mr. Speaker. He said, Mr. 

Speaker, those consultations take place whether they‟re in the 

summertime, whether in the fall, whether in budget cycle or 

without budget cycle. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this model of Chevy 

has all-season tires. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know how much money the Sask Party‟s 

consult-a-thon has raised, but we know how much Enterprise 

Saskatchewan has cost the taxpayers — $90 million. Mr. 

Speaker, as he concluded his remarks, the member said he was 

almost ready to give his number out. No need, Mr. Speaker, the 

people already have the number of the Sask Party‟s $90 million 

marathon man. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Northern Forest Fire 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Due to the quick 

response of the emergency personnel, I stand before the House 

to speak of a forest fire that is currently under control north of 

Prince Albert. 

 

The RM [rural municipality] of Buckland has declared a local 

emergency effective May 17th, 2010. As of right now, one 

home has been destroyed and roughly 60 others are at risk as 

firefighters work to douse hot spots at the wildfire. Since the 

fire started, about 50 people from 22 families have registered 

with the local branch of the Canadian Red Cross. Thankfully, 

the majority of residents living in the area have been able to 

find alternative accommodations and have not needed help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I accompanied the Minister of CPSP 

[Corrections, Public Safety and Policing], along with Mr. 

Duane McKay, the fire commissioner and director of 

emergency response, to assess the damage done by the fire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very grateful for the Buckland Fire 

Department, along with all emergency response personnel. 

They cannot possibly know how much their empathy and 

support has meant to the unfortunate families being evacuated. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of this Assembly 

keep the families of Buckland in their thoughts and their 

prayers. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Postcard from China 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, our caucus recently received a 

piece of misdirected mail. It‟s a postcard from the Premier 

updating his caucus on the progress of his trip to China. Allow 

me, Mr. Speaker, to pass along the Premier‟s message to his 

colleagues. 

 

He writes, hey team. The trip is going really well. The Chinese 

investors were a bit disappointed though to learn that 

Saskatchewan doesn‟t have 20 per cent of the world‟s natural 

resources, but I think I was able to cover. Just like I did with the 

cities, I told them that if we didn‟t have them now, we‟d have 

them next year. In spite of that little hiccup, it‟s no exaggeration 

to say that this is the greatest trade mission in our history, in the 

history of our province, our region, our country, and quite 

possibly the world. After all what could be better than a trip that 

gives me an airtight alibi for missing members‟ statements? 

 

Over here no one‟s even heard of the guitar museum, and in fact 

I‟m turning into a bit of a celebrity: everywhere I go people 

keep talking about the Great Wall. Make sure caucus staff are 

videotaping all my commercials. I want to see them when I get 

home. I‟ll be here on time, but probably a little over budget. Oh 

well, not like it‟s the first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s our pleasure to pass along this message on 

behalf of the Premier, just as it will be a great pleasure to 

receive the people‟s message in November of 2011. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Saskatoon Sports Volunteer Honoured 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of 

Saskatoon‟s most energetic volunteers and sports enthusiasts 

was recently honoured with the Canadian Sport Tourism 

Alliance PRESTIGE [program recognizing exceptional sport 

tourism initiatives, games & events] Award for community 

service. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Joe Bloski was honoured at a gala in Toronto on April 22nd for 

his selfless dedication to developing and promoting sports as 

part of the dynamic fabric of our province. I had the privilege, 

Mr. Speaker, of serving with Joe this past year, as he was the 

Vice-Chair of the 2010 IIHF [International Ice Hockey 

Federation] World Junior Championships host committee that 

saw a great competition and a huge economic impact in our 

province. 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5631 

He is a man of great focus and passion who puts every ounce of 

effort into creating the opportunity for success. Bloski‟s 

accomplishments are numerous. Joe has been a hands-on person 

in coaching, managing teams, leading bid committees, and 

chairing or co-chairing international sporting events for 40 

years in our province. He was an integral part of the 

establishment and growth of Saskatoon Sports Tourism in 2000, 

also serving on the board of directors during that time. He has 

also served as a director for the Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame. 

Joe says that volunteering and networking in the sports world 

has brought much joy and many new friends and business 

connections his way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask you and all of my colleagues in the 

Assembly to join me in congratulating and thanking Joe Bloski 

for his incredible legacy of volunteerism in our province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Questions in Committee 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m sure 

most of us have read the adventures of Nancy Drew, a 

childhood amateur detective. Well last night in committee, the 

member for Martensville played a starring role in her own little 

caper: the mystery of the missing answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in a nutshell, the Minister of the Environment was given 

some pretty obvious clues about four weeks ago about what 

would be asked in committee. But she had trouble finding the 

clues. She could have investigated her own office or even the 

public Votes and Proceedings, the document we receive daily, 

where she specifically answered my written questions and told 

me that I should ask them in committee. 

 

Now even Nancy Drew, the childhood investigator, would have 

known this was a pretty good clue. Even Nancy might have 

followed up on this glaring evidence and made sure she had the 

answers to these questions. But the Minister of the Environment 

missed the clues and must have been too busy organizing her 

pig roast, selling off protected land, and cutting her firefighting 

budget to solve the big mystery. 

 

But she can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that she will have 

another chance to use her detective skills. On November 7th, 

2011, I‟m sure she will still be trying to solve the big mystery 

of why this Sask Party government has suddenly become 

opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Female Role Models 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I stand before this Assembly to 

speak about an issue that is not only important to me, but near 

and dear to parents‟ heart worldwide. Though Mother‟s Day has 

come and gone on the calendar, the important role of a mother 

or a strong female role model still remains. 

 

For this reason, I am proud to announce Dove‟s first annual 

Real Beauty Regina Workshop taking place on May the 30th. 

This is a workshop designed for girls age 8 to 13 and their 

female mentors. It‟s a fun, interactive workshop exploring the 

very important issue of self-esteem. Mothers and/or female role 

models have the greatest impact on young girls‟ self-esteem. 

These female role models have power to positively impact the 

self-esteem of very special girls in their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would personally like to thank Jacqui 

Shumiatcher for generously supporting and sponsoring this 

event. I would also like to acknowledge the sponsorship of the 

Mackenzie Art Gallery, Liz at the University Club and 

Catering, Western Litho for their involvement in this event. 

 

Now as a female MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

it is truly an honour for me to host such a worthwhile event. Mr. 

Speaker, the city-wide response has been absolutely incredible. 

I sincerely hope this event is the first of many to come. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question‟s to the 

Minister of Labour, and wanted to ask the Minister of Labour 

and ask him if it‟s not too late for him to learn from his 

mistakes on Bill 5 and Bill 6 where the International Labour 

Organization, a body of the United Nations, indicated that the 

Saskatchewan government, the Sask Party government, was in 

conflict when it passed those Bills without consultation and 

proper involvement of the community and speaking of the duty 

to consult. 

 

My question to the minister is this: even at this late date, will he 

reconsider this ill-advised Bill, go back to the people of the 

province, sit down, talk it out, come to conclusions, and then 

bring the Bill forward if he still feels it‟s necessary? Will he do 

that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for an 

opportunity to provide an update on Bill 80, which we 

anticipate‟s going to pass later today, Mr. Speaker. Bill 80‟s 

going to ensure that we have greater inclusion within our 

workplaces, Mr. Speaker, especially when we think about 

enhancing the role for First Nations and Métis people in the 

construction sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we can also see, it‟s going to lead to increased 

choice for working people within that sector and increased 

competition, thereby reducing and maximizing taxpayer dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. As far as, as far as process, Mr. Speaker, I suggest 

that the Leader of the Opposition just ask his House Leader 

because, Mr. Speaker, to quote his House Leader from April 

26th, “The reality is that the government has lived by all the 

rules and Bill 80 will pass.” 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 



5632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about Bill 

80 as being positive for the economy, but I want to tell the 

minister this: in 2007, the construction industry in this province 

was working full tilt; contractors were investing; every tool was 

picked up; you couldn‟t get enough people to do the work. The 

fact of the matter, the system was working. And as Terry Parker 

has said many times, if it‟s not broke, why fix it? 

 

My question to the minister is this. Even though you have 

moved this far on this Bill, it‟s not too late to come to your 

senses, take this Bill out by form of a white paper, a green 

paper. Michael Fougere and Terry Parker are reasonable people. 

They‟ve worked together for 17 years. There‟s been no work 

stoppage in the industry. The question is, my question, my 

question to the minister is this: why can‟t you sit down with 

Michael Fougere and Terry Parker, work with the people 

involved, spend the next year in consultation; and there‟s a 

good chance we won‟t need this ill-advised Bill? Why don‟t 

you do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll just draw on some 

insight offered from the Communications, Energy and 

Paperworkers Union of Canada. It was issued last March. It‟s 

one of Canada‟s foremost unions and the title of the press 

release, Mr. Speaker, was, “Saskatchewan changes [are] „a giant 

step forward for construction workers.‟” 

 

And you see, Mr. Speaker, it says the Saskatchewan 

government‟s proposed changes to rules governing unionization 

in the construction industry will give workers more say in their 

working conditions. And it will help Canada‟s employment 

picture, says one of Canada‟s largest sector unions. The 

announced changes allow construction workers instead of 

governments to decide who represents them at the bargaining 

table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see, there are obvious strengths to this 

obviously increasing inclusivity, making sure we have more 

inclusion within this sector, Mr. Speaker. Greater choice, 

greater competition and, Mr. Speaker, we intend to move 

forward with Bill 80. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would turn to the Minister 

of Environment and see if I can have more luck in talking her 

into pulling the ill-advised Bill that she is pushing through the 

House today. 

 

My question to the minister comes from a question that was 

raised with me this past Sunday at a brunch that I attended in 

Regina. And a young man about 10 years old came up to me 

and asked, Mr. Lingenfelter, do you think you‟ll be able to stop 

the wildlife habitat Bill from passing? 

 

Mr. Speaker, many tens of thousands of people in this province 

want this Bill stopped because it protects land — 3.5 million 

acres — that belongs to the people of the province. It belongs to 

the children, it belongs to the adults, and it belongs to future 

generations. Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Premier is in 

China signing a deal with the Communist government so they 

can own oil in Saskatchewan. If he believes in that, why can‟t 

he believe . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — With owning the land here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated quite clearly in 

committee last night when this question was posed, our 

government is committed to this Bill. It will be passing later 

today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we believe in the principle of landownership 

and I would say that the ranchers and farmers who are using 

this land are citizens of this province as well, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟m pleased to be part of a government who will give them an 

opportunity to purchase that land, Mr. Speaker, and allow them 

to continue the great conservation work that they do on that 

land. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Consultation Regarding Proposed Legislation 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the 

Minister of Environment. It deals with the lack of consultation. 

And we know that many First Nations people, many 

organizations, Nature Conservancy and others, don‟t feel that 

they were properly consulted. And by international agreements, 

duty to consult is becoming a very common phrase in private 

sector and governments. But one thing this government seems 

to not understand: that consultation does not mean explaining 

how you implement a Bill after it‟s forced through the 

Assembly. 

 

My question to the minister is this, my question to the minister 

is this: in light of the fact that most organizations, governments, 

and institutions around the world are moving to more 

consultation, how do we get here where no consultation was 

done with the public at large and you‟re jamming a Bill through 

that protects 3.5 million acres of the most sensitive land in the 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. And the discussions with stakeholders 

began last June, almost a year ago, Mr. Speaker. There was a 

great many stakeholders who received the information, who 

attended meetings, who had contact with the officials in my 

ministry explaining what the government‟s proposal was, Mr. 

Speaker, and that was long before the Bill was introduced in 

December. 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5633 

So there‟s been ample opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and I have a 

list of letters from stakeholders who are in full support of the 

approach that the government is taking. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll be moving ahead with this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government 

signed an agreement with Amicus that obliges taxpayers to pay 

the mortgage and the interest costs as well as to pay off the 

mortgage of this long-term care facility if either Amicus or the 

government decides to walk away from the deal. 

 

Now the minister and his officials have confirmed that the 

mortgage on this facility will likely be for 25 years. To the 

minister: what is the estimated total cost of the Amicus 

mortgage, including interest, over the next 25 years and how 

much will taxpayers have to pay for this sweetheart deal to their 

friends? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said over the last 

number of question periods, this is a very good deal for 

Saskatchewan people. More importantly it‟s a very good deal 

for seniors in this province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is a good deal for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers but more importantly it‟s a good deal 

for the seniors in this province, Mr. Speaker. After many years 

of NDP government where they had people staying in acute . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think the member from Cumberland 

would allow the minister to respond to the question. I recognize 

the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this agreement with 

Amicus, the Catholic Health Ministry, allows seniors to age 

with dignity. It allows seniors to age in place. It allows seniors 

to age with their couples, Mr. Speaker, as couples, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland will allow the 

response. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what the 

member from Cumberland has against seniors . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

would ask the minister just to go straight to the response and 

not to refer to the Speaker‟s rulings. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what the 

members opposite would have against supplying 100 long-term 

care beds in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. This is a good deal. 

Amicus has entered into an agreement with the health region 

that will be able to supply these long-term care facilities to the 

residents in that area, Mr. Speaker. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

seniors in the province will welcome this deal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I note the minister didn‟t answer the 

question. Now everyone knows that the longer you amortize a 

mortgage, the more you pay. And many homeowners, for 

example, end up paying more than twice the purchase price of 

their home over the life of a mortgage once interest costs are 

factored in. 

 

So to the minister: has he or his department estimated how 

much it will cost the government or the people of our province 

to build this facility themselves, and how does that estimate 

compare with how much it could potentially cost us all if we‟re 

called upon to pay off that mortgage? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is an agreement 

between the Saskatoon Health Region and Amicus that will 

supply long-term care beds well into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

We have long-term care facilities already in Saskatoon that are 

watching this with great interest. They‟re very excited because 

if this works the way we perceive it‟s going to work, Mr. 

Speaker, it could certainly help relieve some of the long-term 

care issues throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We realize that Amicus is upfronting all the capital. All we‟re 

simply doing is leasing the space with a per-day fee, Mr. 

Speaker, that will help replace that capital. But, Mr. Speaker, 

back to her accusations yesterday that it is some sort of mystery 

deal with the Catholic Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker, that could 

not be further from the truth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that governments can 

borrow money at a lower interest rate than most private sector 

companies. So getting Amicus to build this project on its own 

actually makes it more expensive. But yesterday the 

government said it wasn‟t their responsibility to know what 

interest rate Amicus is paying on the mortgage despite the fact 

that the public is paying for this inside job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the minister: how could the government sign an 

agreement that obliges taxpayers to pay off Amicus‟s mortgage 

without knowing the potential cost? Is this another example of 

the kind of financial mismanagement that has brought us two 

consecutive deficit budgets or, Mr. Speaker, is this the way this 

government is going to go? And we all know about that. We all 



5634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

know about back to the past and Devine governments racking 

up billions of dollars in debt. And guess what? We‟re still 

paying for it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are many very 

innovative . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

construction costs for a government to construct a facility like 

this, the ministry has numbers showing that this facility would 

cost upwards of $30 million or more. Mr. Speaker, Amicus is 

saying that they can build it for far less. They‟re getting the land 

for probably a much more affordable rate than perhaps what we 

would as government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, construction costs are going to be much less than 

if we were to build it ourselves, Mr. Speaker. This is a pilot 

project that we‟ll certainly look at this project as we move 

forward. We do not believe that this is going to cost the 

province any more over the long term than if we would have 

invested 20 to 30 to $40 million of taxpayers‟ money upfront. 

 

The Speaker: — I‟ve been informed that we‟re having 

problems with the mikes . . . [inaudible] . . . If the members just 

want to continue using their voice . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Just one second. Let‟s do a test here. We‟ve got a mike on here. 

We‟re ready to go. It sounds like it, so I will recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we know it‟s either one 

of two ways. Either this is serious incompetence or it‟s a serious 

signal to the public that we‟re back to doing business the way 

the Devine government did it in the 1980s — they can take their 

pick. But from my point of view, Mr. Speaker, when you have 

public money, you should have public tenders and that should 

be the rule. 

 

The CEO is on contract with the minister‟s department. Its 

lawyer is the brother of the Premier‟s chief of staff. The 

construction company, which got the untendered contract to 

build it, and its president have donated $18,000 to the Sask 

Party in the last 18 years. And this is a government that, 

whether they like it or not, has guaranteed this loan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So to the minister: we need to know, how much is this going to 

cost the taxpayers over the 25-year term of this mortgage? And 

why the sweetheart deal for their friends, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s been 

really quite interesting to hear that member and that former 

government‟s new-found interest in public tenders because, you 

know, Mr. Speaker, that government lost $30 million in 

untendered SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], Mr. Speaker, that this province is still 

paying for, Mr. Speaker. And I could go on with other examples 

like Channel Lake and many others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This project is with the Catholic Health Ministry‟s corporation 

of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The members can either allow a 

minister to respond or the members of the opposition may find 

themselves running out of time for questions. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, provincial governments 

of many stripes have worked closely with the Catholic Health 

Ministry. Whether it‟s in St. Paul‟s in Saskatoon, whether it was 

in the Pasqua Hospital formerly here in Regina, whether it‟s 

down in Estevan, whether it‟s formerly in Humboldt, and 

whether there‟s nine long-term care facilities right now run by 

the Catholic Health Ministry — those agreements have been 

entered into by provincial governments of many different 

stripes, and they have been strong health agreements that 

service the people of the province very, very well. 

 

This member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is throwing out all sorts of 

accusations because a couple of members that may be 

connected to the government are also connected to the Catholic 

Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that couldn‟t be 

further from the truth. That member should withdraw those 

remarks because they‟re inflammatory and they‟re untrue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this minister is 

trying to hide behind the Catholic Health Ministry. We have a 

public tender on the Humboldt Hospital. We have a public 

tender on the mental health centre. We have a public tender on 

the Academic Health Sciences centre. We have a public tender 

on Oliver Lodge. We have public tenders. And why do we have 

them? Because our government, an NDP government, brought 

in public tenders because of what happened in the ‟80s. 

 

I have a simple question. People spent over a dozen years trying 

to get the finances of this province in place. Mr. Speaker, we 

tried to get debt under control and a lot of people suffered for 

that. We don‟t want to go back to the past. Tell me why, tell me 

why you‟re rewarding your friends and there‟s no public tender. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Just a reminder to the member, 

and the member‟s well aware of it, of directing of questions 

through the Chair. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that member just cited a 

number of facilities. They cited the Humboldt Hospital, which 

is no longer under the Catholic care ministry. They cited the 

Dubé Centre, which is not under the Catholic Health Ministry, 

Mr. Speaker. They cited a number of projects . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Member from Regina 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5635 

Dewdney. Order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are all sorts of 

examples where tenders have gone out for public facilities, Mr. 

Speaker. She cited them and that‟s what we followed through 

on, Mr. Speaker, in our government. This is a different project, 

Mr. Speaker, because it‟s owned by the Catholic Health 

Ministry. They chose their contractor, Mr. Speaker, and who‟s 

going to benefit from that? The people of Saskatchewan. The 

seniors of this province, Mr. Speaker. Under that government 

they continued to have them all live in acute care centres, and 

that is absolutely shameful. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Utilization of Hospital Beds 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 28 beds that are 

being closed at City Hospital were originally opened as acute 

care beds but have recently been used as long-term care beds. 

The minister says the long-term care beds are being moved to 

Oliver Lodge, which means that the beds at City Hospital 

should go back to their original purpose, which is serving the 

health region as acute care beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister guarantee today that the 28 beds 

will be reopened as acute care beds, or does the minister believe 

that cutting 28 acute care beds is an efficiency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is a very interesting 

question coming from that member. It begs the question, why 

were there 28 acute care beds being used for long-term care? In 

fact there‟s far more than 28 acute care beds in City Hospital in 

Saskatoon being used for long-term care. Why is that, Mr. 

Speaker? Because of years of underfunding by the government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. They did not supply the facilities. We‟re 

moving forward. We‟re supplying those facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As there is a transition from residents in the acute care centres 

over to Oliver Lodge, there will be a transition in those beds, 

Mr. Speaker. That is a decision of the Saskatoon Health Region. 

We know the pressures in the Saskatoon Health Region and I 

would assume that those beds will be . . . continue to open into 

the future by the Saskatoon Health Region as they see fit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that the minister 

talks about all the commitment he has to long-term care — 

cancelled 13 long-term care homes in this last budget. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister is trying to get through this session. He‟s 

trying to get to the end of the session without commenting on 

possible bed closures and impending layoffs. This issue isn‟t 

going to go away; it‟s just starting. 

 

We know the beds are closing and the minister will not 

guarantee that they will be reopened as acute care beds. The 

minister‟s failure to properly fund the health regions has already 

resulted in proposed cuts to health care workers, including 

registered nurses, and cuts to programs and services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many people will be laid off 

as a result of the closure of the 28 beds at City Hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, once again I feel I have 

to spend half of the answer dispelling the absolute falsehoods 

that that member just mentioned. Thirteen long-term care 

facilities have not been cancelled. Thirteen long-term care 

facilities in this province will be moving ahead when the 

communities have their money in place and when the scoping is 

in place, Mr. Speaker, 13 long-term care facilities that were in 

absolutely dire straits, Mr. Speaker, because of lack of funding 

from that former government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you go to Rosetown and you have long-term care people 

living in the basement of a facility, and that was perfectly fine 

under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. It‟s not fine under the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. When you to Watrous, when 

you go to Watrous and it rains out when you happen to visit that 

place and there‟s buckets all over the main entrance, that was 

perfectly fine under the NDP. It‟s not fine under the 

Saskatchewan Party government. Mr. Speaker, those facilities 

are going ahead when the money is ready and the people are 

ready. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I‟m sure those 13 long-term care facilities are 

waiting to see if they‟re going to get the same sweetheart deal 

that this one in Saskatoon is getting. They‟re all looking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the shortfall of money, the shortfall of money 

provided in the last Sask Party budget left health regions 

scrambling to figure out how they could cope with their 

massive deficits. Saskatoon Health Region will experience a 

$24 million shortfall. Maura Davies, region CEO, described the 

money being allotted as “less than what the region requires to 

maintain our current services.” She went on to say in another 

article that as a result of the deficit, the region had not 

determined whether or not they would have to close beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we are hearing that 28 acute care beds will be 

closed. This is a direct result of the government‟s failure to 

properly fund the health regions. How does the minister tell 

Saskatchewan people that he‟s putting patients first when he‟s 

forcing health regions to run deficits, close beds, and cut 

programs? 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen a 5 per 

cent increase in funding in health regions throughout this 

province, Mr. Speaker. Difficult decisions will have to be made 

by health regions but, Mr. Speaker, what we are guaranteeing is 

front-line service will continue and even improve over the next 

couple years, Mr. Speaker, just like in the last two and half 

years under our government when we‟ve seen a huge reduction 



5636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

in wait-lists, Mr. Speaker, not in necessarily the wait-lists but in 

the time the people are waiting. Mr. Speaker, it is positive news. 

 

Just like we saw, Mr. Speaker, when the opposite party was in 

government, they sure wouldn‟t want to put a target on the 

number of nurses attracted because they just wouldn‟t meet it, 

Mr. Speaker. We are 80 per cent there in two and a half years, 

Mr. Speaker. I‟ll put our two and a half years of health care 

records up against their 16 years of dismal disaster health care, 

Mr. Speaker. I‟m proud of our government. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 

134, The Opticians Act with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its amendment be 

now read a third time. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Health has 

requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 134, the opticians amendment Act, 2009 and 

that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move to third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 134, the opticians amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 80, 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 be reported without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, in accordance with rule 34(4) and 

rule 35, this Bill will now be read the third time. The minister 

may proceed to move third reading. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry 

Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister responsible 

that Bill No. 80, The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 

 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5637 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:50 until 15:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call the vote, I would just like to 

again remind our guests in the gallery that the guests are not to 

participate in any form at any time in the proceedings on the 

floor of the Assembly. I‟d ask the guests to remember that as 

we move forward. 

 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 35] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Gantefoer 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert Heppner 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Schriemer Stewart Allchurch 

Weekes Tell Wilson 

Hickie Michelson Ottenbreit 

Ross Chisholm Bradshaw 

Kirsch McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 19] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 35; those 

opposed, 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. Order. I recognize the 

Chair of the Economy Committee. Order. Order. Members, just 

. . . we need to . . . we just need to back up one bit. The motion 

carries. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 132, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 to 

be reported with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with rule . . . Order. In 

accordance with rule 34(4) and rule 35, the Assembly will now 

consider the first and second readings of the amendment, 

followed by the third reading of the amended Bill. I recognize 

the Minister Responsible for the Environment. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendment be read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that Bill No. 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 



5638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:05 until 15:15.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 34] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Gantefoer 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert Heppner 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Tell Wilson Hickie 

Michelson Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Bradshaw Kirsch 

McMillan   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 19] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 34; those 

opposed, 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Before orders of the day, 

I lay on the Table, pursuant to section 286 of The Election Act, 

1996, 95 copies of the report of the Saskatoon Riversdale and 

Regina Douglas Park by-elections submitted by the Acting 

Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — [Inaudible] . . . on a point of privilege, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview may 

state his point of privilege. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 12(1), I wrote 

to the Speaker this morning to advise the Speaker of a question 

of privilege. Mr. Speaker, the 21st edition of Erskine May‟s 

Treatise on the Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of 

Parliament outlines parliamentary privilege as follows: 

 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights 

enjoyed by each House collectively as a constituent part 

of the High Court of Parliament, and by Members of each 

House individually, without which they could not 

discharge their functions, and which exceed those 

possessed by other bodies or individuals. 

 

This definition clearly indicates that parliamentary privilege 

extends to all members collectively and individually and that 

privilege is absolutely essential for members to discharge our 

parliamentary duties. The 3rd edition of Hatsell‟s Precedents of 

Proceedings in the House of Commons concurs Erskine May by 

stating that the privileges afforded to the members are rights 

that are “absolutely necessary for the due execution of its 

power.” Finally the 2nd edition of Maingot‟s Parliamentary 

Privilege in Canada provides a practical definition of privilege: 

 

If someone improperly interferes with the parliamentary 

work of a Member of Parliament — i.e. any of the 

Member‟s activities that have a connection with the 

proceedings in Parliament — in such a case that [matter] 

is a matter involving parliamentary privilege. 

 

The question of privilege rises because of specific actions of the 

government related to scheduling of standing committees. 

These actions have improperly interfered with the ability of 

members to conduct our parliamentary work and thus constitute 

a breach of privilege. 

 

Around 5 p.m. yesterday, notice was provided to opposition 

members that the Standing Committee on Human Services 

would be convened this morning at 9:30 a.m. to discuss Bill 80, 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act. 

This late notice interfered with the ability of members to know 

about or attend the meeting. The majority of members had 

already left the Assembly as the legislature had adjourned at 

3:40 p.m. In fact several members had already left Regina to 

attend events in their constituencies. 

 

According to the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan: 

 

On the instruction of the Chair or another Member acting 

in the capacity of the Chair, a notice advising the 

Members of the committee of a meeting and meeting 

agenda should be circulated as soon as practicable by the 

Clerk of the committee [Rule 126(1)]. 

 

We trust that the Speaker will agree that it is not practicable for 

notice to be posted in the legislature around 5 p.m. — when 

most members have left the building after the adjournment at 

3:40 p.m. — for a meeting at 9:30 a.m. the following morning. 

It is entirely unacceptable to state that members should have 

known that this Bill would come to committee this morning. It 

is impossible for members to know the government‟s intentions 

with regard to any piece of legislation. However the 

government is undoubtedly well aware of its own legislative 

agenda and could easily have provided adequate notice of this 

committee meeting to ensure that all members were aware of 

the meeting and able to attend the meeting. 

 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5639 

Providing notice well after the House has adjourned and most 

members have left the Assembly for an important committee 

meeting early the following morning impedes the ability of 

members to carry out their parliamentary duties. Mr. Speaker, it 

is not sufficient to say that this is not a breach of privilege 

because members will have an opportunity to vote on this Bill 

in the Assembly this afternoon. The breach of privilege in this 

case occurred because members‟ ability to conduct their work 

in committee was impeded. 

 

According to precedent, the breach of privileges occurs 

whenever a member is impeded from doing his or her 

parliamentary work defined by Maingot as “Any one of the 

Member‟s activities that have a connection with a proceeding in 

Parliament.” 

 

It is entirely unacceptable to say that this does not constitute a 

breach of privilege because members will have an opportunity 

to vote on the Bill in the Assembly. Doing so would imply that 

it is acceptable to impede members in certain aspects of their 

duties as long as we are not impeded in other aspects. That 

would contradict the very definition of parliamentary privilege, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the Speaker were to state today that it is a matter beyond his 

reach because it related to a committee, that would constitute a 

grave abdication of responsibility. Marleau and Montpetit state 

quite clearly, and I quote, “The Speaker presides over debate in 

the House and is responsible for enforcing and interpreting all 

rules and practices and for the preservation of order and 

decorum in the proceedings of the House.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, based on all of this, we trust that you will 

recognize this matter constitutes a prima facie case of privilege. 

And if you do find a prima facie case of privilege, I‟ll be 

prepared to move the following motion: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of scheduling of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services on May 19th, 

2010, and report back to this Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 

the Official Opposition‟s claim of the 9:30 a.m. Human 

Services Committee meeting being a question of privilege, it is 

important to know the facts which I will outline. According to 

the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

34(1) Specified bills not concluded by the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think it would . . . Questions of 

privilege are a serious matter, serious issue, and I would ask the 

opposition members now to allow the House Leader to respond 

without interference. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to 

the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

34(1) Specified bills not concluded by the day prior to the 

Completion Day shall be subject to the procedures 

outlined by this Rule. 

 

34(2) In any case where a specified bill has not been 

reported by a standing committee before 9:00 a.m. on the 

day prior to the Completion Day, [so that means, Mr. 

Speaker, it can‟t be done before 9:00 a.m.] the committee 

shall convene to conclude examination of the bill as 

follows: 

(a) The Chair will put the question on any 

amendments, new clauses or new schedules that 

had been previously proposed before putting a 

combined question, if required, in order to 

conclude the examination of the bill. 

(b) No other amendments, new clauses or new 

schedules shall be proposed. 

(c) The committee shall report each bill to the 

Assembly on Routine Proceedings later that day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the committee cannot meet before 9 a.m. and 

has to have concluded its business by 1:30 p.m. that same day: 

 

(a) Rule 130(2) shall not be observed for the purpose 

of concluding consideration of any remaining 

specified bills in standing committees. 

 

34(3) Rule 34(2) applies only to bills referred to standing 

committees after second reading. 

 

Therefore the fact that there would be a meeting on the morning 

of the day prior to completion day was known by all of the 

members as it is part of the rules of this Assembly. 

 

The Opposition House Leader knew that this was the correct 

process as can be seen by his comments made in a scrum on 

April 26th, 2010, and I quote: 

 

We‟re at a point where Bill 80 is inevitable. There‟s 

nothing we can do as an opposition on Bill 80. Once its 

20 hours are in, it passes. It will come up likely the 17th 

or 18th for final passage. It never gets raised again now 

except when it‟s passed and, so, as much as we would like 

to see Bill 80 not go through for a number of reasons, the 

reality is that the government has lived by all the rules 

and Bill 80 will pass. 

 

Although the House adjourned prior to 5 o‟clock on May 18th, 

the House was adjourned to deliberate on Bills that were 

referred to committee with no earlier notice to the opposition. 

One of these committees continued sitting until 10 p.m. 

Therefore members were still able to easily be contacted and 

delivered the meeting notices. Meeting notices for the 

committee meeting in question were being hand delivered to 

members and caucus offices by 4:30 p.m. on May 18th 

afternoon prior to the day of the committee meeting. 

 

According to rule 126(1): 

 



5640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

On the instruction of the Chair or another Member acting 

in the capacity of the Chair, a notice advising the 

Members of the committee of a meeting and meeting 

agenda should be circulated as soon as practicable by the 

Clerk of the committee. 

 

In addition to this fact, Mr. Speaker, if members are not able to 

be present for a meeting, according to rule 121(5) of the rules 

and proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: 

 

Membership of any standing committee shall be 

transferable on a temporary basis by written notice signed 

by the original Member and filed with the Chair of the 

committee. 

 

This happens many, many, numerous times by the members 

opposite in all committees, Mr. Speaker. Therefore if certain 

members were unable to make a 9:30 meeting this morning, 

they had ample time to find a replacement and file the necessary 

chit forms. 

 

According to rule 130(2), the presence of quorum is required 

whenever a vote is held in the committee. However, rule 

34(2)(c) states that “Rule 130(2) shall not be observed for the 

purpose of concluding consideration of any remaining specified 

bills in standing committees.” However there was quorum at the 

Human Services committee this morning when the vote was 

held nemine contradicente. Mr. Speaker, the official 

opposition‟s lack of comprehensions of the rules of this 

Assembly does not constitute a breach of privilege by the 

government. I submit that this point of privilege is not well 

taken. 

 

The Speaker: — I‟m prepared to speak to the motion of 

privilege presented to me this morning by the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. This morning the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview gave notice of a question of privilege. The notice 

concerns specific actions of the government related to 

scheduling standing committees and the inability of members to 

conduct their parliamentary work . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Order. 

 

Details of the case were provided to the Government House 

Leader in accordance with rule 12(2). The member claims that 

the specific actions of the government related to the scheduling 

of the standing committees have been properly interfered with 

the ability of members to conduct their parliamentary work. In 

Maingot‟s Parliamentary Privilege in Canada (Second Edition) 

at page 223 it states, and I quote: 

 

In deciding whether there is a prima facie case, the 

Speaker excludes any matters that are otherwise properly 

to be dealt with under the practice or Standing Orders of 

the House. That is to say, where the answer to the alleged 

„question of privilege‟ is contained in the rules of the 

practice of the House, it would unlikely involve a breach 

of the privileges of Members. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The member claims that a notice was provided around 5 p.m. 

yesterday for the meeting of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services, which met at 9:30 a.m. this morning to discuss Bill 

80, The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment 

Act, 2009. He claims that this was not sufficient notice and in 

consequence interfered with the ability of members to know 

about or attend the meeting. In the case of Bill 80 . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Order. In the case of Bill 80, it has been well 

known for more than six months that there was a distinct 

possibility that the committee may be required to meet if this 

Bill had not been disposed and reported to the Assembly before 

the day prior to the completion day. The rules of this Assembly 

required the meeting that took place this morning. Members 

should have been aware that a meeting of the committee had to 

take place this morning, as required by the rules . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Order. Order. 

 

The next question to consider is the start time for the meeting. 

In this case the member cites rule 126(1) and argues that the 

provided notice was not sufficient. As members are no doubt 

aware, what is practicable is open to interpretation. Committees 

have met with little notice or days or weeks of notice. The 

subject of what is sufficient notice is something for each 

committee to decide or alternatively something that could be 

considered by the House Services Committee through a review 

of this particular rule. I remind you that it is well established 

that the Speaker is not responsible to rule on committee 

proceedings outside of a report from the committee itself. 

 

The matter raised by the members addressed by the rules as I 

have explained, I understand that the present rules are perhaps 

not to the satisfaction of the member. The remedy to issue, the 

remedy to issue raised by the member is better addressed by 

changes to the present rules. This is more a question of order 

and interpretation of the rules and not properly a question of 

privilege. As such, I cannot find a prima facie case of privilege 

has been established. I would also like to remind members that 

our practices . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Order. I would also 

like to remind members that our practices require members to 

include their motion with the question of privilege. This was 

absent from this case. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote will come to order. The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote will come to order. 

 

Members, in accordance with rule 32(1), any business required 

by the rules to be voted shall be disposed of on orders of the 

day and on the day prior to the sessional completion date. 

Pursuant to rule 32(4) the “Proceedings on Orders Of the Day 

to dispose of any remaining business shall be as follows . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote will come to order. Final warning. Order. Order. 

Order. Order. 

 

Pursuant to rule 32.4: 

 

Proceedings on Orders Of the Day to dispose of any 

remaining business shall be as follows: 

(a) disposal of remaining budgetary Estimates, 

Supplementary Estimates and any Further Estimates; 

(b) final Appropriation Bill; 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5641 

(c) specified bills. 

 

In accordance with rule 33(1), I direct the Clerk to call each 

relevant order in turn and in each case all questions will be put 

to dispose of the main motion. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — Committee of Finance. We‟re in Committee of 

Finance. 

 

On the orders of the day on the day prior to the completion day, 

this Assembly shall resolve into Committee of Finance where 

the Chair shall call each relevant order in turn so that 

proceedings in all estimates, supplementary estimates and 

further estimates are concluded. I call on the minister to move 

his resolutions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, I move, no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31st, 2010, the sum of $154,259,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that, resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31st, 2010, the sum of $134,299,000 be granted out of the 

general revenue.  

 

Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No. 

2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 

31st, 2011, the sum of $9,383,254,000 be granted out of 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

the resolution no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2011, the sum of $9,383,234,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. No. 3: 

 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2011, which to the extent that they remain unexpended 

for the fiscal year, are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2012, the sum of $250,300,000 be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 

the resolution no. 3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2011, which to the extent that they remain unexpended 

for the fiscal year, are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2012, the sum of $250,300,000 be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

rise and that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to 

certain resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with rule 36(4) the minister 

will now move first and second reading of the resolutions. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 



5642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. In accordance with rule 31(3), 

I invite the minister to now move first reading of the 

appropriation Bill. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 145 — The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill 145, The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 1) be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 145, The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 1) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pardon me? I heard the “no” before we called 

the first reading. Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with rule 33(1) the minister 

will now move second and third reading of the appropriation 

Bill. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 145, The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 1) be now 

read a second and third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:43 until 15:53.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 35] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Gantefoer 

Draude Krawetz Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert Heppner 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Schriemer Stewart Allchurch 

Weekes Tell Wilson 

Hickie Michelson Ottenbreit 

Ross Chisholm Bradshaw 

Kirsch McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 18] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Wotherspoon Chartier 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion 35; those 

opposed, 18. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,656 through 1,673. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 1,656 through 1,673 are tabled. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5643 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will be seeking leave to 

introduce a motion. Mr. Speaker, we learned late yesterday that 

the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] have concluded 

their investigation with regard to the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest and that they will not be proceeding further with this 

matter. So, Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly I would 

like to move: 

 

That pursuant to section 32(1) and 33 of The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act, this Assembly requests that the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner conduct an inquiry and 

provide an opinion to the Assembly on the conduct of the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest with regard to the 

instant message transcripts and phone recordings 

allegedly involving that member which were provided to 

CBC news, and matters relating to and arising from the 

transcripts and recordings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m first seeking leave for the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to move a 

motion in regards to sending a request to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to read the motion on to the 

record. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave: 

 

That pursuant to section 32(1) and 33 of The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act, this Assembly requests that the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner conduct an inquiry and 

provide an opinion to the Assembly on the conduct of the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest with regard to the 

instant message transcripts and phone recordings 

allegedly involving that member which were provided to 

CBC news, and matters relating to and arising from the 

transcripts and proceedings. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved by leave: 

 

That pursuant to section 32(1) and 33 of The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act, this Assembly requests that the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner conduct an inquiry and 

provide an opinion to the Assembly on the conduct of the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest with regard to the 

instant message transcripts and phone recordings 

allegedly involving that member which were provided to 

CBC news, and matters relating to and arising from the 

transcripts and recordings. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter in debate on this very, 

very important motion. 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues of concern to the 

people of Saskatchewan over the last several weeks about this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. And I think there‟s a number of points that 

members of the opposition also would like to see clarified, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

First off, Mr. Speaker, just minutes ago, the Minister of Justice 

stated that the RCMP had finished their investigation. We were 

under the understanding, Mr. Speaker, that this investigation 

was being done by the Regina city police. Mr. Speaker, that 

leaves us with the question: who did the investigation? Who 

was it referred to, Mr. Speaker? And that is always a matter of 

concern if we‟re getting inconsistent facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister simply misspoke, would he simply 

answer the question: which police department actually 

undertook the investigation? Because I think it‟s clear, needs to 

be clear on a matter like this as to what we have as facts moving 

forward with a motion. There have been many reports in the 

media, Mr. Speaker, that it was the Regina city police 

undertaking the investigation and now we‟re hearing a different 

set of facts. And, Mr. Speaker, I think for clarity we all need to 

understand, as should the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have in this motion some issues that we 

have some concern about from the point of view that we‟re 

talking about investigating the tapes and the transcripts, Mr. 

Speaker. We have asked questions whether or not the 

government was in possession of those tapes and transcripts and 

have been told repeatedly, no. A simple issue is, do they have 

possession of tapes and transcripts to refer to the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner and, if they do, why were we told no, 

earlier, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[16:00] 

 

If the government doesn‟t have tapes and transcripts, what do 

they have to refer? Because, Mr. Speaker, earlier this session 

we asked that very question in oral questions, Mr. Speaker, 

whether or not the government had the tapes and transcripts, 

and the answer was no. So what do we have to refer? Again that 

becomes an issue of some concern because if the government 

does have tapes and transcripts and have had them all along, 

Mr. Speaker, that would mean that we, this Assembly, had in 

fact been misled. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s a serious issue. So if we don‟t 

currently have tapes and transcripts, how can we refer tapes and 

transcripts on this issue to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are just two of many, many points that 

I think that need to be considered as we examine the issue, Mr. 

Speaker, because without doubt I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have a right to have answers. I think all members 

of this Assembly will share a view that clarity on this issue 

benefits us all, that if the issue is examined and looked upon by 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner and he brings back a full 

report to this Assembly, it will provide some levels of clarity, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But without understanding fully from the government, one, 

what police department actually investigated it and came to the 



5644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

conclusions they did, Mr. Speaker . . . And I don‟t think those 

particular conclusions surprised any members of the Assembly. 

But the fact that the tapes and transcripts are now in the 

possession of the government, you know, how did the 

government now get possession of those transcripts when they 

in fact have told us previously they didn‟t have them? Now, Mr. 

Speaker, those are concerns to members of the opposition, and 

they should be concerns to the members of the public in the 

province of Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without wanting to compromise in any way any 

investigation that would be done by the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, we, I think, need to understand from the 

Minister of Justice how the government now has tapes to refer 

and transcripts to refer. Are they being referred directly by the 

government? Or are they being referred by the individual? Are 

they being referred by the CBC? Are they being referred by the 

police agency? Those are all questions that I think are 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about an investigation regarding the 

transcripts and messages without identifying whether or not 

those would be provided to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, and if they are provided, in what method or 

means would they be provided to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we agree in principle with this referral, 

without a doubt. Why wouldn‟t we, Mr. Speaker? But we would 

move, we need to move an amendment, Mr. Speaker, to the 

motion. I would hope to and expect the support of the 

government on the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I should indicate 

very openly that the members of the official opposition referred 

an issue to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. The majority 

of the amendment is that issue that the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner has already agreed to investigate, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, with that I am going to move my 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I‟d like to move:  

 

That we add the following text to the motion made by the 

member from Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

And it goes like this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Further that this Assembly request that the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner conduct an inquiry and provide an 

opinion to the Assembly regarding: (a) the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest‟s use of his constituency office and 

his constituency assistant to further his private interests; 

(b) the member‟s use of his travel expense account to 

further his private interests; (c) the member‟s use of his 

accommodation expense account in Regina while the 

member has been absent from the Legislative Assembly 

since April 14th, 2010 and has publicly declared that he 

will not attend the sitting of the legislature until the end of 

his term as a member; and (d) whether the member is in 

violation of The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act. 

Mr. Speaker, and that is the amendment. I would so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to re-enter the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to re-enter 

the debate, but first of all I need to place the question on the 

amendment that was presented by the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

The motion before the Assembly is the amendment presented 

by the member from Regina Dewdney: 

 

And add the following text to the motion made by the 

member for Saskatoon Southeast: 

 

Further that the Assembly request that the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner conduct an inquiry and provide an 

opinion to the Assembly regarding: (a) the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest‟s use of his constituency office and 

his constituency assistant to further his private interests; 

(b) the member‟s use of his travel expense account to 

further his private interests; (c) the member‟s use of his 

accommodation expense account in Regina while the 

member has been absent from the Legislative Assembly 

since April 14th, 2010 and has publicly declared that he 

will not attend the sitting of the legislature until the end of 

his term as a member; and (d) whether the member is in 

violation of The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this opportunity just to clarify my earlier remarks. I misspoke. I 

used the words RCMP when I should have meant the words 

Regina Police Service. The matter was investigated solely by 

the Regina Police Service. 

 

And I wanted to advise the members that all material that would 

be in possession of the government has already been given to 

the police and would of course be provided to the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to speak to the 

amendment that has been moved by the member from Regina 

Dewdney. Mr. Speaker, the amendment further clarifies what I 

would hope would be the intent of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government‟s motion clearly indicated the 

government‟s interest in moving this issue to the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. Mr. Speaker, that original motion, as 

the member from Regina Dewdney indicated, was very narrow 

in scope and in fact, Mr. Speaker, can be argued that in fact the 

reference that the government‟s motion makes to the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner may in fact be outside the purview of the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner himself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Therefore, the amendment in front of us clarifies for the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner that it is the Assembly‟s wish 

that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner have a broader brush 

to take a look at the issue that was being referred to him and 

allows him to take a look at the issues that are specific to the 

precinct of the Legislative Assembly, to the work of a Member 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5645 

of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The matter that the government has discussed, brought forward 

in their motion, as the Minister of Justice has indicated, has 

been reviewed by the Regina Police Service and apparently a 

report has been provided to the Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. And one can only assume that the police looked at 

what could be “criminality” of what was on tapes that none of 

us actually have had any access to or seen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if the actions alleged in the motion are criminal in nature 

that the RCMP has already reported are not the case, therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner could likely 

do no more on this narrow reference and requires a greater 

reference in order to do justice to the matter in front of us. I 

think every member of this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

wants the public to understand that everything we do, we are 

accountable for. 

 

The work that we do is transparent — the public accounts 

process, the access to records that the public has, the disclosure 

that members of the legislature have to make each year, Mr. 

Speaker. These are important matters that assures the public 

that, while we call each other honourable, we are in fact 

honourable members, Mr. Speaker. And the rules that set in 

place the Office of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner are 

there to assure the public that indeed the actions of a member of 

the legislature are indeed honourable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s sort of like the referee in the hockey game. 

We‟re all given rules by which we conduct our business, and 

someone is looking over our shoulders on occasion, Mr. 

Speaker. And in this case, there are questions about the actions 

that may be contrary to the rules. 

 

We don‟t have many ways in which we can review those 

actions and activities of members, Mr. Speaker, but the Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner is one of those. So during the 

discussions, public discussions previously, Mr. Speaker, about 

the conduct of the member for Saskatoon Southeast, there was 

of course the tape that was provided to the . . . Northwest. 

Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I just have a typo on the page in front of me 

here. I see that, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll have to . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay. 

 

So it is for the member for Saskatoon Northwest. When the 

discussion was taking place about the conduct of the member 

for Saskatoon Northwest, it began, Mr. Speaker, of course with 

the revelation from the media that tapes had been received, Mr. 

Speaker. And from there, the discussion went to discussing 

other activities that the member may or may not have engaged 

in that are and could be contrary to the rules of the Assembly. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, it was noted very clearly that the 

member, everyone knows, has a private business interest. Many 

members in the legislature have other business interests, 

whether it be their farming activity or their legal activity, Mr. 

Speaker, or the running of their businesses back in their 

communities, Mr. Speaker. But public funds should not be used 

to enhance the activities of that private business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it was noted that the individual that was hired to represent 

the collective interests of the office of the member — that is his 

constituency assistant — the person who was doing that was 

also doing the work for the member in his private business, Mr. 

Speaker. There‟s the possibility that public funds were 

benefiting the business interests of the member from Saskatoon 

Southwest. 

 

That is the matter that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

can examine, Mr. Speaker, and should examine on behalf of all 

members of the legislature to ensure that the public has 

confidence in the activities of the members of the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we know that the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest travels extensively to promote the book that he‟s 

written and also the issues that he is passionate about, Mr. 

Speaker, and for which he often receives a stipend or 

honorarium or in fact a contract payment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But we also are aware that the members of the Legislative 

Assembly have travel accounts and can use those travel 

accounts to travel on constituency or association . . . 

constituency business or business of the legislature. It‟s entirely 

possible that a member could utilize those resources to aid their 

private business. That‟s something that the legislature would 

not condone, Mr. Speaker. We have no way of examining this, 

Mr. Speaker, other than the use of the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner and his powers to review and examine this. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, we know that most recently when the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest chose to absent himself 

from the Chamber — his seat is still here — he has indicated, 

Mr. Speaker, through the media, that he has applied for and 

maybe been granted a medical leave. But through the media 

he‟s also indicated that he‟s at work in his constituency office, 

Mr. Speaker, because he feels — and I think I‟m quoting him 

fairly accurately — he feels that he could not do his work in the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner should be 

allowed to examine whether or not he is utilizing public funds 

appropriately, whether he‟s working in his constituency office 

on medical leave or, in fact, that he may be out of the province 

doing something else entirely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s very important that the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, when he conducts his inquiry, has the ability to 

act within a broad range of subject matter, Mr. Speaker — 

subject matter that is relevant to the practices of a Member of 

the Legislative Assembly in the eyes of the other members of 

the Assembly and in the eyes of the public. 

 

I believe that this is the intention of the government opposite. 

Their motion may have been put together quickly as we are 

coming to the end of the session, Mr. Speaker. We applaud the 

reference to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. As the 

public will know or will remember, this was something that 

members of the opposition were asking for two, three weeks 

ago, Mr. Speaker. And so we believe that the government 

members in moving the motion, the Minister of Justice in 

particular, recognizes that there is a role for the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner to play here, Mr. Speaker. 



5646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

We appreciate the fact that they have accepted the fact that the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner has a role to play and 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, we do not want to tie the hands of the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, narrow his focus to the point 

where he cannot rule in the interests of the entire Legislative 

Assembly. So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to support this 

motion. 

 

Now in my review of the amendment, Mr. Speaker, I did 

neglect to make a comment on the fourth point that‟s mentioned 

in the amendment to the motion, Mr. Speaker, and that is for the 

conflict of interest to see if there are any violations of The 

Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act, Mr. Speaker. I think we all 

recognize that the member from Saskatoon Northwest has 

indeed written a book. The book is widely distributed around 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, perhaps into the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Northwest clearly 

outlines in his book — I think he uses the word — he was an 

evil man, Mr. Speaker. He did all sorts of wrong and bad things, 

Mr. Speaker. His book and his speeches state very clearly — 

and one would assume honestly — that his time committing 

acts for which he was found criminally responsible and for 

which he was held in custody for a considerable period of time, 

Mr. Speaker, made him a changed man. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we in this legislature passed legislation 

brought forward by the Minister of Justice not very long ago, 

and that legislation, The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act, Mr. 

Speaker, made it clear that the Legislative Assembly did not 

believe that someone should profit from the proceeds, that 

someone should profit from the proceeds of a book written 

about criminal activities, Mr. Speaker. Obviously this law was 

challenged in court earlier this year by Mr. Colin Thatcher. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the law has been upheld, and Mr. Thatcher 

was or did in fact comply with the Act and provided the 

proceeds from the sale of his book to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there may in fact be a similar circumstance 

here regarding the member for Saskatoon Northwest. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this amendment simply provides the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner the ability or, more importantly, the 

opportunity to include this in his investigation, study review, 

evaluation of the circumstances. 

 

The bottom line in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. We 

know that while allegations are in the air, it affects every 

member of the Legislative Assembly. We want clarity. In other 

words, we want to clarify the issues to ensure that the public 

regains its confidence in the work of a member of the 

Legislative Assembly. That clarity is important, Mr. Speaker. It 

will come only if the Conflict of Interest Commissioner has the 

ability — the broad brush, Mr. Speaker — has the ability to 

examine all of the issues and report on all of the issues. 

 

Nothing would be worse, Mr. Speaker, than if the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner‟s report, based on the government‟s 

motion, were to come back to say, I can‟t review these tapes 

because, number one, I didn‟t get them; nobody gave them to 

me. The government has said they don‟t have the tapes. The 

police apparently had the tapes. I‟m not sure who gave them to 

them because the media said they gave the tapes to the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest who was supposed to provide them 

to the police. We‟re assuming that the member from Northwest 

provided the tapes to the police. If there‟s just that one copy, 

what is the Conflict of Interest Commissioner supposed to look 

at if he can‟t get the tapes? 

 

The member from Regina Dewdney did make a very valid point 

that has to be clarified here as well. It was not clarified by the 

Minister of Justice in his short remarks about the amendment. 

The government said they have turned over all that they had, 

but they‟ve also indicated they didn‟t have the tapes. We don‟t 

know what was the “all that they had” to the police. We need 

some clarification on that. 

 

And more importantly, if we‟re asking the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner to look at this and he doesn‟t have anything to 

look at, the report that comes back to the legislature and 

ultimately to the public will not clarify anything. And we have 

achieved nothing at that point. My concern at the end of the 

day, if that‟s the case, is that the public‟s sense of members of 

the legislature taking advantage of their position for personal 

gain, Mr. Speaker, has not been satisfied, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would ask members opposite to think carefully about the 

motion that they brought forward, think carefully about the 

intention that they wish to present, think carefully about the role 

of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, and think carefully 

about what we wish to achieve when the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner reviews the matter and ultimately reports back to 

the public. 

 

It‟s the public interest that needs to be serviced here, Mr. 

Speaker. The government‟s motion perhaps addresses only a 

small concern within the government caucus. The amendment 

addresses the broader scope of what the public needs to have 

clarified. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all of the members to 

carefully review the amendment that‟s been brought forward. 

And I thank the members of the legislature for their attention 

for these brief remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to thank the Minister of Justice for standing up and 

clarifying his earlier remarks that it was the Regina city police 

to whom this matter had been referred and who had concluded 

their investigation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in looking at the amendment presented by the 

members opposite, the initial motion covers all of those duties. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s clearly outlined in the rules concerning the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, what his powers are. And 

the motion that was put forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast deals with all of those issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And fact is, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been 

handing out a letter that indicates that the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner today had already agreed with an issue raised by 

one of the members opposite, that he would do an investigation 

and provide a full report. Now that report will come back to the 

legislature, if the members opposite accept this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no need for the amendment because all of 



May 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5647 

the issues have been covered in the original motion, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is of course a 

serious issue that we‟re trying to deal with as members. It‟s an 

issue that doesn‟t bring any joy to anyone. But Mr. Speaker, I 

point out that it doesn‟t need to be as difficult as it is. We 

simply, from the opposition side and I think from most 

members of the public, simply would like to have us get to the 

facts of the matter to find out what has happened. That‟s why 

we have our amendment that has simply made it even clearer 

what the incoming Conflict of Interest Commissioner is to look 

at. 

 

Part of my comments, why I say it doesn‟t need to be so 

difficult, is we‟ve got into a situation where we‟re not confident 

that what we‟re hearing is accurate. And I appreciate that the 

honourable Minister of Justice clarified his earlier comments 

about which police force the matter was referred to. But the 

very fact that on two different occasions we‟ve had two 

different versions of which police force the matter was . . . 

pardon me, which police force was investigating the matter, the 

issue surrounding the member for Saskatoon Northwest. It just 

leads to greater confusion, and it really should have been a very 

simple and straightforward thing to stick with what we believe 

to be the accurate and honest truth, that is, that it was the 

Regina Police Service that was doing the investigation. 

 

We believe that‟s accurate, but again I point out that on at least 

two separate occasions we‟ve had at least two separate versions 

of what had happened. We have also had numerous versions of 

the tape and who has possession of the tape, and we‟ve not been 

able to get a straightforward answer, whether the tape was in 

whose hands. So it‟s important that, for the matter of clarity, 

that we get the amendment to the motion added so that — well 

— questions can be clarified and not only be seen to be clarified 

but really cleared up and get some straight answers for certainly 

members of the opposition but also for members of the general 

public. 

 

[16:30] 

 

There‟s no question that when it comes to a question, Mr. 

Speaker, of misappropriation or misuse or misuse of public 

funds in some manner that we need to make certain that we 

know that either the funds are being misused or that they are 

not. And indeed that would be my hope that the finding is that 

funds have not been misused or misappropriated in any way. 

But there‟s nothing has happened to date to give me any 

confidence that we‟re much closer to the answers. 

 

So there‟s lots of questions around this, and it‟s not a question 

or not an issue that we have a long history of having to deal 

with as legislators. It‟s certainly not one that in my time here 

we‟ve had a long history of dealing with. Members are — that 

is, members of the Legislative Assembly — are always under 

public scrutiny, and that‟s probably a good thing because in the 

main it helps all of us in the discharge of our duties and the 

manner in which we handle whatever funds there are in our 

trust, funds that are in our trust to communicate with the 

constituents or to keep a constituency office open, to do 

legitimate travel for MLA business and to hire people. 

 

Most of us MLAs have one person hired, and then some have 

more than one constituency assistant. But in cases like that, it‟s 

typical that it‟s part-time because the pay and rations for 

constituency assistant is, frankly, it‟s enough that you can hire 

one good assistant, but you would be hard pressed to get more 

than one person to work for that salary and do a consistent job 

day in and day out. And I‟m not arguing that there‟s anything 

inappropriate, you know, of the allowance for constituency 

assistants. We all wish it was more because the more resources 

we have we feel we can do a better job of representing our 

constituents, a better job of speaking up for them in the 

Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, bottom line, I‟m very much urging that 

members support the amendment that‟s put forward by the 

opposition, that makes it crystal clear what the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner is to look at and sets the parameters 

fairly broadly but in a fairly commonsense way and an 

understandable way and in a way that will help us all get to the 

bottom of this situation surrounding the allegations of the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I thank the Assembly for allowing 

me the opportunity to speak on this issue. And I certainly hope 

that it gets dealt with in a speedy manner and that the motion or 

the amendment‟s passed and then that motion can go forward 

and pass, and we‟ll get to the bottom of this issue as quickly as 

we can. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented by the member from Regina Dewdney: 

 

That we add the following text to the motion made by the 

member for Saskatoon Southeast: 

 

Further, that the Assembly request that the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner conduct an inquiry and provide an 

opinion to the Assembly regarding: (a) the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest‟s use of his constituency office and 

his constituency assistant to further his private interests; 

(b) the member‟s use of his travel expense account to 

further his private interests; (c) the member‟s use of his 

accommodation expense account in Regina while the 

member has been absent from the Legislative Assembly 

since April 14th, 2010 and has publicly declared that he 

will not attend a sitting of the legislature until the end of 

his term as a member; and (d) whether the member is in 

violation of The Profits of Criminal Notoriety Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 



5648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2010 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Standing vote. Call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 16:35 until 16:43.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the amendment please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 19] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 

 

[Nays — 28] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Gantefoer 

Draude Krawetz Eagles 

Duncan D‟Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Schriemer Stewart Allchurch 

Weekes Wilson Hickie 

Michelson Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Bradshaw Kirsch 

McMillan   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 19; 

those opposed, 28. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is defeated. The question 

before the Assembly is the motion presented by the member 

from Saskatoon Southeast, the Minister of Justice: 

 

That by leave, that pursuant to sections 32(1) and 33 of 

The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, this Assembly 

requests that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

conduct an inquiry . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The question before the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Justice: 

 

That by leave, that pursuant to sections 32(1) and 33 of 

The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, this Assembly 

requests that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

conduct an inquiry and provide an opinion to the 

Assembly on the conduct of the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest with regard to the instant message transcripts 

and phone recordings allegedly involving that member 

which were provided to CBC news, and matters relating 

to and arising from the transcripts and recordings. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I 

move the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question, I would just 

remind members of the short annual meeting of the 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association to be held 

immediately. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved adjournment of the 

Assembly. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:48.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................... 5623, 5626 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5623 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5623 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5623 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5624 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5624 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5624 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5624 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5625 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5625 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5625 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5625 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5626 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5627 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5627 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5627 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5627 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5628 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5628 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5628 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5628 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5628 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5629 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5629 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5629 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan Consultations 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5630 

 Northern Forest Fire 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5630 

 Postcard from China 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5630 

 Saskatoon Sports Volunteer Honoured 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5630 

 Questions in Committee 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5631 

 Female Role Models 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5631 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Labour Legislation 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5631 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5631 

 Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5632 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5632 

 Consultation Regarding Proposed Legislation 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5632 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5632 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5633 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5633 

 Utilization of Hospital Beds 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5635 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5635 

 



 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5636 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5637 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5636 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5637 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5636 

 Bill No. 80 — The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5636 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5637 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5637 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5638 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5638 

PRIVILEGE 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5638 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5639 

  The Speaker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5641 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5641 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 145 — The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 1) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5642 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5642 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5642 

MOTIONS 

 Referral to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

  Morgan .......................................................................................................................................................................... 5643, 5644 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5643 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5644 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5646 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5647 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5648 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


