




















































Hansard: November 01, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 3B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5737 

 November 1, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7 o’clock, this House 

is now in session. The member from Indian Head-Milestone 

had the floor. I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

certainly is a privilege to finish off my comments regarding the 

Speech from the Throne. I had an opportunity before supper, 

from about 10 to 5 to 5 o’clock, to talk about my constituency 

and the wonderful work that my assistant and all the people in 

my life do to allow me to be, number one, the member from 

Indian Head-Milestone, and number two, the Minister of 

Health. 

 

What I want to talk about now is more of the substance of the 

Speech from the Throne, and in particular talk a little bit about 

the issues around health care. We know that on any given poll 

that health care ranks number one in people’s minds. It has for 

many years and continues to be an issue that is number one in 

people’s minds. 

 

However with all the media attention that potash is getting — 

and not that I mind all the media attention that potash is getting 

— I would think that the potash issue may be ranking right up 

there with health care. And really, the absolutely marvellous job 

that our Premier has done handling that file, along with help 

from the Energy minister and the Minister of Enterprise. 

They’ve handled that file very, very well. 

 

And it’s been interesting to watch the opposition trying to get 

into that story. Not sure how they could get in, but they’re 

trying their hardest to try and get part of that media cycle, to get 

some attention in the province. Unfortunately it hasn’t worked 

very well for them. 

 

But what I do want to talk about is the issues around health care 

and just some of the highlights of the Speech from the Throne 

and what we’ve talked about in health care. One of the areas 

that was mentioned in the Speech from the Throne definitely 

was in our platform, was the issue around a health care 

ombudsman. That will be moved forward. It will be a health 

care ombudsman within the office of the current Ombudsman, 

Kevin Fenwick, an excellent Ombudsman for the province, a 

third party, an arm’s-length officer that does great work for the 

province. He handles health care issues already. It makes sense 

that we would incorporate that within his office, and we look 

forward to that office being open and running. 

 

I think it’s important. It was never the case in the old 

Saskatchewan under the NDP [New Democratic Party] that 

somebody could complain about health care that wasn’t 

complaining to somebody within the health care system. And 

that’s the whole point of a health care ombudsman. If they have 

some concerns or complaints about the health care system, they 

can do that complaining outside of the current health care 

system in the Office of the Ombudsman. And so we’re certainly 

looking forward to that. 

 

And what I would say to that, like so many other issues that we 

have put forward in the platform, another promise made, 

another promise kept, Mr. Speaker. Another promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue that was very prominent — and 

certainly the former Finance minister talked about it — is the 

$200 million that have gone to the Saskatoon Health Region to 

move the children’s hospital forward. I think there is a huge 

contrast with all the issues I’m going to talk about with health 

care; a huge contrast with the old Saskatchewan, what the NDP 

used to do. 

 

Here’s what the NDP used to do when they’d announce funding 

for a hospital, for a facility. They would go to Preeceville, and 

they would make announcement after announcement after 

announcement about a new hospital in Preeceville and never 

build it. And you know when they would really make a lot of 

announcements is just before the next election. In fact the 

former minister of Health, the minister from Lakeview, would 

not only have himself there, but he would have the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Would the 

member from Athabasca come to order. I recognize the member 

from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, not only would the 

former Health minister be there to make the announcement, he 

would make sure the candidate for the area — not the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for the area — the 

candidate was there from the area to make this announcement. 

It was all about politics. It was all about announcements, and 

they never got it done. 

 

Under our government, we’ve got Preeceville hospital done. 

They did the same thing in Humboldt. Humboldt they 

announced and they announced. We’ve brought those projects 

ahead and built, Mr. Speaker. Words on that side; action on this 

side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the same thing around the children’s 

hospital. I would say that there’ll be shovels in the ground and 

construction on that site next summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Under the previous government, they would talk about it. And I 

can’t imagine, if they had seven years to announce the 

Preeceville hospital at $30 million or $20 million, how many 

years of announcements they would have on a $200 million 

project, Mr. Speaker — well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot of time so I want to talk a little 

bit about the nursing recruitment that we’ve done in our 

province. In the old Saskatchewan under the NDP, they would 

say, we don’t want to set a target for the amount of nurses 

we’re going to attract in the province. Why? Because we’d 

never meet it. That was the old Saskatchewan. 

 

In the new Saskatchewan under this Saskatchewan Party 

government, we set a bold goal. We said we would attract and 

hire 800 more nurses within the first four years of our 



5738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

government. The opposition said nothing until the election 

campaign. Then they thought they’d jump on that bandwagon 

and try and set a target, except the minister, former minister 

from North Battleford, said we can’t set targets because we’d 

never meet them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we set the target. And not only did we meet the 

target, we surpassed the target. As of about two months ago, 

830 more nurses working in the province in the first three years 

of our government even though we said it would take us four 

years. We succeeded and surpassed even the targets that we set, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about nurse training seats. Under the 

NDP, for many years they dropped the number of nurse training 

seats. Dropped the number of nurse training seats, and then for 

the strangest reason in the last couple years couldn’t figure out 

why there was a nursing shortage. Mr. Speaker, it becomes of 

no surprise that when you don’t train enough nurses in your 

province, you’re not going to have enough nurses in your 

province. Mr. Speaker, we told the public of Saskatchewan in 

the election campaign we’d increase the number of nurse 

training seats by 300 in Saskatchewan within the next four 

years, Mr. Speaker. Promise made; promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many different areas. We could talk 

about physician recruitment. Why don’t we talk about physician 

recruitment, Mr. Speaker? It’s a major issue on the opposition 

benches. In fact I heard the opposition critic say today through 

the media that she has been around about 52 rural communities. 

And in those 52 rural communities, Mr. Speaker, do you know 

how many people she talked to? Hold it. I think opposition 

benches want to hear this. Do you know how many people 

she’s talked to in the 52 communities? Hundreds of thousands 

of people she talked to. Hundreds of thousands. I want to tell 

the opposition critic there’s about 40,000 people working in the 

health care field, and she’s talked to hundreds of thousands of 

people throughout rural Saskatchewan in those communities. 

Pretty interesting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Physician recruitment is a priority to our government, and 

we’ve made great strides. Whether it’s in Hudson Bay, whether 

it’s in Nipawin, whether it’s in Redvers, whether it’s in Leader 

— those are all hot spots, Mr. Speaker — we’ve worked hard to 

make sure that we’re working to increase the number of 

physicians working in those communities. And we’ve done 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but listen: in the old Saskatchewan we had 60 

training seats for the College of Medicine and we had 60 

residency positions — the smallest medical college this side of 

Newfoundland. This side of Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker, the 

smallest college of medicine. But not only was it the smallest 

college of medicine, the College of Medicine went under 

probation because the NDP funded it . . . lacked funding to go 

to that College of Medicine. We were in danger of losing our 

College of Medicine in Saskatchewan under the NDP. 

 

In the old NDP, 60 training seats for the College of Medicine; 

under the new government, the new Saskatchewan, 100 training 

seats for the College of Medicine. Under the old Saskatchewan, 

60 residency positions, Mr. Speaker; under the new 

Saskatchewan, 120. We are moving forward and making sure 

we have the proper health care professionals in this province, 

something that the NDP could have cared less about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have developed a physician recruitment 

agency. Little did I know that under the NDP, under the old 

Saskatchewan, no physician recruitment agency. Most every 

other province in Canada had a physician recruitment agency. 

Under the new Saskatchewan, we hired Ed Mantler, have a 

strong physician recruitment agency board, made up of SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], of many 

individuals working hard to make sure we have the proper 

complement, not only in urban Saskatchewan which is all the 

seats, some of the seats that they represent, but also in rural 

Saskatchewan, none of the seats they represent, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re working hard to do that. 

 

We’re also working hard to make sure that we have a new 

assessment process, an assessment process that will not only 

accept physicians from seven countries around the world, Mr. 

Speaker, that eventually will accept college of medicine 

students from the world into our province to take the residency 

positions, to take the assessment within our province, Mr. 

Speaker, and if they’re successful, be able to practise in 

Saskatchewan. That’s a huge paradigm shift from the old 

Saskatchewan to the new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also increased the number of addiction beds 

in our province, continuing to increase the number of addiction 

beds, Mr. Speaker — a lot of work being done there. I certainly 

had the privilege to join the member from P.A. Carlton, P.A. 

Carlton up in Prince Albert on Friday as we tried to put a spade 

in the ground. It had been 10 below in Prince Albert for the last 

two days — tough to put a spade in the ground for a 

sod-turning — but regardless, Mr. Speaker, that project will be 

going forward. An extra 12 addiction beds for youth in this 

province — something the NDP never did, Mr. Speaker. We 

take action instead of just saying the words like the NDP did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but most importantly . . . My time is wearing short 

here. I want to . . . Or do they want me to go on longer? I would 

certainly go on longer. 

 

One of the proudest moments I think that members from either 

side of the House, even though I haven’t heard a word from the 

members on that side of the House, one of the proudest 

moments that I think our province should take regarding health 

care and the leadership role that we have taken in health care 

under our government . . . It has been a long time since I think 

places around, across Canada, could look at Saskatchewan as 

being a leader in health care. It certainly didn’t happen under 16 

years of NDP government. 

 

But I think that people across the province and across Canada 

are looking at Saskatchewan as taking the leadership role on the 

MS [multiple sclerosis] file, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier moved this file forward when perhaps no other premier 

was ready to move it forward, that no other minister of Health 

across Canada was ready to move it forward. 

 

Our government had looked at the issue around MS and the 

CCSVI [chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency] process, 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5739 

liberation treatment that Dr. Paolo Zamboni was looking at over 

in Italy. And people were going from Canada, from 

Saskatchewan to many countries across the world now that are 

offering this treatment, and are taking it. Mr. Speaker, there is 

no responsible government in Canada, any provincial 

government that would be responsible to say we’re going to 

cover this treatment without the proper science. But how does 

the science get done unless you have the leadership from a 

province, unless you have the leadership from the Premier, 

which we certainly have had in our province as we move this 

file forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it quite frankly astonishing that the opposition hasn’t had 

a word to say about this, haven’t had a positive word to say as 

we move the clinical trials for MS liberation treatment forward 

in this province, taking a leadership role — something that this 

province hasn’t done for far too long under the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s 15 minutes of the positive things on the 

Speech from the Throne just on health care. I could certainly go 

on much longer on many other issues that are very, very 

positive. And that is really just touching the highlights in health 

care. There are so many other things that we could talk about. 

 

Certainly the long-term care issue has been in front of the 

question period over the last couple days. It’s interesting that 

under the NDP over the last five years of their term, they were 

closing about on average 26 to 27 long-term care beds a year 

per year over the last five years of their government. And now 

you hear the opposition critic stand up and say, my heavens, 

they’re closing five in Wawota. And not that that isn’t a serious 

issue — it absolutely is — but how could she stand in her place 

and say one thing about how bad it is what we’re doing, and 

they did 26 to 27 beds a year for five years in the last five years 

of their government, Mr. Speaker? As Lewis Draper would say, 

it’s pure hypocrisy. Pure hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be so glad to support the Speech from 

the Throne, and I’ll be rejecting any amendment that that tired 

old NDP would ever put forward. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

certainly a pleasure to enter into the discussion surrounding the 

Throne Speech — I must say a very good Throne Speech, a 

very forward-looking Throne Speech, a Throne Speech that will 

serve the people of this province very well. There’s a number of 

new initiatives. Some of the speakers before, particularly on the 

government side of the House, have outlined some of the 

initiatives. I’d like to join with them in touching on some, and 

perhaps there’s one or two that so far haven’t been mentioned, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This is my 12th Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And as 

members of this Assembly know and particularly veteran 

members of this Assembly know that this is a time when one 

can say the thank yous to the people that you need to thank and 

make comments about your constituency and general policy 

and issues surrounding the province. 

 

What I would like to do first, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

congratulate the member from Saskatoon Northwest on his 

victory and welcome him and send a welcome to him to our 

side of the House. I’m sure he will enjoy his time here, his long 

time here. And I know, as he mentioned in his maiden speech, 

that he and his family certainly realize some of the sacrifices 

that we as elected members have to make, and he’s certainly 

prepared to do that with his long service in city council and the 

boards of education. So once again I would say welcome. 

 

I would also like to thank my wife, Marlene, and our family for 

their continuing support, the people of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood for their continuing support. I was at a 

fall fair in the small community of Kelliher on Friday afternoon 

and evening and I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reception 

there was very warm and welcoming, and that’s always a good 

thing when you’re an elected member, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The staff in my constituency office who serve the constituents 

in a very effective and efficient manner, and they certainly keep 

me on track and get me going in the right direction, and I’d like 

to say thank you to both Caroline and Sandra. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I have to summarize the summer of 

2010, I would call it the summer of challenge, both in the 

constituency and in our family. I don’t have to explain to 

members of this Assembly the challenges that agriculture had in 

this growing season. I think we’re all familiar with it. And Last 

Mountain-Touchwood being a rural, largely a rural 

constituency — although we have an area along the Last 

Mountain Lake and the Qu’Appelle Valley that we refer to as 

our suburban part of our constituency — but by and large, at 

least in area, it’s a very rural constituency, with the largest town 

of Strasbourg being some 800-plus people. 

 

So the conditions for agriculture in this growing season, there 

was basically three areas of the constituency that suffered 

varying degrees of challenges. The southern third, by and large, 

the producers got most of their crops sowed and there was 

certainly subsequent flooding with the heavy rains in June, July, 

and August. 

 

The central third, I would say perhaps, one-half to two-thirds of 

the crop land got sowed. And then there’s, particularly in the 

northeast corner centred around in the area between Ituna and 

the east boundary of the constituency, the small community of 

Jedburgh where you could drive along Highway 52 for a 

number of miles, and I did that in the middle of June, and you 

wouldn’t see one field that was sowed. What you would see is 

ruts filled with water and so on. And it was a real struggle for 

those producers. 

 

And then of course we know of the harvest challenges with 

harvest being a month late with the excessive rains in August, 

late August and September, downgrading some of the crops. 

And there was real concern, I recall, all across the province and 

I know on this side of the House in mid-September, whether the 

harvest would be completed this year. And I never lost faith in 

our producers, and being one of those producers along with one 

of my sons who is the farm manager and operator and will soon 

be the owner of our farm. 



5740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

The producers of this province got the job done when in 

September they harvested what they could. And when the good 

weather came along near the end of September, they were all 

ready to go and the last crop report I believe is 99 per cent. 

We’re actually even above the five-year average and that’s a 

real tribute to the men and women in agriculture and in crop 

production in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mentioned that our family had some challenges this summer 

but we also now — Marlene and myself — look at some of the 

opportunities that are being presented to us with the raising of 

our two granddaughters. And we certainly will be meeting that 

challenge and I must say we have some interesting times in our 

household these days. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would like to do is, just going back 

to agriculture for a moment, is just make note, and it’s already 

been mentioned, of the quick and effective response led by our 

Minister of Agriculture to the excessive moisture that we had. 

And I heard over and over again, and still continue to hear it 

from producers and families in the province, how thankful they 

are for the programs that were put in place to assist them. 

 

We have a bit of an issue in an area, a small area of the 

province, with the beef producers, and the Minister of 

Agriculture as late as this Friday said that he is looking at it in a 

serious way to see if some support can be found for those beef 

producers. 

 

There are a number of issues in Last Mountain-Touchwood that 

are not uncommon to other areas of the province. And one of 

them I continue to be surprised by is the requests for child care 

spaces in our small communities. And the latest community that 

I heard from was last Friday evening when I was visiting this 

trade fair in the community of Kelliher, some 400 people. And I 

must say I need to congratulate those volunteers and those good 

people of that community who put on year after year just an 

excellent trade fair, the only one that I’m aware of in at least the 

east central part of the province. It’s well attended, well 

organized. And there’s a group of young people there who are 

very organized, have done their homework, and are working 

towards establishing a daycare. They’ve been in touch with the 

appropriate officials within our government, and I talked to 

them for some time last Friday evening and offered any 

assistance that my office could help them with in making this a 

reality. 

 

And the reason that there’s a need for a daycare in our small 

community is because we have young families staying in the 

community, moving out to the communities, finding that rural 

Saskatchewan is a great place to raise their children. Some of 

the young families that are moving to our communities are 

people who haven’t had really any previous ties to rural 

Saskatchewan but find that housing and the other amenities 

make it attractive. So it’s not really a surprise to see that a 

request for daycare is coming forward from some of these 

communities. 

 

I’ll only mention a couple of issues within the constituency 

dealing with health care because our Minister of Health dealt so 

adequately with them just before I stood up. What I will 

mention is our government’s new initiative, the Saskatchewan 

physician recruitment agency, something that has been long 

overdue in the community and in my constituency of Lestock 

who has been looking to recruit a physician to their community. 

I’m sure we’ll find . . . I know that they already have received 

some assistance in their search and are grateful for this new 

initiative. 

 

There are a couple of highways in Last Mountain-Touchwood 

that have been an ongoing issue. They’ve been an ongoing issue 

for the last 10 years. We have been able to make some progress 

on rehabilitating Highway 310, but there’s still a lot of work to 

be done. And certainly the Minister of Highways is fully aware 

of the situation, but it’s not the only highway in this province 

that needs work. There was quite a big pothole left by the 

previous administration over a number of years and with the 

changes in transportation have only exasperated some of the 

poor condition of some of our highways. 

 

But I am pleased to be able to tell the people of the Last 

Mountain constituency, particularly those people in Ituna and 

Balcarres with regards to Highway 310 and those people in Earl 

Grey along Highway 22, a highway that was turned back to 

gravel some six or seven years ago, that those two — Highway 

310 and that section of No. 22 Highway — have been added to 

the five-year rolling plan and are scheduled for upgrades. And 

I’m sure it’s maybe not as fast as the residents of those areas 

would like to see, but we are making progress, and I’m sure we 

will see some significant progress in the next few years. 

 

Now to talk about some of the initiatives in the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker. One of the ones that I would certainly be remiss if 

I didn’t address is the announcement of the shock trauma air 

rescue service or STARS, a service to this province when it’s 

fully incorporated to our emergency services program. And it 

already is. It’s been very well received in rural Saskatchewan. I 

believe it’s well received by most of the citizens of this 

province because certainly it will be most effective in rural 

Saskatchewan. And so therefore you would think that rural 

residents will be the major benefactors, but not necessarily so. 

 

Anyone who travels our vast network of highways and should 

be in need of emergency medical services, particularly a trauma 

situation, will have this flying emergency room available to 

them. And I know the people of this province are very thankful 

that our government is taking this initiative. And you should 

congratulate the member from Melfort for all the good work he 

did on leading on this initiative. 

 

Another initiative of the Throne Speech talks about educational 

outcomes for First Nation and Métis students. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, education I believe is one of the single most important 

initiatives we as a government can do to help all children in our 

province and particularly First Nations and Métis students 

because there is . . . Certainly the outcomes aren’t where they 

need to be and particularly in those communities. 

 

And so with the announcement in the Throne Speech on 

another initiative to help address those poorer outcomes, I think 

it is incumbent upon all leaders in this province, whether they 

be First Nations leaders, whether they be Métis leaders, whether 

they sit on the government side of the House or sit on the 

opposition side of the House, this is something that we all need 

to work collaboratively together to make sure and strive to help 

our children, the children of this province, to be the best that 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5741 

they can be in whatever it is they decide to endeavour 

themselves in. And I know a number of current and past First 

Nations leaders refer to education as their new buffalo, the key 

to unlocking the future for our children. And education will 

play a key role in bringing the various groups within our 

province and within our society together to make this province 

a much stronger province. 

 

There was also mention in the Throne Speech about 

encouraging and requiring our students to have 30 minutes of 

exercise each school day. And we may think, particularly if 

your family has been away from school and so on — and 

perhaps you don’t have any young children in your family, 

whether they be your own or grandchildren — that children get 

a lot of exercise during the day. But they certainly don’t get as 

much exercise as is required for good health because they have 

so many other distractions nowadays, whether it be the Internet, 

whether it be the electronic games, TV. And statistics are 

showing that there is a problem with obesity that’s growing 

within our school-aged children, and particularly within our 

First Nations children. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And one of the not-so-desirable side effects of the increase in 

obesity is the ever-increasing type 2 diabetes. And so certainly 

30 minutes of exercise isn’t going to cure all of that, but it is 

certainly going to be a help, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Also in the Throne Speech there was mention of the energy 

efficiency program, EnerGuide, which in the current fiscal year 

our government put an additional $9.4 million towards that 

program, even though the federal government suspended their 

partner program, ecoENERGY. And that program helped 

homeowners make their homes more efficient by reducing their 

energy needs. 

 

Along that same line, as far as so-called green initiatives, 

there’s mention of increasing wind power, in fact doubling it by 

2015 to 400 megawatts, which will present opportunities for, of 

course, large wind farm operations but also small wind power 

initiatives through the net metering program that is already in 

place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’ve always had an interest in energy efficiency, reducing the 

use of energy, various programs that are in place, you know, 

within other provinces, other parts of Canada, across North 

America, and so on. And there’s a general perception, I believe, 

that if you’re going to become so-called more green, it’s going 

to cost more money and you’re going to lose efficiencies. And 

this I believe is not factual. 

 

And I would just briefly like to mention the Banner Bank 

Building in Boise, Idaho. I had an opportunity two summers 

ago when I attended the PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic 

Region] conference in Boise, Idaho to tour the Banner Bank 

Building. It was one of their conference tours. I had really no 

idea when I signed up for it what it was all about. You know, I 

wondered why they would be having a tour to a bank building. 

 

Well it didn’t take too long to find out. In fact, when we arrived 

— well before we got there — our tour guide said, well the 

reason we’re going to the Banner Bank Building is because it is 

one of the few buildings in the world that has, in its 

construction and operation, has achieved the platinum LEED 

[leadership in energy and environmental design] designation, 

which is, for those people who are familiar with the LEED 

designation, it’s a system, a number of criteria that builders of 

buildings need to meet in order to receive various designations 

starting with a bronze, silver, gold, and of course then platinum 

being the top designation. And we were very fortunate to have 

the owner of the building give us the tour of his building and 

explain what they did during the construction to achieve this 

prestigious designation. 

 

And basically — I won’t go into very much detail — but 

basically what they did is they really, the architects and the 

engineers and so on, when tasked with this idea of achieving a 

platinum LEED designation, they really didn’t have to develop 

a lot of new techniques. Basically what they did is used existing 

construction techniques and modified them and were able to 

achieve pretty amazing results. 

 

Well the bottom line is that they were able to build and operate 

a very energy-efficient, user-friendly building. And the owner 

and builder of the building, he said he got interested in energy 

conservation, but he’s an investor, he said. And his first thought 

is and his first goal is to achieve a good rate of return, which he 

told us at the end of the presentation that he was achieving in 

two years of operation a 27 per cent return on his investment. 

 

And in fact there was a documentary made of the construction 

of his building and it was actually nominated for an Academy 

Award, and I think the title of that documentary pretty well 

sums up I believe what a lot of people do not understand about 

being energy-efficient. The title of the documentary was Green 

Is the Color of Money, and if you think about it, it’s a pretty 

potent message, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I would like to say that with our small initiatives in our 

budget, but important initiatives, to increase wind power, to 

continue to find a new program to replace EnerGuide, plus all 

the other things that we have done in our three years of our 

mandate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we are certainly headed 

in the right direction. 

 

Now I would be remiss if I didn’t just very briefly touch on the 

topic of today, and that is this whole potash issue. And there’s 

some speculation I understand this evening that perhaps we 

could see a federal decision on this issue as early as tomorrow. I 

was reading a Toronto Star item on the Internet where there’s 

speculation in Ottawa that the minister may announce a 

decision, a federal government decision as early as tomorrow 

after the markets close. 

 

And I listened carefully to the debate last Thursday when we 

were debating the motion put before this House, and I must say 

that I was somewhat disappointed in particularly some of the 

members opposite when the Premier was speaking and 

members were chirping from their seats that . . . calling the 

Premier, Captain Canada, and that he is wrapping himself in the 

flag and that sort of thing. I don’t believe that it served those 

members very well. And I think that in the future, they may 

want to reconsider some of their comments from their seats, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



5742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

Potash, as some of the speakers from that side — not all — 

recognize that this is a very strategic resource that this province 

is blessed with. All you need to do is get on the Internet and 

have a look at some of the statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If 

you understand anything at all about plant growth and have 

even a very introductory knowledge of mineral nutrients and 

the role they play in plant growth, you will see how strategic 

our potash reserves are to this province and to this country, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the sources on the Internet that I looked at this afternoon 

as far as the rankings of countries, as far as production and 

reserves — and I’m not going to talk about the production 

because that can vary with different market conditions — but 

the reserve base, the known reserve bases, Canada leads the list 

of countries. We’re miles ahead of any other country. And we 

all know, or at least we should know in this House, that 

Saskatchewan has 90, 95-plus per cent of the reserves in 

Canada. This source that I’m looking at which comes from . . . 

well I believe it’s actually a federal government site, indicates 

that Saskatchewan has 11 billion tonnes of reserve. 

 

The next country closest to Canada is Belarus at 2.2 billion. The 

list that I’m looking at, the total known reserves according to 

this information is 18 billion tonnes. So if Canada has 11 billion 

tonnes it is certainly . . . I don’t see how anyone could argue 

that this isn’t a strategic resource that we have in our province. 

And I believe we should be on the same page in making sure 

that the people of this province and the people of Canada 

maintain control of the mining capacity and work with 

companies who have the same goals as we have. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize my time is up. But what I 

would like to conclude is, I think we are going to see some very 

interesting times in the next few days here with a decision 

coming from the federal government, whatever that may be. 

And I would say in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I will 

certainly be supporting the main motion and not supporting the 

amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it’s a privilege this evening to be able to join in the debate 

on the Speech from the Throne. 

 

But before I begin, along with the rest of my colleagues, I know 

I want to welcome the new member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

I know the House is a bit of a shock the first couple days you 

are here — just a wee bit. The protocol, and I guess the added 

responsibilities that we take on and the different responsibilities 

that we have as an MLA in our home constituency, it is a bit of 

an adjustment to be here. But I offer him a warm welcome and I 

know that he will enjoy his time here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a minute just to pass along to 

my office staff in Moose Jaw, Stacey and Charlene, a very 

warm thank you for all the work that they do keeping the 

constituency office running and providing service to people 

right across Moose Jaw — and from some areas surrounding 

Moose Jaw, people will stop in. They work hard. They do a 

very good job, and whenever I’m in Regina I’m comfortable to 

know that the people in Moose Jaw are being well looked after 

and represented by my office. So thank you very much to them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a privilege to represent Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. It is a great community that is moving forward, 

building on not only our historical assets that have become 

world renowned over the last number of years, but also we are a 

city that’s meeting the challenges of growing and moving 

forward. 

 

And I know the member from Moose Jaw North commented on 

a few areas of the city. I’d like to thank him for commenting on 

areas that are in Moose Jaw Wakamow. But the new soccer 

centre is now open, which is an initiative that began under the 

previous government. It’s open for business now. And the 

Multiplex is well on its way; it’s on schedule and being built 

and it will be a great addition to our downtown core. And Main 

Street, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is as active as ever, and we are 

welcoming new businesses and welcoming newcomers to our 

city. 

 

And when I think of newcomers coming to the city of Moose 

Jaw, I have to comment on the soccer team from Central. Many 

new Canadians that played soccer in their country of origin now 

living in Moose Jaw decided they would put a soccer team into 

the provincial round of championships, and they ended up in 

the bronze medal game, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been together for 

a month. Ray Rawlyk was their coach and he kind of took it on 

as a good project even though he isn’t a soccer expert by any 

means. And I want to offer them congratulations because, as 

Mr. Rawlyk said today on the radio, soccer is something that 

these young students know. It is something that’s familiar to 

them and if it makes them feel more at home here in Moose Jaw 

and at the school that they are currently attending, then it’s a 

very good endeavour and something that should be expanded 

upon. 

 

Moose Jaw is, though, going through a number of difficulties. 

And I have to say, within the next week we’ll see the final 

closure of the XL Beef plant which has been a part of Moose 

Jaw for many, many years. Was Canada Packers, was the 

Western Canadian Beef Packers, moved to XL Beef and it has 

been officially shut down. Its employees were locked out for 

well over a year in a labour dispute. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

really brings to an end a plant that’s been a big part of our 

community, and it’s the end of 200 good jobs in our community 

that are now gone. 

 

Now of course the Thunder Creek Pork plant will be opening, 

but it would have been much better to see both plants operating 

at full capacity, not one sort of replacing the job loss in another 

area. It would have been better for employees and the citizens 

in our city, would have been better for livestock producers 

across the province, and for sure better for the city of Moose 

Jaw. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, kind of on with the comments of more to 

the Speech from the Throne. When I look at the Speech from 

the Throne, first off when I sat in this legislature and listened to 

it, one of the first things I look at is the travelling that I have 

done over the summer and I know my colleagues have done 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5743 

across the province, the constituents I have met with in Moose 

Jaw and in other communities. I think of the issues that they 

have brought up to me — areas where our city is lacking, our 

province may be lacking. But I always look for those issues to 

see what’s being addressed in the Speech from the Throne and 

what initiatives may have an impact not only on Moose Jaw 

Wakamow constituents but others that I have met across the 

province. 

 

And I really have to say that I . . . I’m sorry to say, really, that it 

was a very uninspiring speech and it was definitely lacking any 

type of vision for the province or for the future of the province. 

And none of the issues that we’ve heard mentioned so often 

around the province or at home were mentioned at all in the 

Throne Speech. 

 

So it doesn’t look like there’s going to be much addressed. And 

much of those issues seem to be left untended by this 

government. Now I don’t know whether they’re just not hearing 

those concerns or whether they have different priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that I always do when I 

look at either a budget speech or a Speech from the Throne, I 

go through with my handy-dandy markers. And I mark what are 

commitments that are repeated, what’s new, what’s kind of in 

the middle. And, Mr. Speaker, to be generous in my counting of 

the initiatives, I would say that in the Speech from the Throne 

delivered last week, there was 42 items that were repeated. 

There were at the outside, at the outside — and I was generous 

when I did my count — there were 17 that were new, and 

possibly seven changes that may be made in legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the Premier talked about this new road, 

I thought back to the Speech from the Throne a couple of years 

ago when he said, no more next year country. We’re this year 

country: 

 

For as long as I can remember, people have called our 

province “Next Year Country.” 

 

Today, I’m pleased to report that in our Saskatchewan, 

next year has arrived. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the whole Speech from the Throne was 

looking through the rear-view mirror. So I don’t know. It’s not 

much of a new road. And I believe it was the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix that talked about, and I quote, “Wall’s new road is 

pothole-ridden.” And I think one of the paragraphs out of that 

editorial really hit the mark. And I’ll quote: 

 

Too much of the throne speech, which is meant to outline 

the government’s legislative actions for the coming year, 

is devoted to boasting about its accomplishments over the 

past year, while there’s little that tells Saskatchewan 

residents what awaits them in the near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 42 repeated commitments, 17 possible new ones 

that are pretty vague in some instances, and seven pieces of 

legislation. That’s what we’re looking at for a vision of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues have commented 

on the whole issue of potash, and it has been front and centre 

not only in this province, but across Canada and in other areas 

of the world. And the situation with potash is much like this 

Throne Speech in that it sends some very mixed messages. 

 

The Premier and many of his ministers have travelled across the 

world — China, Europe, right across Canada, in the United 

States. And they have talked about the opportunities here in 

Saskatchewan, which is true. They have invited foreign 

investment and talked about open markets. And, Mr. Speaker, 

now that it’s here, now that we have this huge deal that is a 

possibility and is sitting in limbo while we wait for a decision 

from the federal government, but now that it’s here — and 

maybe it’s in a form or in a deal that was somewhat larger than 

what the Premier or any of his ministers may have expected or 

envisioned — they don’t seem quite sure what to do with it. 

 

And I know the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood was 

somewhat critical of our comments. But, Mr. Speaker, you need 

to have some open minds when you’re looking at this issue. We 

need to look at all the options and all the possibilities that are 

out there. And if the member is quite willing to sit back and 

accept what the Premier says at face value, I know there are 

many others that are critical thinkers and need to look beyond 

that and be prepared for what might ever come of this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think some people have even talked about 

the Premier’s conversion to socialism in his defence of the 

potash industry. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to see that he’s 

come to our way of thinking that the resources of this province 

need to be protected, and that the government does have a 

definite role in guarding the resources that belong to the people 

of Saskatchewan and making sure that there is a fair return for 

the people on the resources that they own. It’s too bad he 

wasn’t thinking like that in 1989. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ll carry 

on, and we’ll look at the decisions that are here. 

 

Many believe the Premier has come to the New Democratic 

way of thinking on resources. And it’s going to be interesting to 

see how this plays out and how exactly it’s handled over the 

next short period of time. But, Mr. Speaker, I can remember 

quite clearly a number of speeches in this House from members 

opposite when they were in opposition. They used to get up and 

just rant and rave about the Crown corporations, how many 

Crown corporations there were. Well the member from Wood 

River is nodding his head. He can remember a few of those 

speeches.  

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker? There is more Crown 

corporations now, after this group has been in government, than 

what there was under an NDP government. It’s true. Yes, it’s 

true, Mr. Speaker. So while they ranted and raved about them 

before, they just love this setup and they have created more. So 

maybe, Mr. Speaker, this conversion to socialism isn’t so 

unusual. Maybe it should have been expected, Mr. Speaker. But 

we’ll just have to keep an eye on it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not only is the way the government is dealing 

with potash, some of the comments that have been made, the 

way they are increasing the number of Crown corporations, a 

bit unusual for what one would have expected from a free 

market welcoming . . . free marketers welcoming foreign 

investment, there’s a couple of other very mixed messages that 

are in this Throne Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 



5744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

touch on a couple of those. 

 

One of the initiatives that’s highlighted in the Speech from the 

Throne which is new, sort of, talks about ensuring children in 

our province get exercise. And that’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

because while there is guidelines in the Department of 

Education which have been there for many years, they’re 

highlighting those, but also talking about a school challenge to 

healthy kids. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very good initiative, but 

when we look back at the last budget, what did we see that the 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] recreation and tourism management class was cut 

in half. 

 

So here we have municipalities and communities right across 

the province that sent letters to the minister. And I’ll quote from 

this letter, and it says: 

 

A large percentage of graduates from the recreation and 

tourism management program are working in rural 

settings. These graduates are important to rural recreation 

and tourism service delivery including economic 

development, social community development, and 

environmental awareness. Employers will only be able to 

hire graduating recreation leaders every second year 

under this new intake process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health just got up and ranted 

and raved about you can’t cut the seats and expect there not to 

be a shortage. And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what they have 

done with this program. You can’t cut the number of 

recreational tourism activity people that are out in communities 

and then say, well we’re going to increase the opportunities for 

students. It just doesn’t fly. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we look at the whole issue of looking at 

creating more parks in the province of Saskatchewan. Well and 

this is interesting, Mr. Speaker, after we just went through the 

whole issue last session of opening up 3.5 million acres of 

Crown land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act to be 

offered for sale. Well, Mr. Speaker, parks, wildlife, habitat, it 

all goes together. People who enjoy the outdoors, who 

appreciate outdoors, appreciate the wildlife and the habitat in 

the province of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s like, well 

we’re selling off this land because we feel we could use the 

money, but we’ll maybe look at opening up some new parks. 

Mr. Speaker, mixed messages. Very mixed messages in this 

budget. 

 

Now the other thing that really jumped out at me was, part of 

the Throne Speech speaks to why this government is committed 

to improving educational outcomes for our First Nations and 

Métis students. Well that’s fine, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a good 

goal to have and something that is ongoing and needs to be 

worked at. But, Mr. Speaker, this government just canned the 

Aboriginal employment development program. And when you 

speak to anyone that was involved in this program, they speak 

highly of it. In fact other provinces were looking at this 

program, putting in place programs that moved Aboriginal First 

Nations employees into employment in our province. 

 

It built an understanding, built a process where people were fit 

into jobs where they had the qualifications for. It just moved 

our whole society forward. And, Mr. Speaker, you need to have 

these type of programs to make sure that there are opportunities 

and to make sure that the appropriate people are fitting into the 

jobs and the openings when they occur. 

 

So when we have a program, when other provinces are looking 

at it, when we have other provinces appreciating the work that 

has gone on in this province and then this government cuts it 

and says, well gee, we’ve got some work to do in this area, and 

we’ll just have to see what happens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there was two things. I know my colleague 

from North Battleford also spoke of the lack of comment on 

housing in the Speech from the Throne. I know there is a 

commitment to 1,000 affordable units to be built with the 

private sector over the next five years. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

wait-list currently in Moose Jaw is almost 200 for public 

housing and affordable housing. What happens to them? This 

government in no way talked about renters. It in no way talks 

about public housing. And, Mr. Speaker, are these people just 

to wait? Have the government members not heard these 

concerns? Have they felt that they aren’t real? 

 

I can give you many, many emails where constituents of mine 

talk about their rent increasing 100 per cent. And when you end 

up with rents jumping like that, when you have rents increasing 

so that senior citizens on a limited income are spending more 

than half their rent purely to cover the cost of accommodation, 

that’s crazy. How do you pay for medication? How do you pay 

for food? How do you pay for the other essentials of life? Yet 

the government ignores this. Totally ignored it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s one other issue that I had truly 

hoped I would see in the Speech from the Throne and it was 

some reference — I know it’s been referenced before — the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital expansion project. This project has 

been on the go for quite some time. And I know the minister 

just stood up and he did a bit of a rant on — and it was a rant — 

on how previously he said the NDP, well when they were 

announcing a hospital, they’d have all the candidates there. 

 

Well I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of like this one out at the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital where we have the Premier, the 

member from Moose Jaw North, the candidate for Moose Jaw 

South, and the MLA for Thunder Creek all touring the hospital 

talking about how much of a high priority it was. And then we 

have the Sask Party candidates who said that should the Sask 

Party form the next provincial government, we will ensure the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital is put at the top of the priority list 

for capital expansion. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know how well that’s worked, because 

we have seen numerous long-term care facilities announced, 

then cancelled, then kind of moving ahead, but not much on the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital. And again through various political 

announcements — the minister may recognize these — they 

talk about the expansion of the Moose Jaw hospital again being 

a priority and proper health care funding is a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve got about a stack, a file of about an inch deep 

of notices and press releases that have been put out by the Sask 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5745 

Party, letters to the editor from the minister talking about how 

important the hospital is. Now, Mr. Speaker, finally, after this 

being a top priority the government finally allotted $400,000 

for planning for the Moose Jaw hospital. And that was in March 

of 2009. 

 

And in 2008 the then minister of Finance said that it was a 

priority and it would be part of the billion dollar in 

infrastructure in the ’08-09 budget. We know that didn’t 

happen, Mr. Speaker. So when we finally got the money 

announced for the planning, everyone was quite pleased. Mr. 

Speaker, March of 2009 we received planning dollars, and we 

were told by the Premier in a visit to Moose Jaw in August and 

by the member from Moose Jaw North that the planning report 

would be released either at the end of this year or early in the 

new year. And it’s printed. His quotes are in the paper, Mr. 

Speaker. The Minister of Health can have a look at them. 

 

And now we found out just lately — and here’s where the 

minister was flinging his arms around and waving his papers 

talking about, just for politics — now the planning report for 

the Moose Jaw Hospital, it will be two years after it began 

before it will be received and released in June of 2011. Two 

years after the money was allotted. Isn’t that handy, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So we miss the next budget. We miss the budget in 2011. And 

right before the election, right before the election, I’m sure the 

Minister of Health will be in Moose Jaw to make his 

announcement. But, Mr. Speaker, he won’t even admit that it’s 

pure politics. Well I know he won’t admit it, Mr. Speaker. I 

must be awful naive to think he would. But it’s pure politics to 

have this report shoved off and miss the budget cycle, and all of 

a sudden it’s going to be there right before the election cycle. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I may look like it, but I wasn’t born 

yesterday. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . You liked that one, did you? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister shouldn’t rant and rave and jump 

around about the politics of building a hospital because he’s 

right in the thick of it right now, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not being 

appreciated by the people of Moose Jaw. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the one thing I do have to comment on is 

Groundhog Day. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Groundhog Day? 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Yes, Groundhog Day. Now the Minister of 

Health doesn’t know, but I bet the former minister of Finance, 

he would recognize this. They are going to . . . I think this is, is 

this ’08-09? Oh no, this is the Speech from the Throne 2010. So 

that’s this year’s, Mr. Speaker. They are going to establish a 

revenue-sharing formula with our municipal partners. I think 

I’ve heard that before, Mr. Speaker. Was it ’08? Was it ’09? It 

was a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, that we were supposed 

to have a permanent revenue-sharing formula with municipal 

partners. It was announced. All the pictures were taken. We 

were clapping ourselves on the back and shaking hands, and the 

minister was smiling. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when they overspent the budget, when they 

blew the bank and made some very poor revenue projections, 

they didn’t even have the respect for their municipal partners to 

actually phone them — pick up the phone and give them a call 

— and say, we think this permanent revenue-sharing formula 

that we’ve announced and talked about and congratulated 

ourselves on for the last six months, I don’t think it’s going to 

work. I don’t think it’s going to work. We’re just going to have 

to keep it where it is. 

 

So . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, oh. Now the member 

from Moosomin’s over there and he’s saying, we did it, we did 

it. Yes they did. Two years in a row they did 90 per cent of one 

point. And if that’s the permanent revenue sharing and he’s 

happy with that, then you know what? He’d better go talk to the 

municipal partners because I can tell you that they’re not happy. 

And they’re not happy more so with the way they were treated, 

by the lack of respect from this government and being told 

through the media that they were not following through on their 

so-called permanent revenue-sharing formula. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so when we see it in the Speech from the 

Throne, it is Groundhog Day because I think this is second or 

third time we’ve seen it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Third. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Is it the third? Anyway, we truly hope that this 

government does keep its commitment to municipalities, 

because they are the ones that have to provide the service at the 

grassroots. They provide the service for the growing 

communities. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s one 

commitment they need to keep to redeem themselves and to 

repair their relationship with municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I was surprised that they put this in print . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve been listening with interest 

to, unfortunately, a number of debates. I think we should allow 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow the opportunity to give 

her remarks in regards to the Throne Speech. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a real hodge podge of ideas. It seems to be a lot 

. . . Well it is. It’s a lot of repeated commitments. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the most frightening part is that there is no vision for 

the province. It’s not forward-looking. It was a little depressing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you’ve been in politics or public life 

for any length of time, or if you do public speaking, you really 

have to read your crowd and look around the room when you’re 

giving a speech. Now not so much as in here because we’re 

going to make them listen to us one way or another, Mr. 

Speaker. But when you’re in the public and you’re talking, you 

can see people start to squiggle. People start to move. and you 

think, time to move on. Time to end this speech, and let people 

get up and stretch their legs. And, Mr. Speaker, when you see 

people starting to squiggle in their seats and move around, 

shifting positions, you know they’re bored. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it wasn’t just me but there was many people in this Chamber 

that did not look overenthused about this Speech from the 

Throne and the prospects for Saskatchewan in the next year. 

 



5746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

And, Mr. Speaker, when there’s nothing that addresses issues 

from my constituents in Moose Jaw, there’s a serious lack of 

issues being addressed from people around the province during 

our summer tours, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the Speech 

from the Throne. And I will be supporting the amending 

motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, the 

member from Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise today to speak in support of the Speech from 

the Throne. Mr. Speaker, I would like to start off by 

congratulating the new member from Saskatoon Northwest. I 

think it was a wonderful by-election and a great testament to 

. . . reflects well on the Premier and on the position the 

government’s taken. 

 

But specifically about the new member from Saskatoon 

Northwest, I have a great deal in common with him. I became a 

lawyer. He became a lawyer. I became school board Chair. He 

became school board Chair. I bought a motorcycle. He bought a 

motorcycle. I married a beautiful woman way over my head. He 

married a beautiful woman way over his head. In any event, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer my congratulations and 

welcome to the new member from Saskatoon Northwest. It is 

good to have a few more lawyers in the House in spite of what 

some of my colleagues might say, and I think we will be well 

served in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by recognizing first my 

constituents in Saskatoon Southeast. I thank them for their 

input, for their support, and for the privilege of continuing to 

represent them in the House. I would also like to thank some of 

my staff here at the Legislative Assembly: my chief of staff, 

Denise Batters; ministerial assistants, Jean Watts, Michelle 

Chyz, Lara Zaluski, Judy Langford, and Matthew Glover. 

Matthew is a new addition to our office, having transferred over 

to handle the labour relations and workers’ compensation files. 

 

In my constituency office, Mr. Speaker, I continue to be very 

ably assisted by Gord Rutten and Laine Goertz. My other 

constituency assistant, Rita Flaman Jarrett, is sadly still off 

dealing and coping with the loss of her son almost two years 

ago. 

 

I’d like to recognize some of the hard workers and supporters 

that have been very good in my constituency — my president, 

Peter Voldeng; Gary Meschishnick, the past president; people 

like Earl Priddle, Marie Koop, Don Ewart, Al Johnston, and 

Kay Robertson, who’ve been very faithful, good supporters, 

and I relied on them for advice and for help on a number of 

things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I usually when I’m doing these things comment 

on my mother. My mother is now 89 years old, still in relatively 

good health, and watches the legislative channel. I don’t know 

whether tonight is one of the nights she will be pressing the 

mute button or whether she’ll actually be listening and taking 

notes so that she can critique what the members have had to 

say. She stays active and communicates well by email and I’m 

waiting to see my BlackBerry light up with criticism partway 

through. 

My mother-in-law still lives in Rosetown, does very well, and I 

would hazard to say makes the best butter tarts in the province 

and is very generous in sharing them. Sadly, as the family has 

grown there’s more and more grandchildren that have now got 

significant other partners, so I have to share the butter tarts and 

stand in line. I’ll be out there this weekend with the hope of 

getting some. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to as well thank my wife, Sandy, for 

the hard work and commitment and support that she’s given. 

She shares my political passion and has been a wonderful 

support. During the last election — she enjoys the same kind of 

sense of humour that I do — we were out campaigning and it 

was about a week or 10 days before the election and I suggested 

to her that we should stop at the advance poll on the way home 

and vote ourselves. We got closer to the advance poll and she 

said, well I’m not sure we should go tonight; I’m still 

undecided. I hope that by the time election had come that she 

actually decided she was going to support the incumbent 

candidate. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to support the 

Speech from the Throne. Throughout the life of this 

government we have been forward-looking, and we’ve been 

moving Saskatchewan to a new era of prosperity. The Speech 

from the Throne sets out the new road that we as Saskatchewan 

people find ourselves on — a road that leads to continuing 

success, growth, and security. This government came to office 

with a huge agenda to complete. Our electoral platform was 

substantial. We made many promises and I’m proud to say that 

we have kept over 100 of those promises and we are well on the 

way to having completed all of them. We will continue to build 

on that platform. 

 

We are now in the final year of our mandate and we are still 

looking forward, looking to build that new road to take 

Saskatchewan to the bright future that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve. And it will be a bright future, based on 

what has happened since 2007. Our province has grown. Our 

population is now at an all-time high. There are more people 

working in Saskatchewan than ever before. Three of our cities 

rank in The Financial Post’s top 10 entrepreneurial cities list. 

The Canadian Federation of Independent Business consistently 

finds our small-business owners to be among the most 

optimistic in Canada. 

 

Canada has struggled with the economic downturn in recent 

years. We have not been spared that trouble, but we have 

managed far better than most of the other provinces. I was 

recently in Vancouver for the annual meeting of Justice 

ministers. It is obvious, despite the economic boost from 

hosting the Olympics, that they are still suffering significantly 

from the effects of the recession. I don’t say that with any 

satisfaction but I am grateful that Saskatchewan has been able 

to do so well in spite of the economic difficulties that our 

country faces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention a few things about my 

hometown of Saskatoon and my own constituency of Saskatoon 

Southeast. Work is well under way on the south bridge project 

to which this government has committed ninety-eight and a half 

million dollars. Any urban planner will tell you that good 

transportation routes and the ability to move about efficiently 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5747 

are crucial to the growth of cities and neighbourhoods. This 

project will certainly help Saskatoon and I’m sure that the 

drivers of Saskatoon will not mind the temporary disruptions as 

they work and weave through the construction that has become 

almost chronic in our city. It’s good to see that because at the 

end of that we will have a wonderful product and a wonderful 

city. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the site for the new children’s 

hospital is Saskatoon. The site verification study has been 

completed. The funds our government committed to this 

initiative have been transferred. The Premier presented a 

cheque for $200 million to the hospital foundation in 

mid-September. Construction is set to begin as soon as the 

design is chosen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly delighted that our province is 

choosing to participate in the MS clinical trials. As most of the 

members will know, our province has a higher per capita rate of 

MS than anywhere else in the world. It is only appropriate that 

our government should support those trials and we’re hopeful 

and optimistic they will bring some positive benefit to those 

people that are afflicted with MS. 

 

Work is also under way on the new health sciences building 

complex at the University of Saskatchewan. When complete, 

this facility will meet the needs of all academic health sciences, 

including medicine, nursing, dentistry, pharmacy, nutrition, 

veterinary medicine, kinesiology, physical therapy, and public 

health for teaching, administrative, and research. This facility is 

a public investment in our future and an essential element in the 

province’s approach to health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon will also benefit from the expansion of 

the STARS air rescue program led by my colleague, the MLA 

for Melfort. People from Saskatoon of course travel in the 

surrounding area, and it is comforting to know that in the event 

of a medical emergency or crisis, the STARS helicopters will 

be available. For people living in rural areas, STARS will make 

it easier for them to get treatment in larger centres where 

trauma and other treatment resources are available. The quicker 

people get to the hospital, the better their prospects for 

recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year, I was honoured to be appointed 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety. This is a 

new ministry, and as you can imagine, it is a challenge to start a 

ministry essentially from scratch. It is essentially an opportunity 

for something to make something new and completely different. 

And we trust and hope that better labour relations and a safer 

work environment will exist for our people in our province. I 

would like to commend the hard work and dedication of the 

ministry staff through the transition period as we focus more 

closely on safety. 

 

Saskatchewan has, to our shame, the second highest lost time 

injury rate in Canada. This is unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, we are 

taking action. We have increased occupational health and safety 

inspections by 24 per cent to the highest level ever recorded. At 

mid-point of this year, the number of files referred to the 

Ministry of Justice for prosecution was nearly double the 

previous year’s total. 

 

It is my intention to work with organized labour and with 

business owners to build a culture of safety in Saskatchewan 

workplaces. In the near future, a committee with labour and 

management representation will be struck to provide advice on 

labour and safety issues. We are turning our attention to 

hazardous materials in the workplace and are considering how 

we can reduce exposure to these materials in order to prevent 

long-term health problems such as the ones associated with 

asbestos. 

 

I have had the opportunity to meet with labour leaders and just 

last week was able to sit down with the executive of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. I appreciate that we have 

been able to have respectful discussions, and I thank them for 

their courtesy and candour in sharing their views with me. Mr. 

Speaker, we went around a large room of people, did 

introductions. One gentleman introduced himself, indicated that 

he was a constituent of mine and volunteered that he hadn’t 

voted for me. I responded by saying, I presume that a lawn sign 

would be out of the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the spirit of humour existed, and we had a 

valuable and productive morning. And the information I 

received was of some significant benefit. And in spite of the 

good-natured banter, the meetings were productive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have indicated elsewhere that we are considering 

indexing the minimum wage. I have asked the minimum wage 

review board to provide a report on how this could be 

accomplished; for example, what economic indicators would be 

suitable to use for indexation. My ministry is in contact with 

organized labour to consult on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, turning briefly to my responsibilities in Justice, I 

am proud to say that we are making progress on many issues 

related to our Justice system and legislative needs. Our 

province sadly has one of the highest crime rates in the country. 

However, we are turning a corner in the fight against crime. 

Statistics are trending downwards and with our commitment to 

increase the number of police officers and Crown prosecutors 

and anti-gang initiatives, we will continue to see those numbers 

drop. 

 

Mr. Speaker, missing persons, especially missing Aboriginal 

women, is a top priority for us. Throughout the life of this 

government, we have worked diligently with our partners to 

implement the recommendations of the provincial partnership 

committee on missing persons. Those recommendations include 

providing resources for the family of missing persons. This year 

we provided a checklist for families that guides them through 

what they need to do when a loved one goes missing. Also there 

is a guide to help families deal with the media. We have 

launched a website with information and resources relating to 

missing persons. We are working with provincial counterparts 

to share information about missing person cases, and we hope, 

improve investigation of those cases. 

 

Before the end of this year, we will open a courthouse in 

Meadow Lake. We will introduce legislation to increase 

transparency and accountability for provincial court judges. 

 



5748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

We have an aggressive legislative agenda. During the session 

we will introduce legislation to amend the human rights Act. 

This will allow complaints that are currently heard by the 

Human Rights Tribunal to be heard directly in the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. As a result, we anticipate a substantial 

reduction in the time it takes to hold a hearing; the current 

average is approximately 22 months. 

 

We will also introduce changes to the local government 

amendment Act to establish four-year terms for municipal 

representatives and allow municipalities to ask for photo ID 

[identification] when conducting elections. Amendments to 

elections Act will provide for photo ID during provincial 

elections. I would like to reassure everyone, Mr. Speaker, that 

we are not adopting or suggesting an all-or-nothing approach. 

Some people in our province do not have ready access to photo 

ID. We will work to ensure that there are alternatives to allow 

them to prove their identity when voting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadians are well known for helping 

democracies hold free and fair elections. I think it behooves us 

to hold ourselves to the same standards we encourage other 

countries to meet. 

 

Earlier today I heard the member from Battleford talking about 

the problems that he was having with his own mother who may 

well not have a photo ID, and indicated that she lives in 

Saskatoon and that his brother lives in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, 

if I could be so bold as to interfere with their family, what I’d 

like to encourage the member from Battleford to do is for he 

and his brother to travel to their mother’s home, have a visit, 

take their mother out for supper, and while they’re out stop by 

at one of the many convenient SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] locations and get their photo ID completed at no cost 

to their mother. And I think their mother would probably enjoy 

a visit from both of her sons. 

 

I know that he indicated that she lives in my constituency, 

possibly one of my voters; a good likelihood of that. And I’d 

like to encourage her to go out and vote, and vote as she has in 

the past, which was likely for the Saskatchewan Party. So Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to encourage the member opposite to consider 

that option. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also on our legislative agenda is the introduction 

of whistle-blower legislation to protect provincial employees. 

As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, we have had vigorous and 

heated debate on this subject in the House. We believe that this 

new legislation will give provincial employees a clear process 

to follow in the event that they need to report inappropriate or 

illegal activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning, Saskatchewan is on a 

new road. This government is investing in healthcare, 

education, affordable housing, infrastructure, and security. 

 

We’re investing in the new public safety telecommunications 

network that will ensure communities can keep in touch during 

. . . [inaudible] . . . Our promise of 120 new police officers is 

already 75 per cent complete. The fight against organized crime 

and gangs will be expanded to adult correctional centres. 

 

In addition to the $200 million for the children’s hospital, we 

will create the first-ever health care ombudsman. We have 

already surpassed our promise of 800 new nurses. We have 170 

nursing training seats that have been added on top of 130 

previously created. We’ve established the physician recruitment 

agency. We’re introducing a dedicated addictions agency and 

creating an additional 100 long-term addictions recovery 

spaces. 

 

We’ve reduced government debt, Mr. Speaker, by 40 per cent 

or $2.7 billion. We will fulfill our one full percentage point of 

the provincial sales tax, sharing that with municipal partners. 

There will be 2,900 more licensed day care spaces by March 

2011, a 30 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be adding 161 affordable housing units 

since the last Throne Speech. One hundred seventy-five units 

for persons with intellectual disabilities. The new Head Start on 

a Home initiative will see construction of 1,000 new affordable 

homes over the next five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will increase support for Saskatchewan grad 

students, especially in fields of new technologies and 

telecommunications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will work with First Nations and Métis 

partners as part of a new and innovative approach to the 

development of our northern forests and our new forestry 

management agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to close by just commenting briefly 

on the situation with Potash Corporation with potash in our 

province. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the position that the 

Premier has taken. He has taken a careful, reasoned, analytical 

approach. He has sought outside assistance from large law 

firms. He has sought outside assistance from former premiers, 

from the Conference Board of Canada. The approach that has 

been taken is one that has been well-thought-through, and has 

been thought through with the best interests of our province. He 

has reflected on jobs, income, and the effect on what it would 

have, a sale would have on the rest of the industry. Mr. 

Speaker, I am proud of the approach that our Premier has taken 

and would urge all members to continue to support that 

approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look back on the road Saskatchewan 

travelled for so many years, when I think of the negativity, the 

defeatist thinking, the gloom of the past, I cannot help but be 

grateful that we have been able to change so much. And I’m 

proud of our government’s and our province’s 

accomplishments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. I will not be 

supporting the amendment. Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 

support this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand and debate the Throne Speech, which really 

identifies a new road ahead for the province. 

 

First off I’d like to start with just thanking some of the people 

that work with me, my CAs [constituency assistant] Charlene 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5749 

Orr and Sandy Kuffner. As we know, we don’t get very much 

time to spend in our constituencies. Lately this summer for 

myself, because of all of the disasters that have occurred in the 

province with flooding, tornados. I’ve not had much time to 

spend in my constituency. So I know that they’re doing a lot of 

the leg work. 

 

I’d also like to thank my ministerial staff, Wendy and Tammy, 

Lindsay and Bonnie, and my chief of staff, Rob, for all the 

work that they do in supporting me. And they have, again, have 

had a very, very busy summer with the flooding disasters that 

we’ve had this particular year. Also support from the ministry 

itself, who again have been extremely busy, as we know. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate our new member from Saskatoon 

Northwest and welcome him to this Assembly and welcome 

him to the Government of Saskatchewan. So, very much a 

welcome. 

 

I’d also like to thank my family. It’s been a number of years 

that I’ve been in here, and we all know that it takes a toll on 

families. So I’d like to thank my wife, Phyllis, my two sons and 

my grandchildren. Also to thank the good people of Wood 

River who have brought me back here three times. 

 

And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that I look at my constituency now 

and around the province — and I’ve had the opportunity to be 

around the province so much this year — there is a huge degree 

of optimism in the province. And this is a dramatic change from 

the last few years, previous years. Since we formed 

government, the optimistic attitude of the people has just 

climbed exponentially. We know that in the past the previous 

government had a propensity for mediocrity but also failing to 

achieve that mediocrity, so it really brought the people in the 

province down. They didn’t expect anything and the NDP 

government never gave them anything so it was very, very 

common for them to be in the doldrums. And now there’s a 

huge degree of optimism. So I’d really like to thank the good 

people of Wood River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I caught only a part of the member from Massey 

Place’s comments, and I know he got up and he quoted 

something from my original speech in the House. And I don’t 

know what he is trying to make of a . . . He’s trying to make a 

point, but typical of an NDP, he stated something but I couldn’t 

hear what the point was he was trying to make. But he did 

comment on my speech and what I had said in the year 2000. 

And I don’t have the exact quote, so I won’t use it, Mr. 

Speaker. But I do stand by the statement that I made then, and I 

stand by it again now. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And I’m very, very proud of my military career that I had. And 

it’s thanks to, not myself personally, but to my predecessors in 

the military and all of the people ahead of us that have been 

fighting battles and wars over the year. And I have to thank 

those people because it’s because of their grit, because of their 

professionalism. It’s because of their determination, and it’s 

because they put their life on the line that people like the 

member from Massey Place can get up and spout off like he 

does in a free speech society. So I think we all owe the military 

a huge degree of thank you. 

Mr. Speaker, we know that we are on a new road. We have 

chosen to go a new road. We know back in the ’40s this 

province came to a junction in a highway and elected at that 

time to take the left fork rather than the right fork. Well here we 

are today carrying on what we’ve done for the last two years, 

two and a half years. We’re taking the new road. We’re getting 

away from that left-leaning road and going on the new road. 

And I’d like to just make some comparisons of the old road to 

the new road. 

 

The old road where we came from, 1992 to 2000, the province 

lost 32,749 people. That was the old road — 11,380 people left 

in the term — the last four years of the now Leader of the 

Opposition. Last four years of his time as Deputy Premier, 

11,000 people left. 

 

School enrolment declined every year from 1992 to 2007. The 

then government was there managing a decline. That is the old 

road, Mr. Speaker. I do not agree with the old road. 

 

Now look at where the new road is taking us. Saskatchewan 

experienced its fastest growth rate in nearly 80 years, an 

increase of 30,511 people. That’s the new road. Saskatchewan’s 

population is 1,045,622, the highest in history. That is the new 

road. School enrolment increased in 2009 after 16 years of 

decline. That is the new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about roads also, we have to talk 

about the real roads. The old road was in the NDP’s time. They 

spent 70 per cent, 70 per cent and 80 per cent of the amount 

collected in fuel tax on highways. That’s the old road. We are 

spending 100 per cent plus on highways from fuel tax. The 

pothole deficit in this province left by the previous government 

was over $1 billion. 

 

And I’m sure that there’s a lot of people in this Assembly will 

remember in 2000 when rural residents were forced to fix their 

own highways because of the NDP government’s neglect. The 

now Leader of the Opposition, who was deputy premier at the 

time, mused that more farmers should volunteer to fix roads. It 

was clearly obvious that the government was not going to fix 

roads so people went out to do it on their own. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that actually happened in my constituency. I was out 

there and witnessed that. 

 

Now where is the new road taking us? In the first three years 

since we took office, we’ve committed $1.7 billion to 

Saskatchewan’s highways. In the first three years of 

government, Highways and Infrastructure budgets have been 

the three largest in the history of our province. And as I 

mentioned, 100 per cent of the fuel tax revenues go to 

highways. 

 

My constituency is very agrarian, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve got 

to look at the old road again and where we’ve come from on the 

old road and where we’re going to on the new road. We had 

four years of drought right near where I live, and we couldn’t 

even get an NDP Agriculture minister to come out and look at 

the drought area, not even tour the area. Four years. We heard 

the government then blaming the feds for everything. 

 

They had no plan for education tax relief. And I go back to 

1944 when it was stated that the education portion of property 



5750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

tax was the most regressive tax in the country. Who said that? 

Tommy Douglas. 1944 until we formed government, there was 

no permanent replacement for the education portion of property 

tax. Even Tommy would be rolling over if he knew what those 

people on the other side had been doing. 

 

Now NDP however, they could invest in private business but 

wouldn’t commit fully to funding ag programs. And I’m going 

to talk about their investment in private businesses a little bit 

later. So how are we doing now in the new road? Provided $50 

cow-calf to cow to producers in 64 RMs [rural municipalities]; 

provided 29 million for producers in southwest Saskatchewan 

in 2008 for water infrastructure programs. Program is now 

province-wide. Gopher control rebate — very, very serious 

problem, something the NDP wouldn’t even look at; $71 

million cattle and hog support; and the largest education tax 

rebate in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want to spend a little bit of time talking 

about some of the initiatives that we’ve done within the 

ministry. And again we have to look at where the old road took 

us and where the new road is taking us. 

 

There is discussion about gangs in our street and in our 

correctional facilities. When the NDP came to power in ’91, 

Saskatchewan’s overall crime rate was similar to the national 

crime rate. Within a few short years, the crime rate was 

shooting upwards while the national rate was dropping. From 

’96 to 2006, crime in Saskatchewan had increased by 17 per 

cent while it had dropped 11 per cent nationally. By the time 

that we formed government, Saskatchewan’s crime rate had 

been out of control for several years. Saskatchewan had the 

highest crime rate for 10 consecutive years and the highest 

violent crime rate for eight consecutive years. 

 

Now we also talked about gangs. And here’s when we talked 

about gangs and what we should be doing with gangs — in 

August of 2005, just days after the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana declared that Saskatchewan Party concern about gangs 

and violent crime to be nothing more than political 

fearmongering. Then suddenly the NDP changed its tune and 

realized that that was a problem in this province, was gangs and 

drugs. That was in 2005, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s very interesting to note an article in the Leader-Post. It 

talked about drugs and drugs behind bars, and gangs. And 

there’s just a couple of items that I want to note in this 

particular article, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a man who served repeated stints at the RPC, Regina 

Provincial Correctional Centre, says, “It’s common knowledge 

to both guards and inmates that there is a plentiful supply of 

drugs inside the jail.” He also said he’s surprised that the 

institution has finally come to light. Now it’s very interesting, 

that statement, Mr. Speaker, because he goes on to say, 

everybody in the jail knew about this; just nobody said anything 

about it. 

 

Now what I find strange about this is the NDP had, how many 

correction ministers? We didn’t hear anything about it over the 

16 years. We even had people that worked in the jail. Did they 

know anything about this, or is this guy really not telling it the 

way it is? So those are some very, very interesting questions to 

ask of each other. Was it that well known? And if it was that 

well known, what was being done about it? And if it was not 

that well known, how come statements like this are being 

published, that it was a big operation in there and it was very 

easy to transact drugs within the correctional centres? 

 

Now let’s look at where we’re going since we formed 

government. We were aware of the existing gang problems, and 

we’re working to combat them with a number of initiatives. 

Safety and infrastructure upgrades to adult and youth custody 

facilities that started last year will be completed this year with 

an additional $1 million in funding. Security in facilities to 

crack down on drugs and gangs in jails and in the community 

will be enhanced this year with implementing of telephone 

monitoring devices in the facilities — a huge step forward. 

Since forming government we have been committed to the 

safety and security of our facilities. 

 

In the ’09-10 budget, including funding for anti-gang programs 

including, including institutional clothing. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

this is one I understand that the guards have been talking about 

for some time. We know that it has really cut down the 

incidence of drugs. And what was the cost of this? And here we 

had a government for so many years. If any of these articles are 

true, wouldn’t they at least use institutional clothing to combat 

some of these situations of drugs? 

 

We instituted non-contact visiting. Again it’s an estimate, but 

it’s estimated that the drug movement within the facilities has 

been reduced in the neighbourhood of 60 per cent by 

introducing non-contact visiting. Now what was the cost of this, 

Mr. Speaker? Was this a problem in the past? Does anybody 

from the previous administration ever say that there was a drug 

and gang problem within the facilities? Or is it just the people 

writing the articles and doing the articles said they’ve known 

about it for 25 years — 25 years? 

 

Now what would the cost be of exercising non-contact visiting? 

There was a little bit of infrastructure cost; however it has 

reduced the drug movement by such a substantial amount. It 

would have been a minimal cost for the previous administration 

to have looked at that. 

 

We’ve expanded some substance abuse treatment units, 

high-security unit feasibility studies and cell conversions to 

create room for more segregated offenders which, you may read 

into there, gangs. 

 

The ’09-10 budget also included capital funding of $9.4 million 

for security upgrades in adult and young offenders correction 

facilities that includes such items as security cameras. It makes 

you wonder. Security cameras weren’t invented the last couple 

of years, but there was blind spots. Why would they not have 

been included many, many years ago? Enhancements to 

windows. Enhancement to perimeter fencing. Reinforce interior 

and exterior walls. Lock replacement. Video surveillance. 

Walk-through scanners. These are all, all initiatives that we’ve 

took since we’ve been government that has really reduced the 

drug movement in jails and helps combat the gangs. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, signed an LOU [letter of understanding] 

with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] to use a 

full-time drug dog in provincial correctional centres to conduct 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5751 

routine searches and to seize any illegal drugs. Now we also 

still use Brigadier Security Systems, but the difference is, rather 

than booking a drug dog, with the agreement we have with the 

RCMP it can be more unannounced. And I would like to advise 

the Assembly that in the past year drug dogs spent 175 hours 

sniffing out Saskatchewan facilities. I very much applaud that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in the ’09-10 budget we included almost a half a million 

dollars for Saskatchewan’s participation in a Western Canadian 

gang database, which is proving to be very effective. We know 

that gangs are very mobile, province to province, and our gang 

database is working very, very effectively. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk a little bit about the 

old road and the new road when it comes to provincial disaster 

assistance programs. Under the old road, private claimants had 

a 20 per cent deductible. Cap on claims: for private, $100,000; 

business, $100,000. Depreciation rates on furnaces up to 60 per 

cent. Average, average wait time for money, 12 to 18 months 

before any money was given to claimants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll just speak to those for the moment. We have 

reduced the deductibles on private claims to 5 per cent from the 

previous 20. This is the new road where we have listened to 

people of the province. We listened to what they really needed, 

what they wanted. There was a little bit of compromise in some 

areas, but at least we did, we listened and we actioned as 

quickly as possible. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Depreciation rates on furnaces to a maximum now of 35 per 

cent from 60. Wait times for money — and I’ve heard this from 

a couple of people, let’s say from the NDP side — maybe it 

was peripheral wording about money being out to our people 

that have been hit with disasters. We had cheques out within 24 

hours of the mayor of Maple Creek requesting financial 

assistance — within 24 hours. 

 

Now I’d like to compare that to the Vanguard flood, and I heard 

people from the other side that said, well we never had disasters 

when we were government. Wrong. They were a disaster. But 

I’ll use Vanguard as an example. There’s people that waited 

over two years to get one red cent out of the then NDP 

government. Two years. And it was a disaster as equal as Maple 

Creek as far as severity — maybe not the numbers of houses, 

but the severity. 

 

We had the minister at the time say, and I should get the exact 

quote. He said, “Well we had one person working on it.” One 

person. And no wonder it took two years; a wonder it’s been 

done until the time we formed government. But as of today, I 

would like to be able to tell the Assembly we’ve received 3,795 

private claims as of October the 25th: 2,607 payments have 

been made; 9 million paid out; 354 files already closed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is our government taking action. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I do want to . . . My time is running low, but before I 

close what I’d really like to do is, I talked briefly about the 

priorities of the old road. And the priorities of the old road was 

not the people of the province. 

 

The old road was investing money, and I would be remiss if I 

didn’t highlight some of the private ventures that the old road 

led to. The tappedinto.coms, $124 million lost. And I don’t 

know, I heard this word someplace, maybe my friends can help 

me out. It was the word SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company]. I’m not really sure what it stands for 

but SPUDCO lost $35 million. I’ll have to get somebody over 

there to explain to me what SPUDCO really is. We’ve got 

Channel Lake. We’ve got Guyana. 

 

Millions and millions of dollars that are down the tubes. And 

I’ve said this before, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say it again, and I’ll say 

it every time I’m in this House when I have an opportunity to 

speak. One of my favourites is mega bingo. We even had a 

socialist government that wanted to take over bingo in this 

province, and they lost $8 million trying to take over bingo. 

And then we look at the money put into the Meadow Lake pulp 

mill, to the tune of $800 million. And it’s a good thing we 

formed government, Mr. Speaker. They were going to do the 

same thing in Prince Albert. They’d already committed $100 

million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think my time is running to a close. So just 

before I close, I do want to, I do want to say that we hear from 

members opposite, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

talked about uninspiring Speech from the Throne. I think she 

was referring to the ones from the year 1999 until 2007 because 

those were very, very uninspiring. So she’s very familiar with 

the word uninspiring when it comes to throne speeches. 

 

Also we hear members getting up on the other side now talking 

about, well my road isn’t fixed yet. Well after 16 years of 

neglect, now we have a typical socialist government saying 

well, we had the problem but you haven’t fixed it within 24 

hours. And it’s just, it’s hypocritical to hear that from the 

members opposite — why the hospital hasn’t been built in a 

week, why the roads haven’t been fixed, why anything’s not 

being done. We’re doing it. It takes just a little bit of time. We 

know it took 16 years to get into this mess. It’s going to take a 

couple years to get out of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I’ll be saying I will not be supporting 

the amendment, but I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this evening to enter into the debate on the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start by congratulating the new 

member from Saskatoon Northwest. It’s always a pleasure to 

have a new member enter the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a minute to just to thank the people 

of Regina Dewdney, who have on now four occasions returned 

me to the legislature, who I have the pleasure of serving and 

enjoy serving, Mr. Speaker. It is one of the best constituencies 

in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Regina 

Dewdney have many concerns and issues that face them on a 

regular basis, as do many of the citizens across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we listened to the Throne Speech on last 



5752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

Wednesday, I have to say that the first thing that came to my 

mind was, for the last two years, Mr. Speaker, we had less than 

a full House. Less than a full House to listen to the Throne 

Speech. I was somewhat shocked that the people of the 

province, constituents of the members opposite and constituents 

of the members of the opposition didn’t think it important 

enough to come to listen to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

Those that were here though, Mr. Speaker, tended to be less 

than enthused. 

 

As I watched the room, I didn’t see a single applause. Not a 

single applause, Mr. Speaker, during the entire Throne Speech 

for any initiative that the government put forward, Mr. Speaker. 

Not once in that entire Throne Speech did the government get 

an applause from the people in the Chamber. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s probably the first time that I’ve ever 

listened to a Throne Speech that we didn’t see a single 

applause, a spontaneous applause for any point in a Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. And that is, I think, indicative of the 

nature of this particular Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech talks and starts out with a 

quote from a poem, a well-known poem by Robert Frost. It 

says: 

 

Two roads diverged in the wood and I, 

I took the one less travelled by, 

And that has made all the difference; 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, yes I believe this government has taken a 

turn on the road, Mr. Speaker. And it is the road less travelled. 

We haven’t seen this particular road travelled since the 1980s, 

Mr. Speaker. We haven’t seen it since we had the last 

Conservative government in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So it 

is a less travelled road, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a road full of 

potholes. It’s a road that resulted in a significant disaster for the 

people of Saskatchewan. A road that put us in debt, Mr. 

Speaker, that took the people of Saskatchewan more than two 

decades to pay. And it’s still not totally paid off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start my response to the Throne Speech 

talking about the fiscal situation of the province. Mr. Speaker, 

like the 1980s, we have a government today that’s trying to tell 

the people of Saskatchewan that their debt is going down, that 

they’ve paid the debt down when the reality is, Mr. Speaker, 

debt is going up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing the same pattern of behaviour from 

this administration as we saw in the 1980s, when Saskatchewan 

people are having the province’s debt increased at the same 

time the government is trying to convince them that the debt is 

decreasing, Mr. Speaker. We saw that in the 1980s. We saw the 

government try to tell the people that their debt was going 

down. And we had at the same time reckless spending, out of 

control spending, and debt increasing at a rapid pace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s we saw a government that built new 

hospitals across all of rural Saskatchewan only to see them shut 

down because we couldn’t staff them, Mr. Speaker, because 

they weren’t being utilized. Mr. Speaker, we have a 

government today that’s spending money like they did in the 

1980s, accumulating debt at a pace that is unbelievable, and 

trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan that their debt’s paid 

down by 40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker by their own budget book, page 62 at the budget 

summary for 2010-11, Mr. Speaker, we see that debt is 

increasing by $4.2 billion or 55 per cent. Now how can you 

claim you paid down 40 per cent of the debt when your own 

budget summary book indicates debt is increasing? Journalists 

have commented on the government’s depiction of the financial 

situation, and they’ve used less than, I would say, nice words to 

depict the debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

following a different path most definitely. They’re following a 

path that’s putting us back in debt. They’re following a path of 

reckless, out of control spending, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

following a path of trying to be all things to all people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact this is a government that in their Throne 

Speech today, on the most important issue, the most important 

strategic decision Saskatchewan will have to make — the issue 

of the future of our resources, and in particular the immediate 

issue in front of us is the future of our potash resource, Mr. 

Speaker — it gets a line, maybe two lines. Now how can we 

have a government telling the people of Saskatchewan, week 

after week, that this is an important issue when it’s not an 

important enough in the Throne Speech to give it more than a 

line? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a government who is trying to 

convince people that the debt is other than what it really is. We 

have a Premier in government that on a most important issue, 

strategic issue facing the province of Saskatchewan, didn’t deal 

with it in the first two to three months we were aware of the 

issue, Mr. Speaker, when we called immediately upon the 

Premier to reconvene the Legislative Assembly so we could 

have a meaningful debate about the future of our resource in 

Saskatchewan. So we could have debated and put forward a 

position long before, long before government had locked 

themselves, the federal government had locked themselves into 

a path and a direction on that very strategic resource for this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what did we do, Mr. Speaker? The government did nothing. 

In fact media reports would indicate that the government, up 

until the day that they said they didn’t want the deal to go 

through, were negotiating with BHP Billiton a deal that would 

include a $1 billion cash payout, Mr. Speaker, and a 

infrastructure fund equivalent to the amount of money that in 

fact would provide for a domed stadium. Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

know what went on in the backrooms with the government, but 

those are reports in the media, Mr. Speaker. And then the next 

day the government comes out and says they’re against a deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been clear from day one that for our 

resources we need to have a plan. We need to have a strategic 

direction for our resources, Mr. Speaker. And from day one, we 

have laid out a plan. We’ve said this deal should not go through 

with BHP Billiton, and we laid out the conditions under which, 

if the federal government approved, that BHP Billiton would 

. . . the commitments they would have to provide to the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that was a plan. 

 

We should have debated that in this House more than two 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5753 

months ago. We, all 58 members of this Assembly, should have 

debated that very strategic issue facing our province. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, this may well be the defining moment of this 

legislature. It may well be the defining issue that any of us, as 

members of this legislature, are part of. Like rural 

electrification, like medicare, there become defining moments 

and defining decisions which make or break, to some degree, 

the future of your province. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re at such a 

defining moment. Moving forward we need to have a clear, 

well-defined path. Both the business community and the people 

of Saskatchewan need to know and understand what our 

position is on our strategic resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re a resource-based economy. If it’s not 

potash, it’s uranium. It’s coal. It’s gold. It’s diamonds. 

Saskatchewan has an abundance of resources, Mr. Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to have a plan. We have to be able 

to articulate that plan. And we have to be able to ensure both 

the people of Saskatchewan who own those resources and the 

business community that we have a plan, and that within that 

plan, Mr. Speaker, there will be development of our industries. 

There will be development of our resources, and there will be a 

path to move forward in the best interests of both the people of 

Saskatchewan and those who wish to invest in our province. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did we see instead? We saw a year ago and 

over the last two years, a Premier that said we were open for 

business, that we were going to accept foreign investment in all 

our sectors, Mr. Speaker. We saw him go to China. We saw 

him go to other countries, making it very clear that 

Saskatchewan was open for foreign investment. Then, Mr. 

Speaker, when one of those companies from another country 

comes to Saskatchewan and wants to invest, what do we see? 

We see the government do a one-eighty and say, no. 

 

You’re sending mixed signals, Mr. Speaker. What I’m saying 

is, the government should have laid a clear path before the 

people of this province and a clear path before the investors of 

the world as to what the conditions would be in order to get 

government support for investment in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to have a set of rules and people 

know what the expectation is. It’s another thing to say that there 

are no rules. And then you come here and you want to make an 

investment and then you see the rules change. Mr. Speaker, we 

can’t make this mistake again. We need to clearly define what 

the rules are moving forward. People need to understand, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need to know. 

 

We were very clear from day one we were against a BHP 

Billiton deal. But, Mr. Speaker, the government wasn’t. They 

came to that conclusion after the polls indicated that the people 

of Saskatchewan were against the deal. They came to that 

conclusion after, Mr. Speaker, after they couldn’t get the 

sweetheart deal they wanted. Mr. Speaker, it was referred to in 

the London Times that the government was acting like a third, 

Mr. Speaker, a third-rate nation, Mr. Speaker, in their 

transactions with BHP Billiton, that they were trying to get 

things that were deemed to be unacceptable by any progressive 

corporation in the world. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all I’m saying about this issue is this is a 

defining moment in our history. This is a defining moment in 

our future, and it warrants two or three lines in the Throne 

Speech. Mr. Speaker, how seriously does the government take 

perhaps the most important decision that we will have the 

opportunity to make as a legislature or as a province in the next 

couple of years? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the portrayal of finances is less than 

accurate. The portrayal of our debt is one that shows a 

government that’s trying to tell the people one story and live by 

another. Mr. Speaker, what we have before us is really a tale of 

two provinces — one of which the Premier wants to portray and 

a second one which is a reality. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

the province deserve the facts. The people of the province 

deserve to be told the full truth. They deserve to be told the real 

circumstances of the province’s finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent thousands, and I have personally 

spent hours and hours and thousands and thousands of 

kilometres travelling around the province talking to people 

about the important issues that they face. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there are many, many real concerns that the people of 

Saskatchewan have. They have concerns about their health 

care. In communities across the province we hear about 

reductions in long-term care beds, reductions in hours of 

service of their health centres, Mr. Speaker, reductions in the 

number of nurses that are available for service in their health 

centres. We hear families genuinely concerned that their loved 

one will have to go a nursing home a hundred or more miles 

away because of bed closures and reductions closer to home. 

 

Those are real concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, what type of response are people in these 

communities getting from the government? Mr. Speaker, in the 

town of Wawota they got told that they had a choice: highways, 

or beds in their long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. It 

shouldn’t be a choice about a person’s health and their ability to 

remain in their community, and the building of highways, Mr. 

Speaker. There needs to be clear-cut priorities, Mr. Speaker, 

clear-cut priorities that are meeting the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard across the province that people’s 

priorities didn’t include a 20 per cent increase or $20,000 

increase to the Premier’s staff in this building, Mr. Speaker, an 

issue raised just three weeks ago. Mr. Speaker, when the regular 

workers in the government are getting 4 or 5 per cent over four 

years, Mr. Speaker, what do the hand-picked chosen few of the 

Premier, what did they do to deserve such lavish increases, Mr. 

Speaker? That’s what the people of Saskatchewan would like to 

know. Why is it so important . . . Why is it okay for the health 

care worker in the community to get 4 per cent over four years 

or 5 per cent over four years, but yet the Premier’s staff can get 

20 per cent or $20,000 over the same time frame, Mr. Speaker? 

That’s a real issue for people in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s a real issue. The people in Wawota were saying they 

have to close beds because of inadequate funding by the 

government in the health care budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, real people are impacted by poor choices and 

those poor choices are affecting families. They’re affecting 

their loved ones and they’re affecting the quality of life of their 



5754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

communities. Mr. Speaker, the issues of affordability are huge 

for seniors, for low-income families, for low-income singles, 

single parents, Mr. Speaker, and students. We’ve seen a 

dramatic increase in rent, Mr. Speaker. And during the same 

period of time, Mr. Speaker, it’s become clearer and clearer that 

there aren’t additional supports or help for those on fixed 

incomes to deal with these increased costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people who built our province — our parents and 

grandparents — should not have to make choices between 

affordable health care, filling their prescription, paying their 

rent, or paying their electrical bill, Mr. Speaker, or the threat of 

having their power or heating cut off, Mr. Speaker. These are 

the people who built our province. They are the people who 

deserve our respect. They deserve our help and they deserve our 

attention to those very important issues that deal with their 

affordability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a minute talking about the issues 

of photo identification, Mr. Speaker. This is an issue that has 

long been an issue. Amendments to The Election Act have 

always been by agreement of all parties, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

been a steadfast rule of our democracy. The last amendments to 

The Election Act were done in full co-operation with the then 

Sask Party in opposition. They had the right and they agreed to 

all the amendments or they didn’t go forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today we have an amendment coming forward that we hear 

about in the Throne Speech without consultation, without 

agreement. Mr. Speaker, that is . . . Our democracy and our 

electoral system is there to meet the needs of all the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan, not an individual political party, 

not an individual political agenda, not to disenfranchise those 

who have less, not to disenfranchise those who live in remote 

areas, not to disenfranchise those who, due to disability or 

being in a nursing home, don’t have the ability to go out and 

access photo identification, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why are we doing this, Mr. Speaker? Can anyone point to 

an issue of electoral fraud? Can anyone point to an issue of . . . 

A real issue, Mr. Speaker. I’m not talking about fictional issues 

in members’ minds. I’m talking about a real issue that’s been 

investigated, an issue that’s been investigated, proven, and 

needs to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

isn’t an issue that individual members of this legislature believe 

in. Mr. Speaker, it has to be an issue that was investigated by 

the Chief Electoral Office in our province, Mr. Speaker, found 

to be valid, and a recommendation been brought forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It cannot be a group of members from a particular political 

party getting together in a room who know that the people who 

traditionally vote for them are higher income people, Mr. 

Speaker, and decide that we’re going to enforce photo 

identification and try to disenfranchise those who most likely 

would vote against us. Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely wrong. 

That is trying to fix the electoral system to your own benefit, 

Mr. Speaker. And the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

don’t agree with politics like that. They don’t agree with 

somebody trying to fix politics to meet their own end, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m more astounded than ever that we have a 

government bringing forward a piece of legislation like this 

after the Minister of Justice has personally told me that we 

wouldn’t bring forward amendments. He was going to bring 

forward amendments without our agreement. But did he ask for 

agreement on this issue — didn’t even consult us on it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is the same government 

that turned down the appointment of a Chief Electoral Officer 

that was selected by a bipartisan committee of this Assembly. 

Mr. Speaker, what does it look like to the general public? It 

looks like we have a government who’s trying to control the 

outcomes and electoral process. And that is not the role of any 

government, Mr. Speaker, in any government anywhere. The 

role of a government is to work with all political parties to 

come to an electoral process that’s fair to all citizens, all 

electoral parties, Mr. Speaker, and that’s fair to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite can say that these aren’t 

issues to people. Well they are issues to people. They are real, 

and real issues affect real people. And people should be 

concerned and people are concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a couple of minutes to talk about 

some other things that have happened over the last three years. 

Mr. Speaker, we saw a change in accounting rules so the 

government didn’t have to report debt in the same way that the 

previous governments had to report debt, so they could try to 

under-report debt, Mr. Speaker. Again, why would any 

government do this except trying to change the debt situation, 

try to change the debt situation to their own favour, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a series of actions that have 

destabilized Crown corporations from this government. And, 

Mr. Speaker, during the 1980s we saw the same thing. We saw 

in the early 1980s, Mr. Speaker, in the late 1970s, Crown 

corporations that were profitable that under the Conservative 

government began to lose money because of a series of 

decisions made by the government. And then at some point 

because those Crowns were no longer making money, they 

were sold off, Mr. Speaker, and in some cases virtually given 

away. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that. We’re seeing that in SGI 

today and, Mr. Speaker, where we’re changing the rules under 

which you can have a licence to provide drivers’ licences and 

plates to Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker, opening it up, 

hurting SGI’s market share, Mr. Speaker. Now why would any 

company want to hurt their own bottom line, Mr. Speaker, 

potentially damage their own market share, unless you had a 

hidden agenda? And, Mr. Speaker, that hidden agenda can and 

will result in the destabilization of SGI Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they can say, what are we talking about? 

But we’ve been down this road before. We were down this road 

in the 1980s. We had a viable, we had a viable, profitable 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, 

that made money every year it was administered under an NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. And then in the 1980s a series of 

actions were taken and that corporation no longer was 

profitable and was sold off for pennies on the dollar. 

 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5755 

We saw the same thing with Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, and we saw 

it sold off. And we saw SaskEnergy, an attempt by the then 

Conservative government to sell SaskEnergy. And at that point, 

the people of Saskatchewan got behind the New Democratic 

government and stopped that sale. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, today, decisions made today 

can impact the long-term viability of Crown corporations. They 

can affect the long-term viability of the services provided to 

Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, you can’t just say it’s 

not going to happen when those decisions appear to have direct 

impact on the bottom line of those corporations. And we’re 

going to be watching very, very carefully. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a fiduciary responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan — all 58 members of this Assembly — and we 

have a responsibility to ensure that we act in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, above all we have a 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan understand what is being done by their 

government, what decisions the government is making, what 

the impact can and will be on the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s the role of the official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a government today who is 

spending as much of its time wondering about what its direction 

should be, what its vision should be, Mr. Speaker. Because it 

appears like they don’t have a vision. They don’t have a path. 

They don’t have a direction, Mr. Speaker. When we want to 

have debates about meaningful issues, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

intend or don’t want to have those debates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the official opposition offers to go with the Premier to 

Ottawa to make our case to the Prime Minister, to 

Saskatchewan’s 14 members of parliament, to the leaders of the 

other opposition parties, Mr. Speaker, what does this 

government do? What does this government do? It turns down, 

turns down that motion, turns down the support of the official 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. That is a path not taken. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, on two occasions during the . . . at least 

two occasions that I well remember, when important issues 

faced the people of the province of Saskatchewan when the 

former NDP government was in place, Mr. Speaker, they took 

members of the official opposition with them to Ottawa to help 

them make their case. They never turned down an offer of help. 

They never turned down the support of the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, because they believed that a united voice, a solid 

united voice made a difference. 

 

This government in its first opportunity says, no we don’t want 

anything to do with the opposition. We don’t believe in 

co-operation or working together, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 

believe necessarily working together in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people is in our interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what do we do? The Premier does nothing. Did he go to 

Ottawa and have a meeting with the Prime Minister? No he 

didn’t. No he didn’t. Did he get a meeting with the Prime 

Minister? No. Could he have got a meeting if it was the Leader 

of the Opposition and the Premier? Well we’ll never know 

because the Premier, because of his own political, his own 

political posturing and wanting to be the hero, Mr. Speaker, 

wouldn’t take an offer given genuinely by the opposition to 

help to take this issue to the Government of Canada, to the 

Prime Minister, to Saskatchewan’s 14 members of parliament 

and the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that tells you a great deal about the nature of this 

government. And this government’s about itself, Mr. Speaker, 

not about the people of Saskatchewan, not about the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 

itself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons I won’t be able to support 

the Throne Speech. I will support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

And I hope that members opposite take a few minutes to 

consider their actions and what is viewed by their actions in 

particular on refusing help to deal with one of the most critical 

issues facing the people of this province in the last two decades. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 

join the debate on the Throne Speech here this evening. But 

first off I would be remiss if I didn’t join my colleagues in 

thanking a lot of key people. Firstly and foremost, my family: 

my wife, Leone; my daughters, Katelin and Rayanne. As many 

members in this Assembly know, a family takes quite a toll 

when a member of the family is in this line of this work and I 

do sincerely thank them for all their support and their 

well-wishes over the past few years, Mr. Speaker. As well as 

the numerous friends back home in Yorkton and around the 

province that continue with their thoughts, their prayers, and 

their supportive comments time after time, day after day, year 

after year, Mr. Speaker. That does truly make this job a lot 

easier. 

 

Along with my constituency staff — I just had a lady that had 

been with me for three years, Ms. Annie Whitehead, left me 

after three years to move to Regina. And I welcome on staff 

Ms. Ingrid Stumph, our new CA. And my senior CA, Ms. 

Lauretta Ritchie-McInnes, who has been doing this job for quite 

a number of years and is just an indispensible member of our 

team back in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with that as well, the legislative staff here in this building 

that support us day after day and get the research done and help 

us out carrying out the jobs that we perform here, Mr. Speaker. 

The people of my constituency back in Yorkton and area, again 

very supportive and not always on side, but always there to give 

constructive comments, to tell us where they think we might be 

able to do better, but there also to support us with comments 

when we’re doing what they feel we should. I am truly 

honoured and it is a privilege. I know it’s a privilege and I’m 

blessed to be representing the constituency of Yorkton and with 

those fine people there. 

 

As well my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, here in Assembly, both on 

our side of the House and across, working with them day after 

day and month after month for the past three years. A year to 

go. I’m looking forward to the possibility of more years after 

that, Mr. Speaker, after the next election. 



5756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

I also want to join my colleagues in welcoming my new 

seatmate, the new member from Saskatoon Northwest. It’s an 

honour to be sitting beside him. We’ve gotten to know each 

other a little bit over the last number of days and I look forward 

to . . . My colleagues over here aren’t helping me out a lot, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re telling stories that are not true and scaring my 

new friend here, the member from Saskatoon Northwest. But I 

look forward to developing the relationship over the next 

number of years. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss as well if I 

didn’t mention our leader, the Premier of the province. I had the 

honour of introducing him at a leader’s dinner, a chamber of 

commerce dinner here early in September. And in my 

comments, I mean you want to introduce the Premier and give 

some background on his past, but also to reflect on other things. 

I mean everybody can do that. 

 

So what my intent was to reflect on him being the leader. What 

are the true qualities of a leader? And, Mr. Speaker, I googled 

qualities of a leader and I think I came up with 17 definitions 

and going through that list I challenged all the leaders in that 

room, Mr. Speaker, to look at themselves and see how many of 

those qualities they could describe themselves with from that 

list, Mr. Speaker. And as I rattled that list off of approximately 

17 different qualities, I found that at one time or another, the 

Premier has demonstrated those qualities to me more often than 

not a number of times. And I am so privileged to be working 

with and for the Premier, the leader of our party, and I look 

forward to the many years that he will be serving this province 

in the future. 

 

When reviewing the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I quickly got 

to page 4. On page 4 we talk about the past summer, the season 

that we have just come through, the wettest season on record, 

past 100, maybe 500 years. And I want to take this opportunity 

to reflect on how that disaster affected my home constituency 

of Yorkton, my home of Yorkton, and with that recognize some 

local heroes. 

 

First off the people of Yorkton, upon the storm ending, before 

the storm even ended, Mr. Speaker, people out of their homes 

and helping their neighbours quickly to ensure that nobody was 

in dire straits. People stepped up. They went above and beyond 

and I would say with minor injuries, if any at all, and no loss of 

life, which could have easily happened in the dire consequences 

of that flood, Mr. Speaker. It was just astronomical and 

heartwarming to see how the community rallied to help 

everyone in that community. 

 

The EMS [emergency medical services], the different 

emergency measures in Yorkton, the fire department, the police 

under the leadership of Chief Dean Clark and Staff Sergeant 

Joe Milburn, Mr. Speaker, did an amazing job of keeping things 

organized and keeping everybody together and addressing the 

issues as they came and keeping people safe. The city of 

Yorkton employees, Mr. Speaker, were amazing. All employees 

were out, reported to duty, cleaning drains and rescuing people 

whether it be by boat or loader, and taking people to safety. 

 

The mayor, James Wilson, his leadership was very welcomed 

and very respected. The leadership that he showed over the 

number of, not only the day of the flood, the days following the 

flood, but also the months following the flood with the 

leadership he showed through the city, the city of Yorkton, and 

the council of the city of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, the leadership 

that they’d showed as well. 

 

Provincial employees through Corrections and Public Safety. 

We were just totally blessed to have the Minister of Corrections 

and Public Safety there a number of times and organized the 

help, the volunteer firefighters from the North and the 

volunteers from around the province that were orchestrated and 

organized through his department and his ministry to help the 

people of Yorkton. And for that, Mr. Minister, I’m truly 

thankful. So thank you very much. And when considering the 

minister and the work that he did and the Premier being out 

week after week throughout the disaster in Yorkton, and 

looking at some of the . . . I won’t go into detail the changes to 

the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] program, 

Mr. Speaker, but the Minister of Corrections did a fine job of 

rattling through those. 

 

And if there’s three things I can focus on that were mentioned 

in the Throne Speech that people time and time again have 

given me a lot of good comments about, was our handling of 

the flood along with the people of Yorkton and the people of 

the province; the way the Premier and our government has been 

handling the potash issue as of late; and one other one would be 

the MS treatment, liberation treatment that we will be moving 

forward with here, Mr. Speaker. I’ll touch on that a bit later. 

 

When considering the theme of the Throne Speech, “The New 

Road” — or I would characterize that as you can’t keep doing 

things the same old way and expect different results — we have 

been doing things a little bit differently. And no disrespect 

intended to the former government, the members across, and no 

disrespect intended to any previous government, but all 

governments of different political stripes have fallen into that 

trap over the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That said, the Throne Speech does lay out some key things that 

maybe aren’t new news but reiterating what the promises have 

been made, the promises that have been kept, and what we are 

going to be moving forward with in the future. The Throne 

Speech, as you know, is a plan for the government for the next 

year. And that plan very clearly continues on with promises 

made, promises kept, and continuing on finishing up those 

promises, some of which would be the revenue sharing with 

municipalities going to the full per cent this year and the 

expansion of the education property tax relief that will be 

fulfilled this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These promises, Mr. Speaker, along with some new initiatives 

that are what is coming to be described as our new 

Saskatchewan, some of these initiatives for continued 

population growth . . . And speaking of the population, Mr. 

Speaker, the population growth we are now enjoying, the 

largest population in Saskatchewan’s history. That alone, that 

might not be the greatest thing but when you consider that is in 

conjunction with one of the lowest unemployment rates if not 

the lowest unemployment rate in the country, along with some 

of the highest average wages in the country, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that the government has a little bit to do with. But 

it’s the people of this province and that new-found positive 

attitude and that positive outlook and that faith in our province 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5757 

that is helping us enjoy that to this day, Mr. Speaker. That 

environment is also one of an increased investment in this new, 

this contemporary Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I’ll move on to some of the details of the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker. I was going to leave this one for close to the last, 

but I heard the member opposite talking about the potash and 

talking about this combined trip to Ottawa with a united voice. 

And I heard that talk over and over again. 

 

But in reflecting on the Leader of the Opposition’s comments in 

his reply to the Throne Speech, there was clearly not a united 

voice. The Premier has had one message. And as I’ve reflected 

in just my previous comments, people I’ve talked to around the 

province and at home, very happy with the Premier’s outlook 

on this subject, the stance that we’ve taken. And clearly the 

Leader of the Opposition not having the same stance, it doesn’t 

make any sense to have a disunited voice or a not a united voice 

going to Ottawa to speak in the first place. So that sort of 

negates his comments there. 

 

He referred to some alleged negotiations that I have not heard 

anybody here talk about, these negotiations with BHP. The only 

thing I have heard is the plans BHP came to the province with 

for the Jansen Lake mine which I mean that’s a welcome 

investment into this province, and nobody here would debate 

that. 

 

The only thing I have heard from this side of the House is a 

commitment to the people of the province to do all possible to 

ensure that the people of this province benefit for the resources 

that we do have here in biblical proportions, and that in a fair 

but business-friendly way. We realize the potash belongs to the 

people of the province. No one’s ever debated that. And the 

Premier has time and time again referred to those statements 

that, you know, these are the people’s resources and we’re 

going to treat them as such. We are here to look after the 

resources of the people of the province. BHP looks after their 

interests. PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] will look 

after their interests, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the position that 

we have to take. 

 

[21:30] 

 

On this new road, reflecting on that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll touch on 

some of the different initiatives. And again this, admittedly a 

previous announcement, but carrying through with some of the 

plans and commitments that we’re following through with — 

the $200 million commitment to the children’s hospital, that 

money has flowed through, and as I’ve spoken about in this 

Assembly before, is something I’m very happy about. 

 

I’ve talked to people around the province saying, you know, 

maybe that money should have been spent around the province, 

spread that $200 million around the province to help all regions. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we know and I’ve seen with my own eyes 

that we need a specific children’s hospital in Saskatoon that 

services these children, the issues that do arise with children 

around the province. Spreading that money around does not 

effectively address some of the issues that these young children 

encounter. And that money spent on a specific centre in 

Saskatoon is money well spent, and I look forward to the 

construction of that facility. 

The target of 800 nurses. I think we all know now that 830 and 

plus has been met. So again a commitment that we made, and 

I’m very happy to reflect on that, Mr. Speaker, that that 

commitment has been kept in a year quicker than we’d 

expected. 

 

Some of the other initiatives with surgery. We’re talking about 

reducing surgical wait times, and in fact that is starting to work 

quite well, Mr. Speaker. In fact I think Saskatoon has realized a 

71 per cent reduction in wait times for orthopedic surgery for 

mainly seniors. We’ve talked a lot about, today about the 

STARS program, the shock trauma air rescue system, which I 

believe will enhance our medical system, our emergency 

response system in this province to great lengths, Mr. Speaker. 

In the industries, specifically oil and gas and mining, and with 

some of our rural people as well, Mr. Speaker, where you know 

we have issues where we need — we have specific or very 

detrimental accidents and significant cases of trauma where a 

helicopter-based trauma unit would be very welcome. 

 

Something I did touch on previously, and I’m very happy to be 

part of this government with the announcement of the $5 

million for the trials for the MS liberation treatment. I know 

around Yorkton I’ve numerous friends — just had a bit of an 

event yesterday for a friend of mine in Yorkton looking at his 

MS treatment, and this is a welcome, welcome announcement 

for the many MS patients around the province. 

 

The expansion of the nursing training seats, Mr. Speaker, again 

something that’s been very welcome and talked about at home 

to great length. In fact, one of my daughters has applied for 

nursing, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to the possibility of 

her getting into nursing and being a very caring and a very 

committed nurse in the future. 

 

Something I was involved with very early on in my political 

career right after the election in 2007 with the 

community-based organizations initiative with the former 

Social Services minister from Humboldt, the community living 

wait-list of 440 now down to approximately 132, I believe. We 

have 308 of those spots filled, and those are quickly being 

addressed. So I’m very happy that some of the work that we did 

three years ago has come along that quickly, and we’re very 

well on track for eliminating that 440 person wait-list by the 

end of this next year. 

 

With that, a lot of the issues with housing for persons with 

intellectual disabilities, an initiative started in October ’09, and 

we’ve got about 175 of those housing units in place right now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Head Start on a Home program, which I think is a great 

initiative sort of along the lines possibly of Habitat for 

Humanity. And the investment we made in Habitat for 

Humanity, I think, has been a very welcome investment as well, 

Mr. Speaker. But Head Start on a Home will see the 

construction of 1,000 new affordable homes — homeowners in 

the next five years. And I’ve heard a lot of buzz around the 

Yorkton constituency as well where a lot of people looking at 

getting involved in that initiative and taking advantage of that. 

 

The police officer initiative, we know we’re 75 per cent of the 

way to that, completion of that. So we’re right on track. And I 



5758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

know Yorkton has enjoyed . . . The city of Yorkton put the 

money up for two and the provincial government put up the 

money for two, plus with the cadets in the city of Yorkton now, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re well on our way to having a fully staffed 

. . . We do have a fully staffed police department. And as I 

mentioned, under the leadership of Staff Sergeant Joe Milburn, 

we have a very competent and a very, a very effective police 

force. 

 

Reflecting again on some of the initiatives that were spoken 

about in the Throne Speech, and I think the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow kind of touched on this and maybe 

poked a bit of fun. But you know I’ve talked to many mayors 

and many municipal representatives around the province who, 

although they would’ve liked to have some of those initiatives 

in place followed through with last year, they’re very happy 

with the follow-through within the four-year commitment, not 

only of our revenue sharing with municipalities, but the 

education property tax relief that will be in full effect this year, 

Mr. Speaker. And with that, a lot of the agricultural citizens 

around Yorkton are very encouraged by that and the income 

and the money that it will save not only the farmers but the 

ranchers in the Yorkton area. 

 

The commitment to infrastructure investment — another 

welcome initiative that was announced. And when we started 

on that three years ago, the former minister from Maple Creek 

did an amazing job in getting that initiative up and running, and 

now our minister from Rosetown continuing on with the good 

work done by the former minister in some of the commitments 

with highways and infrastructure advancement and rebuilding 

in the province. 

 

One thing I can point to that specifically comes into effect in 

Yorkton. The truck route, reliever route has . . . The initial part 

has been opened up and is in use. We’ll be kicking off that 

initiative, I think, on Friday — the official announcement. And 

the additional routing that will be connecting down to 52 and 

over to Highway 10 is in the process of being built. So that’s a 

significant investment in the Yorkton area, aside from all the 

other municipal investments that have been done through that 

ministry to improve roads and highways in our constituency. 

 

We’ve seen significant investments in the agricultural portfolio, 

Mr. Speaker. And without going in depth — I know the Ag 

minister will be talking about those in depth very shortly, but 

— when we see the significant investments in livestock, loan 

programs, significant investments in hog and cattle operations, 

very welcomed, and the agricultural people around Yorkton are 

very happy about that. And now with the wetlands and the 

initiatives put forward through the Minister of Agriculture, 

again very welcome support in the community to get us through 

to the next year and carry those farmers through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I tease the member from Melville-Saltcoats quite often — the 

Minister of Agriculture — that you know I go to places and I 

have to straighten people out because they’re always telling me 

how good this Agriculture minister is. It’s quite likely he’s the 

best Agriculture minister, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had in decades if 

ever. And you know quite often I have to straighten them out 

and, you know, kind of bring the Minister of Agriculture back 

down to ground. But he is truly respected and appreciated to 

many agricultural producers that I meet throughout the 

province. 

 

I had a conversation, Mr. Speaker, recently with a First Nations 

leader and I was very encouraged by the words that he had to 

say. We had a nice private conversation. And he was telling me 

that our government, this government, and the Premier 

probably have more respect from his group anyway than any 

leader in his memory. And, Mr. Speaker, I was very encouraged 

by that. You know sometimes you see things in the news and 

you think maybe you’re not doing that great of a job but, you 

know, when you talk to some of these leaders in private they’re 

very encouraging and very supportive and very open to 

continuing to work with this government for many years to 

come. So that’s very encouraging. 

 

And the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood touched on a 

lot of those initiatives there as well so I won’t get too in depth 

there. 

 

The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport has . . . The 

former minister did an amazing job as well, did some really 

good work. And he was in Yorkton a number of times and 

always well appreciated there and very loved and very liked. 

And a lot of good announcements with the film festival and a 

lot of the other Parks, Culture, and Sport announcements that 

we did have. 

 

The member from Regina South, our new Minister of Tourism, 

Culture, and Sport, working very hard and some of the new 

initiatives I like to reflect on that are coming through his 

ministry, Mr. Speaker. The fixed $6,000-a-year support for 

athletes. Our athletes continually supported by quite often 

Alberta out-of-province money, and I’m encouraged by 

supporting our athletes and building some Olympic athletes for 

now and into the future to represent their province so well that 

the Olympic athletes that we’ve had up to this point have done, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see new investments in our provincial parks which is 

always encouraging as well. 

 

Energy, Innovation, and Environment, Mr. Speaker, some 

significant investments there. Although the federal government 

has dropped their portion of the program, we see almost $10 

million — nine and a half million dollars — invested in our 

EnerGuide program continuing on to support some of those 

energy efficiency initiatives that have been started and 

continue. 

 

We’re looking at new energy sources. We’re looking at 

expanding, expanding wind power in the province. Doubling 

that capacity, along with other initiatives, Mr. Speaker, 

including, you know, the possibility of new hydroelectric power 

in the North in the coming years and exploring other 

opportunities as well. So that’s always encouraging news. 

 

Another file that I had the honour to work on with the former 

minister of Environment from Martensville and now under the 

guidance of the new Minister of Environment from Weyburn, 

Mr. Speaker, Weyburn-Big Muddy, the multiple material 

recycling program that I’ve often said is close to my heart 

coming from that industry; the solid waste and recycling 

industry and myself knowing, from our group, the Waste 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5759 

Advisory Council and different groups that I’ve been involved 

with over the years, advocating for a sustainable recycling 

program in this province. 

 

And again no discredit to the former government, I think they 

were trying to get things perfect before getting it out of the box. 

And we know that nothing is ever perfect. And I’m very 

encouraged that this new program, although admittedly quite 

likely won’t keep everybody happy, it is a good first step and a 

step that we can, a foundation we can build on in the future to 

expand recycling and make sustainable recycling in the 

province with the non-refundable tin, plastic, glass, paper, and 

cardboard that we’ve seen ebb and flow through the markets, 

and then have sustainable, non-sustainable markets where now 

we’re going to see markets that are truly going to be sustainable 

and positive recycling and less landfill usage in the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I lost my page. Here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk again about this new 

Saskatchewan for a few minutes and the positive attitudes. We 

see . . . I’ve often said . . . In my old life I used to do a lot of 

off-road racing and motorcycle racing, and one of the first 

things you’ll get taught is, be careful where you look because 

where you look is where you steer. And time and time again, 

we’ll see members opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, 

trying to get people looking in the ditch. And if we look in the 

ditch, where are we going to go? In the ditch. 

 

We’re on the road. We’re looking forward. We’re looking 

down this new road, and we’re not looking in the ditch. We’re 

glass-half-full people, Mr. Speaker. The people of the province 

are half-glass-full people. The new people moving to this 

province are glass-half-full; they’re positive, they have a 

positive attitude. We’re not glass-half-empty, the 

pessimistic-type attitude of the past like I’ve so often found 

members opposite, they do get that way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I often thought that this was maybe sort of 

an act, this glass-half-empty-type of an attitude, and I mean this 

sincerely. I’m not poking fun at the opposition whatsoever. I 

had the opportunity to speak to a group of social science 

teachers last year at the Social Science Teachers’ Institute along 

with my friend, the member from Regina Rosemont. And he 

made a statement that really struck me, and it struck a chord 

with me. And it was sort of an aha moment for me. And he said 

to these teachers — and I mean it’s public record, you can ask 

any one of them — that New Democrats by nature are critical 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, I thought that was an awfully odd 

statement. Because I mean I know he truly believed it. And I 

thought, critical, what does critical mean? Critical as in 

pessimistic; half glass empty; we’ll never grow at the national 

average; we’ll always be in and out of equalization — all these 

negative statements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to me, that’s looking in the ditch. And if you’re always 

used to having that negative attitude, that pessimistic attitude, 

we’re never going to grow. And that’s why I think so many 

people moving to the province now and their positive attitudes, 

they’ll see some of the comments coming from members 

opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, and they really get tired 

of it. 

They are encouraged by the positive attitude of our Premier and 

our members of the government, Mr. Speaker, our Deputy 

Premier. A positive attitude. The member from Canora-Pelly 

always has encouraging, positive things to say. And every now 

and then I’ve even found myself in a bit of a woe is me attitude. 

And the member from Canora-Pelly is always there to pick you 

up, dust you off, and get you back on your feet with a positive 

attitude. 

 

[21:45] 

 

There’s not too many more positive people than I’ve met from 

anywhere than my friend, the member from Canora-Pelly. And 

that really strikes me as odd, Mr. Speaker. I mean, we want to 

be positive. We have to be positive. And I started thinking 

about that — being positive. And I was at a blood drive awhile 

ago. My wife, my family, and I, we try to give blood as 

regularly as possible. 

 

And when a friend’s son recently was diagnosed with a 

life-threatening illness, we thought it was time to get on the 

bone marrow drive. And you know, they’re looking at your 

blood types. And I found out my blood type is B positive. No 

kidding. My blood type is B positive. And I guess it’s in my 

nature. I can’t help but be positive. You get down every now 

and then. But it’s B positive. 

 

I’m looking around this side of the House and I’m thinking, a 

lot of these members must have B positive blood types. And 

I’m not sure the blood type across . . . some might be B 

negative. I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. But I want to just 

encourage my members, my friends on this side of the House to 

always keep your blood type in mind and be positive. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone on quite a while here. So I 

would just like to say that I support the main motion, the 

Throne Speech, and I do not support the amendment. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to take to my feet tonight. Before I get into the meat of the 

Throne Speech, I would like to thank a few people. First of all 

my wife — she has been there with me through thick and thin. 

We’ve got two beautiful girls and she takes care of them. And 

tonight she ran to soccer practice and just . . . She’s there doing 

some of the grunt work when I’m in the legislature representing 

the people of Lloydminster. So I’d like to thank her first and 

foremost. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the ladies in my constituency office. 

We do a pile of work out of our constituency office. It’s kind of 

a place that people come. They bring concerns. We try and deal 

with them directly. Some people bring in issues that they just 

want us to be aware of, Mr. Speaker. And Marilyn and Caren, 

Marilyn has really picked up the slack lately because Marilyn 

has had some concerns and hasn’t been in the office as much. 

So I just want to say thank you to those ladies. 

 

I’d like to congratulate our newest member from Saskatoon. I 

know all my colleagues have and some of the members 

opposite and I appreciate the members opposite acknowledging 



5760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

him. I think he ran a great campaign. It showed a kind of 

barometer of where the people of Saskatchewan are today and 

the support that he garnered with more votes, higher percentage 

of the vote than we got in the last election. I think that was 

terrific. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected, one of the roles I had 

was Deputy Chair of committees, and with yourself as Speaker 

and the Deputy Speaker kind of showing me the ropes, it was a 

position I really enjoyed and it forced me to understand the 

rules in a fairly in-depth way. And now the member for Carrot 

River Valley will hold that position and I wish him the best of 

luck. I know he will do an excellent job and I hope he enjoys it 

as much as I do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get to the Speech from the Throne, I 

would like to also talk about one of the responsibilities I have, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s SGI. They had a very challenging 

summer. The member who just was on his feet spoke about 

some of the flooding issues in his constituency. Down in Maple 

Creek they have struggled with some major flooding issues 

there and I know SGI has struggled to be on top of those issues, 

to be a presence in the community almost as the rain is 

stopping. 

 

And this summer I made a point of going to Maple Creek and 

meeting with our SGI office people there. I spent a day in 

Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and talking to the people who are on the 

ground following those flood events. And the reports I hear 

back is that SGI was, you know, worked extremely hard. When 

you have that many claims in that short of period of time, it is a 

struggle for anyone. But I know that SGI did their best. And I 

think, looking back, they are recognized as being one of the 

leaders in Saskatchewan insurance industry, and it’s the 

dedication of the employees which makes their brand stand out. 

I hear the member from Yorkton says, they set the standard, and 

I think the people of Saskatchewan can be proud that their 

insurance company set the standard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about potash as well, Mr. Speaker. 

Maybe I will put that a little later on, Mr. Speaker, in my chat 

tonight because that’s something I would like to dig quite deep 

into here. 

 

A couple of the things that jumped out for me, Mr. Speaker, in 

the Throne Speech was our . . . And the members opposite 

speak about, well the Throne Speech from ’07, the Throne 

Speech from ’08, the old Throne Speech. In each of those, Mr. 

Speaker, there was consistent commitments that we have come 

through with. I’m proud to stand behind those three throne 

speeches as I am this one. In each of those, Mr. Speaker, we 

talked about new police officers. In the election we said 120 in 

this term. Quickly do the math: that’s 30 a year. In each Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, we have committed . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You’d better write that down for them. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — The member beside me thinks that I 

should be doing the math a little more, laying it out for the 

members opposite, but I think they can follow. Thirty a year, 

Mr. Speaker, for four years, comes to 120. At this point we’re 

three years in and the funding has been put in each successive 

budget. This year it’s in the Throne Speech. It will be in the 

budget. At the end of our term we can stand in front of our 

constituents and say, we said we were committed to 120 new 

police officers and that’s what the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, in the election campaign in ’07 we said we 

think the people of Saskatchewan need 800 new nurses. We put 

it in our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, back in ’07 — 800 new 

nurses. The members opposite thought that was impossible but, 

Mr. Speaker, we thought it was possible. We thought it would 

be a lot of work; we didn’t think it would be easy. But here we 

are, Mr. Speaker, three years in, a year ahead of schedule, and 

the Minister Responsible for Health said it here in the House 

today, Mr. Speaker, 800 — I believe it’s 837 nurses today on 

the ground — new nurses, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 

behind that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, doctor recruitment. One of the members opposite 

today said the advertisements for new doctors, there’s more 

new doctors required in Saskatchewan today than there was a 

year or two, three years ago. Mr. Speaker, that may be true but, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s because our population is growing. If you 

look at the number of doctors on the ground today, there is 

more doctors working in Saskatchewan today than there was 

when these guys left, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I think is more important, Mr. Speaker, we’re training 

more doctors. When these guys left, there was about 60 training 

seats I believe, Mr. Speaker. Today . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sixty-three. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Sixty-three, my counterpart says. I 

think that there’s over 100 training seats today, Mr. Speaker. 

And not just that. We were training doctors back under the 

former government and we didn’t have residencies for them. 

We would spend tens of thousands of dollars, potentially 

hundreds of thousands of dollars. We’d train our brightest 

students to become doctors, to take care of us. And then they’d 

have to leave to do their residencies. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know if any of them have been in business but, Mr. Speaker, I 

see a flaw in that business model. I think that the people that 

lose there are the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve invested a 

large amount in the training and then they get nothing on the 

end. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we’re training more 

doctors; we’re offering more residencies. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to keep more doctors in Saskatchewan because this 

is a positive place to live and a great place to be a doctor. 

 

Not only are we training more doctors, Mr. Speaker. When the 

former government was running the province, they had six 

countries around the world which communities could recruit 

doctors from, foreign-trained graduates. And, Mr. Speaker, very 

successfully from South Africa in my community — we’ve had 

several doctors. I can’t think of the other five countries have 

been nearly as prolific for bringing doctors in, but South Africa, 

we have several excellent doctors. 

 

But at some point, Mr. Speaker, we needed to broaden the 

scope. We didn’t have enough doctors in Saskatchewan. Their 

government wasn’t willing to broaden the scope. I know our 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5761 

Minister of Health has worked extremely hard. He’s worked 

very hard with the College of Physicians and Surgeons to 

ensure that we have a standard which ensures we have a high 

calibre of doctors coming to Saskatchewan, but also ensures 

that the communities around Saskatchewan are recruiting those 

doctors to have the choice, have the ability to find a good one. 

And I think that that is a real feather in his cap, the college’s 

cap, and a real advantage for the communities around 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The critic for Health, Mr. Speaker, spoke earlier today about 

her tour of Saskatchewan, about communities. Mr. Speaker, she 

says she’s been speaking a lot about it. And I knew that she had 

come through my communities because people would call me 

and they were scared silly, Mr. Speaker. They were shocked. 

They said, if those guys ever get in government again, we were 

are in trouble. You know, she said she’d come into town and 

she’d talk to some health care . . . people concerned about 

health care. And those people would call me up and say, holy 

cow, you guys got to, you got to win the next election; we can’t 

go through this again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think part of the concern might have been 

last time they did a tour of rural Saskatchewan, they toured 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker, they closed hospitals around rural 

Saskatchewan. So you can understand that it’s kind of like, it’s 

kind of like Halloween, Mr. Speaker, when they come knocking 

on your door. If they knock on your door one year and then egg 

your house, you’re going to be a little suspect the next time they 

come around and knock on your door. So if she had a frosty 

reception in some of the communities, that may have 

contributed to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The air ambulance, Mr. Speaker, that’s a positive 

announcement that I think has been very well received. I live 

right on the Alberta border, Mr. Speaker, in Lloydminster. 

Alberta has an excellent track record with the STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] program. It’s been functioning 

very well for the last 25 years. It provides a level of service for 

critically injured people across Alberta, and there’s no reason 

that people in Saskatchewan don’t deserve the same level, the 

same standard as people in Alberta and many other provinces. I 

think Saskatchewan might be one of the laggards in this regard. 

 

We heard earlier today Saskatchewan was one of the leaders in 

fixed-wing aircraft for supplying airlift service in Canada. And 

we now, after 16 years of the NDP, find we’re one of the last 

provinces to have a rotary wing service. And I think that’s 

systemic of the problems that 16 years of NDP government . . . 

If any other province had to stand for 16 years of the NDP, they 

probably would be in the same boat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk briefly about the potash 

situation. I know that’s on the minds of many people in 

Saskatchewan. At a dinner up on Thursday night, a gentleman 

came up and chatted with me. He wanted to talk about the 

potash. He’d been waiting to talk to me for about three weeks. 

He came up and spoke to me, Mr. Speaker, about potash. He 

wanted to talk to me. He said he was very pleased with the 

speech that our Premier made to the chamber of commerce here 

in Regina. He thought that that is the right move for 

Saskatchewan and just wanted to let me know. And I think 

that’s something that all our members are hearing here and 

there around their constituencies. There’s been very few people 

that are talking the other way. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of chatter coming from the 

members opposite. And I think that they’re feeling a little 

insecure about their position. Back in the ’70s, Mr. Speaker — 

I’m going to go back a few years — back in the ’70s, the NDP 

had a similar position. They thought, we don’t think that the 

private companies are doing a very good job in potash. So they 

decided that they were going to be the captains of the industry, 

Mr. Speaker. They were going to run the industry. They thought 

that they knew more about potash than the mining companies. 

So they passed some legislation. They changed the laws and, in 

all essence, they stole the potash companies out from under the 

investors. 

 

And well they started producing potash and they started selling 

potash and they started producing. Pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, we 

had a problem in Saskatchewan. We had mountains of potash. 

It was selling for very little, very little money. The people of 

Saskatchewan were not getting much value for their resource, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, then in the ’80s, the potash 

industry was sold to the private sector, Mr. Speaker. Most of 

the shares were sold to the private sector. But it wasn’t until 

1994 when the now Leader of the Opposition was, I believe, the 

guy selling the last shares. The deputy premier, he sold. He 

knew that the NDP were not captains of potash. He’d suffered 

through the years of decline. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I understand . . . I’m just getting into the 

heart of the potash debate here, Mr. Speaker, but we’re coming 

up on 10 o’clock. So I know the members opposite are going to 

sleep well tonight, knowing that I can finish this tomorrow. But 

I’d like to adjourn the debate for this evening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Lloydminster has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5737 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5739 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5742 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5746 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5748 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5751 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5755 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5759 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


