




















































Hansard: April 12, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 42A  MONDAY, APRIL 12, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4697 

 April 12, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

request leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to make an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank you to members for leave for this introduction. 

 

To you and through you to all members of the Assembly and 

those guests who have gathered, it’s an honour for me to 

introduce a group of very, very special guests who have joined 

us today on the floor of the Legislative Assembly. I will not be 

introducing them all individually for the fear of missing one 

but, Mr. Speaker, we’re joined by veterans of this country and 

by those who continue to serve her with courage and pride. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, just earlier today we celebrated an 

event called the End of an Era in the rotunda. We were joined 

by all members of the Assembly and the Leader of the 

Opposition and of course our honoured guests, Legion 

representatives and veterans and a number of others who joined 

us for this ceremony. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada is a country, as you know, that came of 

age during World War I. Our country took its first steps towards 

nationhood as our soldiers took steps towards Vimy Ridge and 

Ypres and the Somme and Passchendaele and the battles of 

World War I. The brave men and women that served on those 

battlefields gave us a voice and established a legacy that the 

Canadian Forces continue to uphold to this very day. 

 

The last number of years have brought with them the passing of 

the few remaining veterans that served in the Great War. And 

with their passing have gone the last tangible links to this 

chapter in our history, a chapter of this remarkable generation, 

of its heroism and of the coming of age of our country. 

 

Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, on the National Day of Remembrance 

of the Battle of Vimy Ridge, a commemorative ceremony was 

held to mark the end of an era and honour all First World War 

servicemen and women at the National War Memorial and 

Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Ottawa. And earlier today, as 

I’ve mentioned, members joined with each other to engage in a 

similar ceremony of remembrance here in the Legislative 

Assembly in our rotunda. 

 

Men and women gathered here this morning, Mr. Speaker, and 

last week in our nation’s capital to mark an end of an era, did so 

as an act of remembrance and as an act of gratitude. We owe a 

debt of sincere thanks and must never forget the defining 

contribution of those who served, of those who came back and 

helped continue to build our great country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a book of reflection that has been started 

as a result of this morning’s ceremony. Many have signed it 

already. It’s available in the rotunda, and we invite anyone that 

is able to come to the Legislative Assembly to sign that book of 

reflection and to pay homage and thanks to our veterans, 

certainly of World War I, but all veterans who have served so 

bravely and with such great courage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last living link of service to the Great War 

died in February, with the death of Mr. Babcock that has been 

well-documented. This is why we take this opportunity to 

gather as we did this morning. But, Mr. Speaker, we should 

resolve that it not be about one afternoon on a day in April, that 

it be a constant act, this act of remembrance, this sense of 

gratitude that we have. And we can show it in various ways. We 

can volunteer for a cause. We can make sure we are reaching 

out to those who are still in service or perhaps those veterans 

who would enjoy that kind of camaraderie from the rest of us. 

Mr. Speaker, may we continue to remember in the way we 

conduct our lives on a daily basis. 

 

And I would ask all members of this Legislative Assembly to 

join me in welcoming these heroes, these veterans and 

members, representatives of the Legion to our Legislative 

Assembly, to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked, I’m 

understanding, leave for an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

Premier and thank the Premier for the opportunity to join with 

him earlier today in the rotunda of this beautiful building where 

we come to do the work of the people, to join with veterans as 

well as our Colonel Keddy. Thank you for being here with us 

today. And also the member from Wood River who emceed the 

function in the rotunda, thank you for that as well. 

 

To the other guests who came to recognize and honour the men 

and women of the services, both present and past — today, 

particularly past — and the individuals from the Great War, 

veterans who did the very honourable thing and went to defend 

our country, and some 650,000 who left to do that heavy lifting 

and to defend this country, and also to the 68,000 who didn’t 

come back to their family and friends and community to run the 

farm or to look after fisheries in their area of Canada, this was a 

very, very important day. Of course with the passing of John 



4698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

Babcock, the last veteran of that Great War, gave us occasion, 

sad as it is, to come together and not only honour those 

memories but celebrate what Canada is all about. 

 

I join with the Premier in asking all of us to sign the book of 

reflection which is in the rotunda, to add our names to the 

respect that we have for those people who were involved and 

are involved in the heroic efforts at any time during the history 

of our country and today, to pay respect for those people. To 

not only pay respect, but to give the admiration that is deserved. 

I think the fact of the matter is that we often take that for 

granted, and it’s taken for granted in many ways. 

 

It’s taken for granted in the amount of compensation we give to 

the men and women who do that heavy lifting. And I think we 

need to do more when it comes to pensions and recognition for 

the work done. And like all people in Saskatchewan and across 

Canada, we in the official opposition want to honour all of you 

and all of them for the work that they have done on behalf of 

our country. 

 

I’d be remiss also if I didn’t mention, I believe the choir, Mr. 

Premier, was from Campbell, and the beautiful music they 

provided on this occasion for the colour guard and for all the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. And I know many from 

the government side and the opposition side were there to pay 

respect and honour. 

 

I want to join with the Premier and welcome our friends here 

today and hope you come back many times to visit with us, not 

only here in the Assembly but personally as well. Thank you 

and good luck. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Request leave 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked to leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 

honourable Assembly, a delightful and engaged group of 

Saskatchewan women seated in your gallery. Today I have the 

honour of introducing members of Saskatchewan’s Red Hat 

Society chapters. 

 

The world’s first chapter was created over a decade ago by Sue 

Ellen Cooper. She was inspired by the poem, and an irreverent 

and inspired poem it is, “Warning” by Jenny Joseph, and 

through the gifting of many red hats found a way to celebrate 

women in the latter part of their life. And I can certainly 

appreciate, as I think we all do, that issues of gender equality do 

not divide us, but in fact unite us. 

 

That point was reinforced by Gertrude Mongella from Tanzania 

as she offered her opening address to the Plenary Session of the 

Fourth World Conference on Women sponsored by the United 

Nations in 1995. She said, and I quote, “It is now the turn of 

men to join women in their struggle for equality.” 

 

As a husband, as a father, as a son, and as all of us in this 

Assembly, as a citizen, it is my honour to stand in the 

legislature and recognize the work of the Red Hat Society. The 

Red Hat Society provides a community, a supportive sisterhood 

for women across Saskatchewan and well beyond. Together 

they celebrate life and support each other through its challenges. 

 

In the words of Sue Ellen Cooper: 

 

Women make up more than 50 percent of the population, 

and regardless of our current age, each of us is growing 

older every day. Each one of us travels her own path, yet 

all of us inevitably share so much in the areas of life 

experiences, personal relationships, and societal roles. 

 

Organizations such as the Red Hat Society are integral to the 

community spirit we celebrate in Saskatchewan. Next week the 

Government of Saskatchewan will proclaim Saskatchewan Red 

Hat Society Day in honour of the organization’s anniversary. I 

ask all members to join me, and most especially the member 

from Kelvington-Wadena who’s a member of this society, to 

join in welcoming the ladies of the Red Hat Society to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I too on behalf of the opposition 

want to welcome the members from the Red Hat Society, all the 

women that have come today. From what I know about this 

group, not only are they very visible because of their hats — 

and it’s unfortunate that the member didn’t wear hers; that 

would have been entertaining — I understand that these women 

are extremely enthusiastic and they have a lot of fun. That’s 

what I always hear, that you have a lot of fun. Look at all the 

hats nodding. So I too would like to welcome all the women 

here today to the legislature. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce others 

who are in the gallery. On the very top row is Darlene Gray, the 

director of OCATS, the Ovarian Cancer Awareness and 

Treatment in Saskatchewan, and Elan Morgan board member. 

Wave? And sitting beside Elan are Joan and Harvey Schneider, 

also board members. I just want to say about Joan before I sit 

down and welcome them, Joan was the executive secretary to 

the president of SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] when 

that was me. So I’m very happy to see Joan here today and 

welcome them all to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I had the pleasure of attending a ceremony where we had 

seniors being able to take next steps in their life, in their career. 

And one of the people that facilitated this was Sherry Knight, 

and Sherry Knight is the president of Dimension 11 which is a 

consulting firm that works with all members of society, doesn’t 

matter their age. But one of the things she has had the 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4699 

opportunity to do was to help seniors prepare themselves for 

re-entry into the workforce, and this was a program that was 

sponsored by both the provincial and federal government. And 

like I said, I had the wonderful opportunity of meeting different 

seniors that Sherry and her company had prepared for their next 

step in their careers. So I would like everyone in the House to 

welcome Sherry Knight, president of Dimension 11. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Assembly an individual seated in the western gallery. I’m 

referring to one, Brett Angus. If you could give us a wave there, 

Mr. Angus, or should I say President Angus, Mr. Speaker, 

because Brett of course is serving as the newly-elected — at our 

very successful convention up in Prince Albert — as the 

president of the Aboriginal New Democrats of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know he’s a proud, young Métis man. He’s working in the city 

here at one of the city’s most popular night spots, and probably 

why he’s here earlier — for the shift, Mr. Speaker. But it’s good 

to see Brett here in his Legislative Assembly. And I’d ask all 

members to please join me in welcoming Brett Angus to his 

legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

citizens who are concerned over the condition of our highways 

in this great province. This particular petition pertains to 

Highway 123 which is the highway into Cumberland House. 

 

[13:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the communities in the North, unlike 

communities in the South, have only one access in and the same 

access out, so that is a very important link for them. This 

particular highway has so many potholes in it that it requires 

significant manoeuvring just to stay . . . from getting stuck in 

the mud, so the petition says. So this highway certainly is in 

dire state of needing of repair. And I’ll read the petition, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing of 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this particular petition is signed by the good folks of 

Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to present a petition that originated with the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. This petition is in support of the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund, the same 

scholarship fund that was promised in the 2007 election 

platform by the Sask Party. The prayer of this petition, Mr. 

Speaker, reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from Moose Jaw and 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection from 

unreasonable increases, rent increases for renters. And we know 

the vast majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent 

control guidelines, including Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], 

Ontario, Quebec, Prince Edward Island. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view 

to protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from the good city of 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition costs and a call on the Sask Party 

government to have their actions match their rhetoric. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 



4700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is being circulated because the 

Saskatchewan Party government amended the retention 

program specifically to exclude master’s, Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] graduates and students who graduated from 

post-secondary institutions from outside of Saskatchewan. And 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to immediately expand the 

graduate retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 

regarding the Sask Party’s lack of action with respect to climate 

change: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

undertake immediate actions to mitigate climate change 

by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, actions which will 

serve to protect Saskatchewan people from the significant 

costs to our economy, global security, and the quality of 

life which climate change threatens to bring about, and to 

also protect Saskatchewan people from longer and more 

frequent droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers 

which feed our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more 

frequent and serious flooding, and loss of at least the 

southern part of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest 

which is treasured by so many in our province; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

a meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and 

broad-based strategy including enacting substantial and 

meaningful legislation and substantial and meaningful 

regulations, to meet the commitment solemnly pledged 

repeatedly in October and November of 2007 during the 

last provincial election by the Premier, the current 

member from Swift Current, who at the time of the last 

provincial election when he made this serious and 

significant commitment was serving as the leader of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, to reduce our province’s 

greenhouse gas emissions by 32 per cent from the levels 

of greenhouse gas emissions which our province 

produced in the year 2007 and to meet said 32 per cent 

reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by the year of Our 

Lord 2020, 10 years from now or one short decade away; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring 

the Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set 

about the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions, rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties, to actually 

address this critically important issue which will directly 

affect our province’s economy and the quality of life for 

all of our residents; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised 

decision to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie 

Adaptation Research Collaborative is a valuable and 

much-needed organization in that it generates practical 

options to help Saskatchewan adapt to current and future 

impacts of climate change and fosters the development of 

new professionals in the emerging science of climate 

change impacts and adaptation; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

La Ronge, Esterhazy, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that the existing construction industry labour relations 

Act has provided a stable labour environment, and also the 

stable labour relations environment provides for quality of work 

and safe construction sites. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4701 

The petitions are signed by residents of Regina, Preeceville, 

Springside, Qu’Appelle, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and 

Battleford, Saskatchewan. And I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficit budgets and the $1 

billion debt growth that’s occurring within our province. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Humboldt 

and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film and 

television industry. The petition acknowledges this 

government’s failure to address issues critical to the film 

industry and how it’s driving jobs and investment out of the 

province, particularly with its short-sighted decision to close 

Saskatchewan Communications Network. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

To cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces, to reverse its decision to shut down 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, and to work 

with the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Condolences to Polish People  

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 

sadness that I rise in the Legislative Assembly today to offer 

condolences to the people of Poland and to people of Polish 

extraction who live in our province and live, indeed live across 

our country. A horrific plane crash on Saturday resulted in the 

death of Poland’s President Lech Kaczynski. Tragically, among 

those killed were Mr. Kaczynski’s wife Maria, ministerial staff, 

15 members of parliament, the commanders of all branches of 

the armed services, the central bank president, historians of the 

Katyn massacre and several bishops and priests. 

 

It is hard to imagine how a nation can cope with such an 

unexpected and large-scale loss of its leadership and its public 

servants and its spiritual leaders. However, Mr. Speaker, with 

Saskatchewan being settled by many Polish migrants over a 

century ago, we know for so many of our fellow residents that 

this tragedy hits very close to home. 

 

President Kaczynski left an indelible mark on history. His 

involvement with the solidarity movement during the 1980s in 

challenging the Soviet communism is well known, Mr. Speaker. 

Because he and other Polish people stood up for what they 

believed in, Poland eventually freed itself from the chains of 

communism. A week of mourning has been declared throughout 

Poland, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On behalf of the members of this Legislative Assembly, I want 

to extend our condolences to the people of Poland and to the 

many Polish Canadians who are coping with this loss and this 

tragedy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Canadian Effort and Sacrifice in War 

 

Mr. Quennell: — On Friday April 9th we commemorated the 

Canadian victory at Vimy Ridge where thousands of Canadian 

workers and farmers turned soldier, through their efforts and 

sacrifice, transformed Canada from a political arrangement into 

a nation. With innovative tactics, determination, and courage, 

Canadians succeeded where others had failed in the taking of 

Vimy Ridge, earning Canada its own place at the treaty table at 

Versailles. 

 

This year we also honoured the passing of the very last of the 

Canadian veterans of the Great War, the so-called war to end all 

war. When no one living has a direct experience of that war it 

will be easier to forget, not the date or the accomplishment, but 

the reality of the hard sacrifice that made the accomplishment 



4702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

possible. 

 

The peace brokered at the treaty table at Versailles was an 

all-too-short one and Canadians, once again and not for the last 

time, took up a disproportionate share of the burden in the 

renewed conflict. Canadians continue to face difficult 

challenges and decisions as to our responsibilities in the world. 

As we face those challenges and make those decisions, we must 

strive to ensure that our achievements are worthy of the 

sacrifices required to obtain them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Remembering Edward Bayda 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week 

marked the passing of a great man and important member of 

Saskatchewan’s legal community. On Saturday, a state funeral 

was held for former Chief Justice Edward Bayda. Friends and 

colleagues joined together to remember his lifetime of 

achievements. Edward Bayda was the youngest provincial 

Chief Justice in Canada, the first of Ukrainian descent, the 

province’s first Saskatchewan-born Chief Justice, and the 

longest serving provincial Chief Justice. 

 

Ed Ratushny, a professor emeritus of the Faculty of Law, 

University of Ottawa, and close friend, had this to say about 

him, “Under his leadership, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 

and he, personally, made a great contribution to our 

constitutional jurisprudence . . .” He went on to say, “He also 

contributed to public policy through his landmark reports 

arising out of his royal commissions inquiring into the grain and 

uranium industries, both so vital to the Saskatchewan and 

Canadian economies.” 

 

Mr. Bayda relished the role that judges play in articulating and 

shaping the law, but he understood the immediate, often 

personal impact that judges’ decisions have on the lives of 

ordinary people. 

 

I ask that all members of this House join with me in 

remembering a man who succeeded in making his province a 

better place to live and work. Our sympathies go to all of the 

family members of Justice Bayda’s family. We share their 

sorrow and loss. Former Chief Justice Edward Bayda shall not 

be forgotten. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Holocaust Memorial Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today, April 12th, is Holocaust 

Memorial Day or Yom HaShoah. In Israel, at 10 a.m. a siren 

blows and everyone stops what they’re doing. They pull over in 

their cars and stand in remembrance of the 6 million Jews who 

were killed in the Second World War. 

 

In Saskatoon, Holocaust Memorial Day is going to be 

celebrated on April 18th. Regine Frankel will be the guest 

speaker. Ms. Frankel was born in France in 1930 and, with her 

whole family, was hidden during the war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have walked through Anne Frank’s house in 

Amsterdam where Anne and her family were also hidden during 

the war. I stood where she stood, looking out a window while 

her diary was being read aloud behind me. The powerful 

message in remembering the Holocaust and memorializing the 

tragedy of 6 million Jews being killed is that we never let this 

horror become ancient history. To the survivors and their 

families it remains real and ever-present. 

 

To all of us, we must remember so that it does not happen 

again. We must all be witnesses to carry on the memory of the 

Holocaust. To quote historian Jennifer Rosenberg, “We fight 

against ignorance with education and against disbelief with 

proof.” 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we join with the world on Holocaust 

Memorial Day to say that we too will not forget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

93rd Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 9th will live on 

forever in Canadian history. This year marks the 93rd 

anniversary of the beginning of the Battle of Vimy Ridge. 

 

This confrontation was the first time all four divisions of the 

Canadian corps went into battle together. The battle has become 

a national symbol of sacrifice and bravery, and it truly stands as 

a timeless memorial to the strength of the Canadian nation. 

 

Over 97,000 Canadian soldiers formed that core of a fighting 

force that launched that assault. Four battalions that were 

engaged in that battle hailed from Saskatchewan. The action of 

these soldiers defined the character of Canada and brought this 

nation out from under the shadow of the British Empire, 

allowing its citizens to forge their own image. 

 

As our sons and daughters are currently serving in many 

capacities around the world in both peacekeeping operations 

and in the NATO-led [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] 

mission in Afghanistan, it is crucial that we note that they are 

just the latest to wear the uniform of the Canadian Forces. They 

are writing the newest chapter in the history of our armed 

forces, and what a proud history it is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Granting of Pardons 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the recent news about the 

pardon granted to Graham James has left Canadians concerned 

about our nation’s system of keeping track of criminal records 

and worried about why dangerous criminals are being pardoned. 

 

As the James case shows, Mr. Speaker, the National Parole 

Board does not grant pardons based on the special merits of 

those applying. Rather, for many years pardons have been 

granted as a matter of routine to almost anyone who applies, 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4703 

provided they can show that they have not run afoul of the law 

for a period of several years following their release from 

custody, regardless of the violent or harmful nature of their 

crime. Even sex offenders, gang leaders, and drug leaders can 

be pardoned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government introduced changes to the 

Criminal Records Act aimed at ensuring the granting of pardons 

did not result in vulnerable Canadians being put at risk. 

 

Unfortunately the James case shows us that sometimes 

criminals are granted routine pardons even when they have 

committed very serious crimes like trafficking drugs, 

perpetrating sex crimes, or procuring sexual favours. Violent 

behaviour like this could put vulnerable people at risk, 

especially if these offenders go to work in the public sector or 

to serve in public office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has said the case of 

Graham James will cause it to review how pardons for serious 

criminals are issued in Canada. It is our hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Government of Saskatchewan will fully co-operate with this 

review. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Strong Economic Recovery 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can hardly believe it 

myself, Mr. Speaker, but once again there is more good news 

about our wonderful province. There are more glowing reports 

released last week about the strong economic recovery 

happening right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

A new Conference Board of Canada report indicates that 

economies in both Saskatoon and Regina are growing in 2010. 

Saskatoon will increase by 2.8 per cent and Regina by 2 per 

cent. The Conference Board report suggests, and I quote, “A 

strengthening provincial economy will lift employment by 

5,000 jobs in 2010 and another 7,000 in 2011.” 

 

The Canadian Federation of Independent Business today said 

business optimism in Saskatchewan hit a two-year high in 

March and now leads all Canadian provinces. Consumer 

confidence in the provincial economy continues to grow. More 

and more individuals and families are choosing to plant their 

roots in our province. Urban housing start-ups are up by 176 per 

cent in the first three months of 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these good news reports help to show the rest of 

Canada and beyond what everyone that lives here already knew. 

Our province is becoming a leader in confederation. Our 

government will continue to work hard to ensure that all people 

in Saskatchewan have opportunities to succeed. Our 

government will continue to move forward, and reports like 

these signal that we are on the right track. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Personal Health Information 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health, and it deals with a number of polls that 

came out over the weekend. One of them shows that 92 per cent 

of the public don’t agree with the releasing of names and 

addresses of hospital patients. In this particular poll, the 

question asked was, should the names and addresses of hospital 

patients be released and used for fundraising? Yes, 4 per cent; 

no, 92 per cent; and no opinion, 4 per cent. 

 

In light of the concern and outrage that has been expressed by 

Saskatchewan residents and by the Privacy Commissioner, will 

the minister today admit a bad decision and reverse his decision 

to release that information? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m glad to be able to rise today and clarify some of 

the misinformation that’s certainly has been let out regarding 

the regulation change that our government has seen. 

 

What I want to say is that the protection of personal health 

information, the privacy of personal health information is 

paramount to our government. Mr. Speaker, we are combining 

that with the absolutely amazing work that foundations have 

done across this province, both in urban and rural. Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve done absolutely great work and they truly do, I believe, 

have the full confidence of the general public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this regulation allows health regions to enter into 

agreement with foundations if they so choose. There’ll be 

health regions that don’t. Some will enter into agreements with 

foundations to provide only a name and an address for the 

auspices of the health region to pursue some fundraising 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker. That’s all it is. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister, the Privacy 

Commissioner has been pretty clear on this issue and I quote 

where he says, “It’s a bad idea.” The Privacy Commissioner 

also says, and I quote, “Information provided so we can be 

diagnosed and treated shouldn’t be shared with any other party 

without the consent of the patient.” This obviously violates that. 

 

Can the minister tell the Assembly and the people of the 

province what consultation went on with people of the province 

or in fact with the Privacy Commissioner before this 

wrong-minded decision was made? What consultation . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very, 

very important, Mr. Speaker, that the general public knows that 

at many opportunities throughout the process they can opt out. 

They can have their names taken off, Mr. Speaker. While 

they’re in the hospital, for a couple months after they’ve been in 

the hospital, after receiving the first letter — they can opt out at 

any time, Mr. Speaker. That is in place. 

 



4704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

But it’s important also to know, Mr. Speaker, that the Privacy 

Commissioner was consulted formally four different times on 

this very regulation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and yes, we 

know his opinions on this regulation as did the former 

government know his opinions as they worked through this 

regulation over the last four years of their mandate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the obvious question to the 

minister is: what did the Privacy Commissioner say and what 

advice did he give to the minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the information that will 

be passed out, if health regions so choose to enter into an 

agreement with the foundation . . . the information of a name 

and address had been passed out for decades, Mr. Speaker, 

decades under the previous government. 

 

It was only since 2002 where HIPA [The Health Information 

Protection Act (2004)] was put in place, Mr. Speaker, and I do 

believe that there was some unintended consequences of HIPA, 

Mr. Speaker, and this was being one of them. We’re changing 

that, Mr. Speaker, to allow the exchange of a name and address 

— only a name and an address — once a formal agreement has 

been struck with health region and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the members to 

allow the Minister of Health to complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, only once a formal 

agreement has been put in place . . . Now this isn’t going to 

happen for a month or two months or three months. We’ve 

already talked to the health regions and foundations. Whether 

it’s Judy Davis here in Regina, whether it’s Maura Davies in 

Saskatoon through the health region, they all realize what is 

paramount is privacy, Mr. Speaker, health information privacy. 

That will be respected to the utmost degree. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, just to be clear, the poll that 

was done over the weekend or the polls that were done, they ask 

the question: should the names and addresses of the hospital 

patients be released? That’s it. And the answer that people give, 

92 per cent, is no. 

 

My question to the minister is the following. Isn’t this 

arrangement to allow for letters of . . . beg letters to go out to 

ask patients for money, people who have already suffered 

enough, isn’t it just the result of the cuts to health care that have 

occurred in the last budget — 135 million to capital health 

facilities and equipment? Isn’t that the real reason that we’re 

into this mess we’re now in? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there is an increase in 

health funding by this government to record levels, record 

levels that this province has never seen before, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, a record level of health care spending. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said from the outset, if people want to opt out, 

they certainly have that option. 

 

If you look at what other provinces have done, this is no 

different than what’s being done in Ontario and New Brunswick 

and a couple other provinces, Mr. Speaker. This is the same 

process that will be done. Personal health information will be 

paramount to be protected. Name and address, if the health 

region so chooses, can be then transferred to a health foundation 

and, Mr. Speaker, a letter can go out. If the person chooses to 

opt out at any time, the person is more than capable and will be 

informed of that choice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Gynecologic Oncologists 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, for two years the minister has 

ignored the pleas of women with ovarian cancer and 

gyne-oncologists to address substandard working conditions in 

southern Saskatchewan. As a result, Dr. Brydon, one of only 

two gyne-oncologists practising in southern Saskatchewan, has 

closed her practice because she is burned out. To quote Dr. 

Brydon, “Physically and emotionally, I can’t cope any more.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s incompetence and failure to address 

the substandard working conditions of gyne-oncologists in 

Regina is putting at risk the lives of women with ovarian 

cancer. Why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, we want to thank Dr. 

Brydon for all the work that she has done in southern 

Saskatchewan. These people are very specialized doctors. They 

are, Mr. Speaker, gynecology oncologists, which is a very 

specialized area. We have had four in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. Dr. Brydon is closing her practice to move on to other 

options. The health region, the health region as well as the 

government, is working hard to ensure that that position will be 

filled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I will say is that in the last two and a half years of our 

government, we have done more to recruit physicians into this 

province compared to the 16 years. And especially when you 

look at the front page of the Leader-Post, from 2001 to 2006 the 

net out-migration of health care workers in Saskatchewan was 

1,160 health care workers out, Mr. Speaker. In our first two and 

a half years, we have attracted 164 more physicians to our 

province than under that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, that tired rhetoric is no consolation 

to women who have ovarian cancer. Mr. Speaker, in every other 

jurisdiction, including Saskatoon, gyne-oncologists work in a 

hospital setting with the proper support around them — not so 

in Regina where the specialists have to find their own office 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4705 

space and work without the support of a nurse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he going to provide immediate 

office space and examining room space in the Regina General 

Hospital along with the proper nursing support, or is he going to 

continue to ignore the issue until the second gyne-oncologist 

closes her practice? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have a gynecological 

oncology program working group that was established, Mr. 

Speaker, under our government. This working group has patient 

support, is represented through patient support groups. It also 

has a gynecology oncologist, the four that were in the province, 

working on this group as well as the health authorities of 

Regina Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, and the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency to deal with this issue to have an ongoing program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry officials have informed me that 

progress is being steadily made, Mr. Speaker. And yes, there 

are going to be decisions made by physicians to step aside. But, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going in the right direction. It isn’t the 

working of that group . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition members 

to give the minister the same opportunity to respond as the 

government gave the member to ask the question. I recognize 

the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it isn’t the working of 

that group that would get into the micromanagement of what 

happens within a health region or the Cancer Agency. That is 

the auspices of the Cancer Agency or the regional health 

authority in their particular area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a lack of leadership. 

The working group has been ongoing for over two years. 

They’re going to just keep spinning their wheels unless the 

minister says, do this. The minister’s incompetence and failure 

to address the problems means there’s now only one 

gyne-oncologist looking after all of southern Saskatchewan 

women. This will put additional pressures on the remaining 

gyne-oncologist and potentially will increase the wait time for 

women who are waiting for even an initial diagnosis. 

 

My question to the minister is this: will the Sask Party 

government be forced to send women out of the province for 

diagnosis and treatment because of their incompetence and 

failure? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — As I had mentioned earlier that the 

health region, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region will be working hard in the next . . . 

in the past but as we move forward over the next month or so to 

attract another gyne-oncologist into the province. I am very 

proud of our government having set up a physician recruitment 

agency that will deal with this very issue, these very issues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately that hadn’t been done for many, many years — 

never even contemplated under the former government when 

we saw hundreds and hundreds of doctors leaving this province, 

Mr. Speaker. In the last two and a half years, we’ve seen more 

doctors come to the province than leave — an increase of about 

164. There is more work to do. That’s why we set up a 

recruitment agency, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’ve also 

increased the number of training seats in the College of 

Medicine and the number of residency positions, up to 108 

residency positions in the province, Mr. Speaker, that will bode 

this province very well into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, ducking and weaving, I mean there 

is no answer in the minister’s rhetoric. And Dr. Brydon’s 

leaving her practice now because the province will not set up a 

gyne-cancer unit in Regina. This unit would allow women to be 

diagnosed, treated, and receive follow-up care in one place. To 

quote Dr. Brydon: 

 

I actually don’t think that the way the system is structured 

in this province at this time allows anybody to do the job 

that needs to be done properly and that is because we do 

not have a gynecologic women’s cancer unit the way all 

other provinces do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is the minister going to establish a 

gyne women’s cancer unit in the province now, or is he going to 

wait and wait and wait, and talk and talk, and talk and continue 

to risk the lives of women with ovarian cancer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know and 

understand the very importance of this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we set up a working group that has patient 

representative groups on it, that has the oncologists on it, that 

has the Cancer Agency, that has the health regions, to look at 

how to best manage this project, Mr. Speaker. There has been 

progress made, absolutely. But it’s interesting that they would 

stand and criticize the way the program and the way the health 

system is being run, when they have been in government for 16 

years prior, setting up the very program they’re criticizing now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at how we can improve this 

program as we move forward. We’re looking at how we can 

have the proper complement of gyne-oncologists within the 

province, Mr. Speaker, because we know that it is a very 

important issue, and we’re working to improve the health of 

women in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



4706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

Dutch Elm Disease 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are outraged 

at the Sask Party government for its short-sighted decision to 

axe funding for the Dutch elm disease program. To the minister: 

why did she make this short-sighted decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

during this budget process, there were some difficult decisions 

to be made as far as the Dutch elm disease program goes. The 

municipalities have the capacity for the trees that are under their 

jurisdiction in their areas. And, Mr. Speaker, the province will 

continue monitoring for Dutch elm disease in the buffer zones 

surrounding those communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, when asked why she cut the 

$500,000 from the Dutch elm disease program, the minister 

said, “. . . there were some tough decisions to make in this 

budget. But we felt there was knowledge and capacity within 

the municipalities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dutch elm disease has been confirmed in at least 

25 communities in Saskatchewan, and there will still be a legal 

obligation to remove the trees on the part of the property 

owners. Did the minister consult with these 25 communities 

before she off-loaded new costs onto them and onto 

Saskatchewan property owners? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, municipalities 

have the capacity internally to monitor the elm trees in their 

jurisdictions. And, Mr. Speaker, Ray Morgan, the city of 

Regina manager for forestry said, and I quote, “We are not 

concerned about our program.” Mr. Speaker, they know what 

their capacity is. As I said, the province will continue to 

monitor the buffer zones around those communities. And the 

Ministry of Environment will continue to provide technical and 

scientific support. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another quote from Ray 

Morgan as well, and that is that there will be long-term, 

significant financial implications. Perhaps the minister would 

like to heed those words as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is trying to off-load its 

responsibilities onto property owners and municipalities. But 

that certainly won’t work on lands that the government controls, 

such as provincial parks. To the minister, how does she plan to 

meet her obligations to control Dutch elm disease on provincial 

lands without this program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of 

Environment has signed a memorandum of understanding with 

the Ministry of Tourism and Parks that the monitoring will be 

done through parks on park land for trees that are on that park 

land, Mr. Speaker. And we trust the Ministry of Tourism and 

Parks to follow through on their obligations. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as far as downloading goes, it’s the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] who continually pulled back money 

from municipalities. Mr. Speaker, municipalities have revenue 

sharing at unprecedented levels under this government. We are 

supporting municipalities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, that lack of control on provincial 

lands will exacerbate the problem in cities. The provincial 

program created a buffer zone around the cities. And without 

that buffer zone, officials are predicting a full-blown crisis. A 

Star Phoenix editorial describes the Sask Party’s decision to cut 

the program as “. . . another example that it didn’t make the 

hard decisions in trimming its budget. It made short-sighted 

decisions that . . . could prove . . . costly.” It “shows neither 

foresight nor courage.” 

 

To the minister: why should municipalities, property owners, 

and our environment have to pay the price for this minister’s 

lack of foresight and this government’s incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Apparently the member opposite hasn’t 

been listening to my answers. The Ministry of Environment has 

signed a memorandum of understanding with the Ministry of 

Tourism and Parks. They will be doing the monitoring within 

provincial parks, Mr. Speaker. And as far as a buffer zone goes, 

I’ve said twice already during this question period that the 

Ministry of Environment will continue to do monitoring in the 

buffer zones around municipalities such as Regina. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the municipalities, we feel, have the capacity 

to deal with this issue. And, Mr. Speaker, in the circumstance of 

Regina, it was the NDP who clawed back $120 million in 

revenue sharing for the city of Regina alone. Mr. Speaker, we 

have increased revenue sharing to the municipalities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the $22,500 that came from this 

program for the city of Regina had huge efficiencies built into 

it, Mr. Speaker, because the buffer zone was protected around 

the city of Regina, and therefore there wasn’t the creep-in to the 

city in terms of the city having to deal with those elm trees. 

 

There are 60,000 American elm trees in the city of Regina that 

need to be protected, Mr. Speaker, and yet, and yet what I’m 

finding out is that I can’t find anybody who is actually 

consulted. The experts that are dealing with this were not 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4707 

consulted prior to hearing it in the budget. I’d like to ask the 

minister this: who did the minister consult with respect to 

cutting this program of $500,000 when it is so valuable to the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, again to clarify for the 

member opposite, the buffer zones around municipalities will 

continue to be monitored by the Ministry of Environment. That 

has not ended. I don’t know how much more clearly I can say 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the municipalities have the capacity to take on this 

challenge. Ray Morgan of the city of Regina, said, and I quote, 

“It’s a challenge to keep the trees growing in Regina . . . If we 

have to spend $50,000 extra dollars to help prevent it on our 

own budget, it’s a worthwhile investment.” Mr. Speaker, the 

city of Regina is in a better position financially under this 

government than it ever was under that government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, given that there is so much outcry 

from the province of Saskatchewan, the people in 

Saskatchewan, with respect to this ill-fated decision for such a 

highly efficient amount of money that that $500,000 was, will 

this minister now admit that she made a mistake in cutting the 

Dutch elm disease program and reinstate the funding to ensure 

that the American elm trees in Saskatchewan are well 

protected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for her question. As I said, the Ministry of 

Environment will continue with the monitoring around the 

buffer zones. Municipalities will be responsible for the trees 

that they own within their own municipalities. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they also have unprecedented revenue sharing under 

this government, Mr. Speaker. We feel that they have the 

capacity to take on this program, and, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry 

of Environment will continue to provide technical and scientific 

support for those municipalities who need assistance. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Finance and Electoral Issues 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Justice. Does the Premier consider the Saskatchewan Party to 

be the Saskatchewan conservative party? 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I want to remind the members 

that the questions should relate to ministerial duties or 

responsibilities. I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, once again to the Minister of 

Justice: if the Premier’s party is not the Saskatchewan 

conservative party — and of course it is not — why are 

members of his party taking funds belonging to the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — Again I remind the member the question 

should be directed to the ministerial responsibility of members. 

If ministers want to respond, we’ll let them respond. I recognize 

the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, does the Premier consider it 

appropriate for the Saskatchewan Party to deny the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan its money in order to 

prevent its participation in provincial elections? 

 

The Speaker: — Again I must remind the member of the rules 

that the questions are to be related to the ministerial 

responsibility of the ministry. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, once again my question is to the 

Minister of Justice. The Premier has a pattern of taking things 

that don’t belong to him. Will the Premier return the $3 million, 

which was taken by the Sask Party, to the Progressive 

Conservative Party? 

 

The Speaker: — I again remind the member under rule 19(2) 

that questions should be directly related to ministerial 

responsibility. I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again my 

question is for the Minister of Justice. Does the Premier believe 

taking money belonging to another political party is legal? 

 

The Speaker: — I remind the member again from Regina 

Dewdney of rule 19(2) that questions are directly related to 

ministerial responsibility. I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, once again my question is to the 

Minister of Justice. Does the Premier believe that the money 

should be returned to the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I again remind the member that the questions 

should be related to ministerial responsibility. And if the 

questions are not related to ministerial responsibility, then we 

will move to the next question. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Justice Minister 

is this: does the Premier believe that the money that was put 

aside in a trust fund by the Progressive Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan should be immediately returned to the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — Again, again I bring to the attention of the 

member from Regina Dewdney, the question does not relate 

directly to the ministerial responsibility of the Minister of 

Justice. Next question. The member from Regina Dewdney. 

 



4708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question to the Minister of Justice is: in a fair and unbiased 

electoral process, should all political parties have the right to 

run candidates and use the funds raised by them in a fair and 

impartial electoral process? 

 

The Speaker: — I remind the member of the rule, and 

ministers if they so wish may respond. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to present its ninth 

report. I move: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the government 

members to come to order, so we can proceed. The Chair of the 

standing committee on Crown corporations and central agencies 

has moved: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the member for 

Yorkton. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 

133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services has moved that Bill No. 133, The Tobacco 

Control Amendment Act, 2009 . . . report the Bill with 

amendment. When shall this Bill be considered in Committee of 

the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its amendments be 

now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 133, The 

Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 with amendment and 

that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

with amendment be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Letters of Retirement  

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to inform the 

Legislative Assembly of letters of retirement received in my 

office. The Conflict of Interest Commissioner, Mr. G.L. 

Gerrand, has announced his retirement to take effect April 24th, 

2010. And the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Fred Wendel, has 

announced his retirement effective April 30th, 2010. I recognize 

the member from Cannington. 

 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4709 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

with leave to move a motion regarding substitutions to standing 

committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

for leave to move a motion regarding committees. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitutions on Committee 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the names of Dan D’Autremont and Jeremy Harrison 

be substituted for the names of Rod Gantefoer and Delbert 

Kirsch on the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the members to come to 

order so we can move forward with the motion. The 

Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That the names of Dan D’Autremont and Jeremy Harrison 

be substituted for the names of Rod Gantefoer and Delbert 

Kirsch on the Standing Committee on House Services. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, before orders 

of the day, with leave to move a motion regarding the 

construction of the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee, to move Corrections and Public Safety from 

Human Services to Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Services. 

 

Changes to Rule 142 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly be amended by deleting rule 142(c) and (d) and 

substituting the following in its place: 

 

(c) Standing Committee on Human Services — portfolio 

to relate to the areas of health, social services, education, 

and labour; and 

 

(d) Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice — portfolio to relate to the areas of justice, 

corrections, policing, municipal, intergovernmental, 

interprovincial, First Nations and Métis and northern 

affairs; and tourism, parks, culture, and sport. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly be amended by deleting rule 142(c) and (d) and 

substitute the following in its place: 

 

(c) Standing Committee on Human Services — portfolio 

to relate to the areas of health, social services, education, 

and labour; and 

 

(d) Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice — portfolio to relate to the areas of justice, 

corrections, policing, municipal, intergovernmental, 

interprovincial, First Nations and Métis and northern 

affairs; and tourism, parks, culture, and sport. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave 

to make a motion of substitution on committees as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a motion of substitution on committees. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Substitutions on Committee 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

move: 

 

That the name of Warren McCall be substituted for the 

name of Trent Wotherspoon on the Standing Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved: 

 

That the name of Warren McCall be substituted for the 

name of Trent Wotherspoon on the Standing Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



4710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Why is the Leader of the 

Opposition on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion under rule 

59. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to 

briefly state the reasons for the motion requesting leave. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Condolences to Polish People 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the easiest way 

would be to read the motion and then just give a couple of 

words, but the motion would read: 

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to the people 

of Poland on the tragic death of President Lech Kaczynski 

and his wife Maria and 94 others including many 

distinguished public servants, among them the army chief 

of staff, the national bank president, deputy foreign 

minister, army chaplain, head of the national security 

office, deputy parliament Speaker, and civil rights 

commissioner; and further 

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to all the 

people of Polish ancestry throughout Saskatchewan and 

Canada during this difficult time. 

 

That is the motion that I would move if I receive leave. I think 

it’s self-explanatory and would support the Premier’s private 

member statement that he did earlier today. But we would then 

have the opportunity as members of the Assembly to send 

something forward both to the community in Poland, but also to 

the many communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition Leader has asked for leave to 

move a motion under rule 59 regarding condolences. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let me thank the 

members of the government benches for agreeing. And I 

promise that I won’t take very long because I know we have 

many other issues that we need to deal with today. And I 

believe that I will be the only speaker from this side of the 

Assembly, and I want to say to the Deputy Premier that I 

appreciate very much the opportunity to say a few words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, April 10th tragedy struck the country 

of Poland. A devastating plane crash killed 96 people, people of 

Polish citizenry. The president, his wife Maria, and 94 others 

were killed when the plane they were travelling in crashed in a 

forest while they were landing or attempting to land near the 

city of Smolensk in eastern Russia. A devastating loss such as 

this, taking the lives of so many senior officials, is 

unprecedented in our modern age. 

 

Among the victims were the army chief of staff, a national bank 

president, a deputy foreign minister, army chaplain, the head of 

the national security office, deputy parliament speaker, civil 

rights commissioner, and at least two presidential aides, and 

three other lawmakers. Mr. Speaker, this kind of devastation to 

any organization, whether it is government or private sector 

corporation, strikes a blow at the heart of this country. And I 

know all Canadians and all citizens join with us in our 

condolences to the 96 killed. 

 

The effects are being felt right here in Canada and indeed here 

in Saskatchewan. We have a large Polish population here in the 

province and our heart goes out to all of them who are affected 

directly or indirectly. Thousands are gathering to commemorate 

those who’ve fallen in this disaster and to send signals of 

support to their comrades, friends, and families in Poland. Our 

Lady of Czestochowa, the church on 20th Street West in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale, is a hub of the city’s 

Polish community. And I know that our members will want to 

reach out and support that community in this time of grief. 

 

People have placed candles and flowers on a statue at the 

church and are signing a book of condolences to send to the 

Polish embassy in Ottawa. As one of the parishioners of that 

community who came from Poland in 1984 said, and I quote: 

 

The reaction has been overwhelming. People are shocked, 

speechless, stunned, just united in grief . . . 

 

We love Canada dearly, but we never realized how Polish 

we are at heart. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that all of us know that feeling, and 

we extend our condolences. During this difficult time, I ask all 

members of the Legislative Assembly to join with me in 

wishing strength and faith to the people of Poland and their 

descendents here in Saskatchewan and others across Canada. 

And through adversity, may courage prevail. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with those short words, I know that other 

members will want to join with me in this motion in voting for 

it. And I move: 

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to the people 

of Poland on the tragic death of President Lech Kaczynski 

and his wife Maria and 94 others including many 

distinguished public servants, among them the army chief 

of staff, the national bank president, deputy foreign 

minister, army chaplain, head of the national security 

office, deputy parliament speaker, and civil rights 

commissioner; and further  

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to all people 

of Polish ancestry throughout Saskatchewan and Canada 

during this difficult time. 

 

I so move. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to the people 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4711 

of Poland on the tragic death of their president, Lech 

Kaczynski, his wife Maria and 94 others including many 

distinguished public servants, among them the army chief 

of staff, national bank president, deputy foreign minister, 

army chaplain, head of the national security office, deputy 

parliamentary Speaker, and civil rights commissioner; and 

further 

 

That this Assembly extends our condolences to all people 

of Polish ancestry throughout Saskatchewan and Canada 

during this difficult time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

though we hadn’t had a chance to talk about this earlier today, I 

welcome the motion by the Leader of the Opposition and by 

members opposite. This House will know that during member 

statements I had the chance to express a few, even if only brief, 

expressions of sympathy and concern for the nation of Poland, 

but also for the many Canadians of Polish descent and Polish 

extraction, and also for the many Saskatchewan residents who 

trace their heritage as well to that country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as one considers the scale of this tragedy and the 

loss of so many members of the government, the loss of a 

president who had a history of reform, who had a history of 

being on the side of the Polish people — sometimes against 

some pretty significant odds, sometimes against the odds that 

would have seemed insurmountable to people like the former 

president, the late president now, Kaczynski and others that 

worked with him side by side like Lech Walesa — we can 

understand why that country is feeling the loss that they would 

be feeling today. 

 

Were it only the president, were it only the president, the loss 

would be enormous. But consider the fact that, as the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition has pointed out, that this plane crash 

took the lives of many, many ministerial staff, high officials in 

the Government of Poland and 15 members of the parliament 

and the commanders of all the branches, all of the branches of 

the armed service and the central bank president and historians 

of the Katyn massacre. 

 

We can consider, Mr. Speaker, that the loss that must be being 

felt across that country today would be unspeakable. And so it 

will be hard for members to try to inadequately pay tribute or 

homage or even offer our condolences to the people of Poland 

and to others who feel the loss very directly because of the scale 

of the loss. I understand that, we understand our information 

today that perhaps one of the members of parliament was even, 

was an opposition leader or a potential future candidate for the 

presidency of Poland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we note today that President Kaczynski left an 

indelible mark on history, not just of his country, but he left an 

indelible mark on the current history of our world — history 

that was marked by the fall of the Berlin Wall, an era that was 

marked by a birth of freedom in Poland through the Solidarity 

movement. 

 

In the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, some women and men of uncommon 

courage challenged that regime, a Soviet-controlled regime in 

that country. And they did so, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, 

with uncommon courage to make that stand. The president that 

we mark today, former and late President Kaczynski, was part 

of that group. He was counted in that number of patriots of his 

country who stood for his country and stood for a new birth of 

freedom in Poland. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would expect what is happening today 

in Poland and what is happening for the people of Polish 

descent in our great province and for the people of Polish 

descent across the country, I’m sure they’re taking an inventory 

of that loss of, yes, the late President, but of all of these other 

leaders in their country. 

 

We each in this House know of someone of Polish extraction or 

descent, families from right here in our province of 

Saskatchewan who trace their roots back to those people who 

actually built this province in the first place, who came for their 

own new birth of freedom from faraway places, from Poland 

specifically, and carved out a way of life for them and now for 

us out of dirt and rock and sand and bush, and now, obviously 

generations later, still have an affinity and an attraction to their 

homeland, to their heritage, to their culture, to the Polish 

experience. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, may I just say on behalf of the members 

of the government side of the House — and I know it was 

already articulated by the Leader of the Opposition, members 

on the opposition side of the House — let me just say that we 

again, as I tried to do inadequately in members’ statements, we 

extend our sympathies in our thoughts to the people of Poland. 

And we extend our thoughts as well to the people in our 

province who are proud of their Polish extraction, all the people 

of the country who also share in that Polish ethnicity. We offer 

them our very, very best today on such a remarkably tragic day 

as this. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege, not 

because in any way of the nature of the topic, but a privilege to 

be able to stand, Mr. Speaker, and add a few comments on this 

motion, a motion that allows this Assembly to speak 

collectively about the sorrow we feel for the great loss that the 

people of Poland have experienced. 

 

As the Leader of the Official Opposition and the Premier have 

stated, Saskatchewan has many proud roots to Poland. Many 

people who came and settled this country, settled this province 

and made Saskatchewan the great place it is today, come from 

Poland. I know over the weekend through chatting with people 

and through Facebook, many people are truly sad to the very 

core of their being about the loss of such a great number of 

leaders for their country. 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker. I was communicating with a 

friend who is Polish and lives in Poland. And she didn’t 

necessarily, what she expressed to me was that she did not share 

the political beliefs necessarily of the president and many of the 

individuals there, but she was very clear that that did not matter. 

What mattered was this was such a large number of people that 

were so central to everything going on in Poland, and it raises 



4712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

the real challenge right now for the people in Poland by having 

such a vacuum. 

 

And I think in this, I assume we’ll all agree to support this 

motion, Mr. Speaker. I think we should also at the same time 

keep in our thoughts and prayers the country of Poland, not 

only for the loss that they are experiencing because of so many 

people dying in such a tragic way, but also our thoughts for the 

next steps, Mr. Speaker, because with the loss of so many 

people, it’ll be necessary for new leaders to come forward and 

show the type of leadership and characteristics that are required 

in times of trouble, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s an honour to be able to add my support to this motion, 

and my thoughts and prayers go out to everyone in Poland and 

those in Saskatchewan who have ties to Poland. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to put some remarks on the record 

regarding this tragedy in Poland. Mr. Speaker, the community 

that I grew up in has many immigrants that came from Poland, 

the very common names of Yaworski and Paslowski, and many 

of those people are no doubt today feeling the pain that anyone 

would feel when you have a loss of people that are direct 

descendants probably of some relatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, the members have very, very 

eloquently stated the tragedy, the circumstances regarding the 

tragedy, and the fact that we as well in a democratic society 

grieve for those individuals, for those families that are left, for 

those people that are still there to move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that happened just a very short 

time ago — March the 2nd in fact — I had the opportunity to 

meet with the consul general of Poland who was here. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I understand that you met with him as well, Marek 

Ciesielczuk. Now Marek, this was his first visit to 

Saskatchewan and he was very proud, he was very proud of the 

things that had happened in Poland regarding moving Poland 

forward, one of the leaders in the European Union. And he 

talked about the potential, the potential of Poland and the fact 

that he saw things happening in Poland that he was very proud 

of. And he was recognizing the leadership of many, not just 

President Kaczynski, but others. 

 

I also had the opportunity to meet with a senior trade 

commissioner from Poland who’s based in Montreal, 

Wlodzimierz Leszczynski. And Mr. Leszczynski also indicated 

how there was an opportunity for Saskatchewan and Poland to 

continue to grow, continue to grow, and not only for the fact 

that immigrants from Poland had helped build our province. 

And we know that there are many communities where the 

number of immigrants who came from Poland in the early part 

of the 1900s have in fact contributed a great deal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of . . . I know many, many residents 

in the Canora-Pelly constituency and across Saskatchewan who 

are of Polish descent. We of course extend our condolences to 

all of those people in Poland who right now are dealing with a 

tragedy that is of such proportion that I think most of us cannot 

fathom what that really means. So I extend my condolences to 

those people as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to add 

a few remarks. It was an interesting weekend as we all had this 

unfold. And it was interesting from our own family’s 

perspective as my brother was in Poland this weekend actually. 

He was visiting Poland. 

 

Some of you know he works for a mining company in the 

province and was visiting a foundry in Poland but stopped by 

my uncle’s graveyard. My uncle was buried in Poland from 

World War II, flying aid into Poland after doing the things that 

soldiers do. 

 

But I just wanted to put this on record, that many of us, whether 

of Polish descent or not of Polish descent, we feel very strongly 

about when we see this kind of thing happening that we should 

rally together and support each other in these times of loss. 

 

We were as a family very proud because my uncle was awarded 

a medal from Poland for doing that kind of thing, flying aid into 

Poland during World War II. And so we were proud of being 

recognized by the Government of Poland, and we just want to 

say back to the people of Poland that we feel the pain they’re in 

today. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one 

presented by the Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to the people 

of Poland on the tragic death of their president, Lech 

Kaczynski, his wife Maria and 94 others including many 

distinguished public servants, among them the army chief 

of staff, national bank president, deputy foreign minister, 

army chaplain, head of the national security office, deputy 

parliament Speaker, and civil rights commissioner; and 

further 

 

That this Assembly extend our condolences to all the 

people of Polish ancestry throughout Saskatchewan and 

Canada during this difficult time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

move: 

 

That the resolution just adopted, along with the oral 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4713 

tributes, be transmitted by Mr. Speaker to the ambassador 

of Poland to Canada and forwarded to the people of 

Poland. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — This motion would have to be moved by 

leave. Would leave be granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That the resolution just adopted, along with the oral 

tributes, be transmitted by Mr. Speaker to the ambassador 

of Poland and forwarded to the people of Poland. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1202 through 1217. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1202 through 1217 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 1218 through 1225. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1218 through 1225 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 1226 through 1234. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1226 through 1234 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 108 — The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join into the discussion on Bill No. 108, An Act to 

amend The Cities Act and to make a consequential amendment 

to The Land Surveys Act, 2000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in dealing with legislation, Mr. Speaker, especially 

legislation around cities, it’s always of course important to get it 

right. It’s important that the amendments that are put forward, 

looking at a particular piece of legislation, speak to needs in the 

community, speak to the changes that individuals in the 

communities being affected want, changes that they think are 

important, and changes that they think will make the situation 

better as opposed to worse. 

 

When looking at cities, Mr. Speaker, as you know, my 

constituency, Massey Place, is in Saskatoon. So as a member 

representing a portion of one of the great cities in our province, 

I of course have a special interest in hoping that this legislation 

hits the mark and the types of changes that are in this legislation 

are in fact what people are interested in and what people want. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, having had a chance to go through Bill No. 

108, An Act to amend The Cities Act and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Land Surveys Act, 2000, I 

appreciated the opportunity to read some of the introductory 

remarks made by the minister on November 16th, 2009, when 

he introduced this Bill to the legislature and made a few 

comments. And in listening to his comments, Mr. Speaker, he 

identified a number of areas that will be affected by the 

proposed changes through these amendments. The one area, Mr. 

Speaker, that he mentioned was that this Bill — this is a quote 

from the minister — that “this Bill proposes to enhance city 

authority by reducing provincial oversight of city street sales, 

leases, and closures, and improving the tools available to a city 

to collect and enforce property taxes on mobile homes and 

house trailers,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that first point that’s been identified, it’s changes, Mr. 

Speaker, that are being brought forward in this amendment that 

affects the relationship between the province and the 

relationship with municipalities as it relates to city street sales, 

leases, and closures. In the comments, there was reference, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was overlapping jurisdiction where it wasn’t 

necessarily clear who in fact was responsible for the one 

particular area. So in instances like that, Mr. Speaker — if the 

minister’s characterization of the situation is accurate and 

reflects the situation on the ground in our municipalities, if that 

is in fact what is wanted and desired — then that type of change 

that makes the jurisdictional boundaries and responsibilities 

more clear is likely a good thing. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I would have a word of caution on that 

issue. We’ve seen in many instances, Mr. Speaker, when there 

has been a relationship between the provincial government and 

a municipal government or a regional health board or a school 

board, we see a number of troubling instances in the last couple 

of years, and especially in the last couple of months and 

especially in the last budget, we’ve seen instances when 

responsibilities have been off-loaded from the province to other 

levels of government or other levels of authority. And I know 



4714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

that that is a concern for many groups. 

 

So it would be my hope that in this situation, when dealing with 

streets and roadways, that type of thing, where there is a more 

clear explanation in terms of who’s responsible for what and 

how something gets done, then that would be a good thing. But 

I worry, Mr. Speaker, if the off-loading of responsibility from 

the provincial government to another level of government or an 

authority, I’m worried that if that offloading is one that places a 

greater burden on the other level of government or other 

authority, then that’s a problem. 

 

We can think of some examples, Mr. Speaker, in the recent 

budget on health care for example, with cuts being made, the 

budget not clearly stating what funding is required for the 

settlement of health care workers, and that is in turn a burden 

that will have to be assumed by the health regions, many health 

regions, Mr. Speaker, that are already running a deficit. 

 

So in that situation where we saw a change of responsibility, we 

saw an off-loading from one level to another. I would suggest 

that it will be detrimental to that other level and, Mr. Speaker, 

that that off-loading is in fact a way for the provincial 

government to make its own balance sheet, supposed balance 

sheet, look better, have less red on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s my hope that on this issue here with Bill No. 108, as 

changes are made with respect to jurisdiction on things like 

roadways between the provincial government and 

municipalities, I hope, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not a similar 

situation as we’ve seen in health care where the government is 

off-loading responsibility, their own responsibility, off-loading 

their own requirement to be funding health care properly. I hope 

that same experience, Mr. Speaker, is not happening on the 

front of municipalities with respect to roadways. 

 

There are other examples as well, Mr. Speaker, when 

off-loading by this government has not been done in a way that 

is actually helpful to the other level of government or other 

authority. We saw another example in the recent budget on the 

issue of funding for teachers’ salaries in upcoming negotiations 

where that money is not clearly stated in the budget, and the 

burden will be placed on school boards to pick up the 

difference. 

 

And so we have another example, Mr. Speaker, where the 

government says one thing, says that they’re about more clearly 

explaining the roles of one level of government to another level 

of government or to another authority. But when you look at the 

fine print, when you look at the details, it’s actually an 

off-loading of burden simply to make themselves look better as 

opposed to dealing with the issues at hand. 

 

So it’s my genuine hope that in the minister’s explanation, 

when he said that this Bill proposes to enhance city authority by 

reducing provincial oversight of city street sales, leases, and 

closures, and improving the tools available to a city to collect 

and enforce property taxes on mobile homes and house trailers 

. . . So the first issue, Mr. Speaker, was about the off-loading of 

the responsibility. And it’s my hope that that’s done in a way 

that does in fact make life better, make life easier for 

individuals in our municipalities, for the administrators, for the 

elected officials in our municipalities working. I hope this 

change does do that and does not place a greater burden on 

them, greater expectations on them without adequate resources 

to match that expectation that is put upon them because we’ve 

seen the track record in health care. We’ve seen the track record 

in education where they’ve chosen, the members opposite have 

chosen not to provide the resources along with the 

responsibility. When that happens, it’s to the detriment of all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now it’s interesting. The changes, Mr. Speaker, that are 

suggested in this first issue that the minister brought forward 

was on the issue of improving the tools available to a city to 

collect and enforce property taxes on mobile homes and house 

trailers. So the idea, Mr. Speaker, that if you have individuals 

living in a mobile home or a house trailer, that the government 

is able to properly tax those individuals as they are supposed to, 

able to tax them for the services that they are accessing, my 

concern, Mr. Speaker, with only having the ability or . . . In 

looking at the minister’s comments, my concerns are for the 

individuals living in those mobile trailers or the mobile homes 

and because we know that individuals living in mobile homes, 

as with individuals throughout Saskatchewan, have faced a 

great number of challenges in the last couple of years with this 

Sask Party government. 

 

We know that for many people in Saskatchewan — perhaps 

especially many people living in mobile homes and trailers — 

that life has become more difficult. Life has become more 

expensive under the Sask Party government. And there are a 

number of reasons. And I can see why perhaps the changes 

brought forward in this legislation, addressing the specific issue 

of taxes, could perhaps be coming forward because, Mr. 

Speaker, if individuals are not able to pay their taxes, if they’re 

living in a mobile home and there’s problems with them being 

able to make ends meet and pay their taxes, I think there are a 

number of reasons why that could be. And I think those reasons, 

Mr. Speaker, are directly tied to the changes that we’ve seen 

under the Sask Party government and how life has become 

more expensive and less affordable under the Sask Party 

government. 

 

I mean the first issue you could think of, Mr. Speaker, is the 

government’s broken promise on providing a percentage of PST 

[provincial sales tax] revenue to municipalities — a promise 

that was clearly made, Mr. Speaker, to municipalities, a promise 

that municipalities were expecting. They were expecting this 

because they recognized that, with the way commodity prices 

work and with the examples that we’ve seen over the course of 

time in Saskatchewan, we know that commodity prices do go 

up and down. And perhaps, you know, in the last year we see 

evidence of the up-and-down nature, the cyclical nature of 

commodity prices. 

 

And I know members opposite . . . having predicted $3 billion 

in potash revenue, predictions that were hugely over what 

common sense people would suggest would be realistic and 

reachable, I could see why, Mr. Speaker, when we have that 

kind of budgeting and that kind of talk on the issues of 

commodities coming out of the government, I can see why 

municipalities were counting on that revenue from the PST 

because the whole idea of providing a percentage of the PST 

revenue to municipalities was that they would be in some way 

buffered or taken out of that up-and-down nature of resource 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4715 

revenue, that they would be able to more accurately predict 

what their revenue would be in the coming years and in turn 

they would be able to do better planning at the municipal level 

and provide better services to people in their local area. And 

that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I could see why municipalities may in fact want to have a 

better access to taxing mobile homes and trailers because every 

dollar is precious to municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and especially 

when municipalities are facing the broken promise that they’ve 

experienced from the Sask Party government on the issue of 

revenue sharing. I can see how they would want to have the 

issue of being able to tax mobile homes clear and 

straightforward and have it set up in such a way that those that 

should be paying are paying. So I see that as pretty obvious why 

municipalities might want that type of change because of the 

broken promise that they’re facing with the Sask Party 

government. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now why might municipalities have trouble accessing the tax 

dollars of people living in trailer parks or trailer homes? There 

could be a number of reasons why they might be having 

problems, but I think it’s because, Mr. Speaker, life under the 

Sask Party has become more expensive and less affordable. 

 

For example if the person living in that mobile home is a 

student, Mr. Speaker, they’re seeing their tuition go up a lot 

over the last few years, Mr. Speaker. So you might have an 

individual living in a trailer park, living in a mobile home, 

wanting to improve their lot in life. Perhaps it’s a young person 

or perhaps it’s an older person that’s decided to go back and 

receive educational training so that they are better prepared for 

the workforce and better prepared to fully participate in the 

modern economy that we have here in Saskatchewan. Now that 

individual, Mr. Speaker, when one is in school, if they’re living 

in a mobile home or any type of housing for that matter, Mr. 

Speaker, life is becoming more expensive because tuition is 

going up, and that’s a pattern that we’ve seen under the Sask 

Party government. We see lots of talk about this so-called 

tuition management system, Mr. Speaker, but at the end of the 

day, any student living in a mobile home in any part of the 

province, all they can safely assume about a tuition 

management strategy is that tuition will be going up. 

 

So I can see, Mr. Speaker, why — if you have a student living 

in a mobile home — I can see why they are perhaps having 

problems paying their property taxes because under the Sask 

Party government life has become much more expensive. 

 

Now if one is living in a mobile home in a trailer park, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s necessary to ensure that the mobile home is 

hooked up to all the utilities in the municipality. So an 

individual needs heat in that mobile home. And this leads me to 

another area, Mr. Speaker, where life has become more 

expensive under the Sask Party government. And I can see why 

individuals living in a mobile home might be having trouble 

paying their property taxes because, Mr. Speaker, under the 

Sask Party government we have seen utility rates go up. We 

have seen rates for SaskEnergy go up. We have seen rates for 

SaskPower go up. And every indication, Mr. Speaker, from 

members opposite is that that will continue, that this is their 

way of operating business. 

 

So in the same way that in my earlier remarks about the issue of 

jurisdictional responsibilities and how off-loading a provincial 

responsibility can be a burden on municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 

changes to things like utility rates can also be an off-loading 

and placing a burden on Saskatchewan people — the taxpayers, 

the ratepayers here in the province. 

 

And so I know that is a concern because many people, many 

people living in mobile homes, Mr. Speaker, they are having to 

pay their property taxes, and that can cause problems for them 

because they are paying more in tuition if they’re a student or if 

their children are pursuing post-secondary education. They are 

paying more in natural gas to heat their home, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re paying more for electricity in order to run their 

appliances, plug in their car, and do everything else that we do 

with electricity. So I can see problems. 

 

Now the individuals living in mobile homes who are paying 

property taxes . . . changes that in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

in Bill 108, are designed to make it easier, make it more clear in 

how municipalities are supposed to and can tax individuals 

living in mobile homes. I know the individuals living in the 

mobile homes that are paying the property taxes; I can 

understand some more reasons why they may be having trouble 

paying their property taxes. 

 

And another area can be the area of camping fees. We’ve seen 

camping fees go up, Mr. Speaker, and so everyone . . . Holidays 

are an important time for everyone in the province. Everyone 

likes to get out and experience all the great corners and nooks 

and crannies in Saskatchewan, and that often means people like 

going camping. And camping traditionally, Mr. Speaker, is an 

affordable way for many families to vacation. 

 

You know, some people do have big fifth wheelers or 

motorhomes that can cost a lot of money, and that’s fine. Some 

people like to travel in luxury. Other people, Mr. Speaker, like a 

pup tent. Other people like to sleep under the stars. Other 

people might have an old tent trailer and might have a favourite 

campground that they’ve traditionally gone to. But what these 

individuals have experienced, Mr. Speaker, is that life has 

become more expensive for them to go on their camping trips. 

That reduces the amount of disposable income they have, Mr. 

Speaker, for paying things like their property tax bill. So I see 

how that’s a problem. 

 

The area of health care, Mr. Speaker, if there’s an individual 

living in a mobile home having trouble paying their property 

taxes, another reason they might be having problems or might 

be worried are because of the recent changes the Sask Party 

government have made with respect to providing coverage to 

visit a chiropractor. 

 

Many individuals in the province, some people, many 

individuals truly benefit and value and appreciate the 

relationship they have with their chiropractor. Because of either 

a workplace injury or a recreational injury, some sort of 

incident that’s happened in life, they’ve found it necessary to go 

to a chiropractor. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, having met 

with a good number of them at my constituency office and 

replied to a great number of emails and having returned many 



4716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

phone calls, this is an issue that those that visit a chiropractor, 

they truly do appreciate, value, and respect the role of their 

chiropractor in maintaining their health. 

 

Now I wish, Mr. Speaker, the respect that those individuals 

have for their chiropractor, I wish that same level of respect 

would have been present by members of the government in 

dealing with the chiropractors in the province. Because what we 

saw from the government was the complete opposite of respect. 

 

We saw the government engaging in negotiations, going 

through negotiations, coming to an agreement, suggesting that 

they were bargaining in good faith. They come up with a new 

agreement to fund chiropractic services in the province, and 

what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They did not show up to sign 

the agreement. They went through this huge charade, this 

façade of bargaining in good faith, and then at the end of the 

day when the minister was supposed to show up to sign the 

paper, he was a no-show. And that’s a lack of respect for 

individuals in the profession. 

 

So I know as I’m speaking to many people in the province, 

individuals that are receiving chiropractic services, many of 

whom may be living in a mobile home, having trouble paying 

their bills, I know when they’ve seen that kind of treatment of a 

well-respected profession here in the province, it worries them. 

Because they say if the government is willing to treat a 

respected profession in that manner, I can only, I can only . . . I 

can’t even think, I can’t even think how they’ll respect me as an 

individual, me as a taxpayer, me as a person living in a trailer 

park in any one of our constituencies throughout the province. 

 

Because what’s happened, similar to the other situations, there 

has been an off-loading of responsibility. Instead of the 

government funding a service — a service that may cost a 

dollar but it’s shown, Mr. Speaker, that it saves many other 

dollars down the road — instead of funding that properly, it’s 

being off-loaded to individuals in the province, some of the 

most vulnerable. 

 

So you have an individual living in a trailer park, living in a 

mobile home, faced with changed legislation in how the 

municipality is able to access the tax dollars that they should be 

paying. 

 

And I understand and I completely recognize the need for 

municipalities to access tax dollars. That makes perfect sense to 

me. But I also can greatly empathize with the individuals living 

in mobile homes, living in a trailer park faced with increased 

tuition, faced with increased SaskPower rates, faced with 

increased SaskEnergy rates, faced with paying more to visit 

their chiropractor, faced with more when they go and visit their 

favourite campground in the province. I can understand, Mr. 

Speaker, why these individuals living in that trailer park might 

have trouble paying their bills. 

 

And the issue of chiropractors raises an important one when it 

comes to a user-pay health care system, and I know this would 

worry many . . . It worries myself; it worries many people in my 

constituency. And I think it worries many of those individuals 

living in the mobile homes being asked to pay property taxes. 

And that’s the issue raised by the Minister of Finance in North 

Battleford when he suggested that user fees were part of the 

solution for health care and that that debate should occur. And it 

seems puzzling to me, Mr. Speaker, why that conversation 

would be opened up, why that door would be opened. If their 

true convictions to their core were that that was not the way to 

go, why would that issue be brought up? And I know that 

worries many people living in trailer parks, many people that 

are being asked to pay property taxes. That is a great concern. 

 

So that addresses some of the first areas addressed by the 

minister in his opening remarks when he introduced Bill No. 

108, this issue of clearing the responsibilities and the roles 

between the municipality and the provincial government.  

 

In my opinion, I say that’s a good thing so long as it’s not a 

huge off-loading of responsibility and burden and cost, a huge 

off-loading that we’ve seen in so many areas with how this 

provincial government deals with either a school board or a 

health region or another level of government. So long as it is 

improving the situation, so long as it is not making life more 

difficult for people in municipalities, so long as it’s not 

providing . . . so long as it’s not stipulating increased 

responsibilities without the ability to properly pay for and 

afford those expectations and changes, then in my opinion at 

least I think that is a reasonable thing. 

 

And if the consultation, the proper consultation has occurred 

with the municipalities, Mr. Speaker, that too needs to occur. 

And I’ve given a number of speeches on this government’s 

inability to properly consult with important groups in the 

province, and that won’t be my speech today. But I will say 

there’s a great amount of evidence to suggest that when it 

comes to consultation, this government certainly falls short, and 

that is the consistent track record. 

 

So the second area the minister commented on in his 

introductory remarks on Bill No. 108 is that he says, “This Bill 

proposes to provide the option for city councils to require 

criminal record checks in the election process.” So this is a 

request, Mr. Speaker, coming from, I assume, individuals at the 

municipal level wanting to ensure that we have the best, most 

honest, most competent individuals serving in elected office in 

this province. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that’s a sentiment that is appreciated 

and shared by people in this Assembly and shared by many 

people around the province. Whether it is at the federal level, 

the provincial level or the municipal level, or whether it’s to 

elected school boards, whether it is election to serve in a First 

Nation, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that we have good, 

honest people working in those areas. 

 

So again tying in to my earlier comments about consultation, if 

the proper consultation has occurred with municipalities, if the 

desire for this change of providing criminal record checks or 

requiring criminal record checks in the case of election, if that is 

a request that’s coming forward from municipalities, I think 

that’s a good thing because it provides greater transparency, and 

it provides a greater understanding of the backgrounds of 

individuals. 

 

Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, we can do a criminal . . . A 

criminal record check can be done and perhaps information can 

be learned. But I would . . . The member from Rosemont earlier 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4717 

today in a member’s statement talked about pardons and the 

granting of pardons here in the country. So this issue of 

criminal record checks also opens up the issue in the 

consideration of pardons and whether or not an individual 

receiving the pardon is in fact worthy to receive the pardon, 

raising the issue that perhaps the individual being granted the 

pardon did not deserve the pardon. 

 

We saw in recent days, Mr. Speaker, with the situation of a 

walker, that a pardon was granted for someone who was a 

convicted sex offender. A pardon was granted, not because this 

individual had . . . that there was evidence that the reform had 

taken place or that children and youths were safe in his care or 

around him, but more or less, as I understand through media 

reports and having done some initial reading on it, Mr. Speaker, 

that it’s done just as a matter of routine business. That you can 

still have an individual who has not reformed, an individual 

who has done many things, an individual who still can pose a 

great threat to the public but could be granted a pardon. 

 

So it’s an interesting question, Mr. Speaker. If we’re going 

down this road of requiring criminal record checks for the 

municipal level, we have to ask ourselves how pardons play 

into that process. Is the pardon not screening out an individual 

who still poses a great threat, an individual who has not 

reformed, an individual who has not changed his or her 

behaviour? So we have to ask ourselves. 

 

True, the municipality might be requesting this change, but we 

have to look at the intent of their request. And I would think 

their desire for this request would be to ensure a greater level of 

transparency, a greater level of safety for their constituents, and 

safety for their financial resources as well. Because as I said, 

under the Sask Party government, life has become more 

expensive, so every dollar that municipalities have in their 

possession is an important one. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So it may be fine to bring in the requirement for criminal record 

checks. But we have to ask ourselves, is this going to 

accomplish what we want to do? And I think what 

municipalities want to do is provide greater transparency for the 

backgrounds of their elected officials and provide a greater 

amount of security and safety for their constituents and for their 

resources. 

 

And it’s been clear from the past few days that an individual, I 

think, that most people in the country would deem as 

dangerous, most people in the country would deem as 

unreformed, most people in the country would see as a threat to 

their children, when an individual like that is the recipient of a 

pardon, I think it greatly calls into question the system of 

granting pardons as routine business and whether or not the 

individual is actually deserving of receiving that pardon. 

 

I don’t pretend to be an expert of the court system or the 

granting of pardons. In some ways these are my thoughts after 

seeing recent events and doing some initial reading and talking 

to some people. But I know in bringing forward these changes 

in Bill No. 108, changes that would require the provision of 

criminal record checks at the municipal level for those 

interested in serving their fellow constituents, then we have to 

ask if criminal record checks are the silver bullet that will 

ensure municipal individuals operate with greater transparency, 

greater accountability, and that on those that still present a 

threat are being handled in a proper manner. 

 

Well the last area, Mr. Speaker, that was mentioned by the 

minister in introducing this Bill, the last area where he said 

these amendments would affect life for Saskatchewan people, 

he says, “Third, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments 

in several areas that improve the effectiveness of the Act on 

technical and administrative matters.” 

 

So again I would tie back my comments to my earlier remarks. 

When making any sort of change, any sort of amendment to 

legislation, it’s important to get it right. It’s important to ensure 

that the changes that are being suggested will in fact make the 

situation better. 

 

So it’s my hope that with these technical details and the fine 

print, as problems are identified and suggestions are thought of, 

it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the proper consultation has 

occurred between the provincial government and levels of 

municipal government to ensure that the technical changes in 

this Act, Bill No. 108, are in fact hitting the mark, that they’re 

not causing more problems, because it should always be the 

desire of government to make life better, to make life more 

straightforward, and to improve the efficiency of operation of 

government, whether that’s at the provincial or municipal level 

or whether that’s in a school board or health region. 

 

That can’t be used as an excuse, Mr. Speaker, for off-loading a 

burden, for off-loading debt. It can’t be an excuse for making 

hurtful cuts, short-sighted cuts. We saw today in question 

period the issue of Dutch elm disease, how the government’s 

desire to look for money under every possible cushion in the 

government sofa, taking $500,000 out of a program that 

protects trees. 

 

We can see how in many instances the cuts have been 

short-sighted. The actions by government have been 

short-sighted. They haven’t been looking long term, thinking 

with a long-term strategy in how to best prepare the province 

for the future. 

 

So it’s my hope that with these smaller technical details that 

affect the administration of the Act, it’s my hope that the proper 

consultation has occurred with the municipalities and that the 

spirit of the changes is one of a desire for true improvement as 

opposed to the other track record we’ve seen with this 

government of off-loading and of short-sighted cuts. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, in speaking on Bill No. 108, An Act 

to amend The Cities Act and to make a consequential 

amendment to The Land Surveys Act, 2000, my comments have 

been organized in three areas. The one area was about 

addressing the changes that are being brought forward by 

government that would off-load some of the government’s 

responsibility to the municipal level. I said that’s fine so long as 

it’s actually making the situation better, and that it’s not an 

unfair off-loading of responsibility and cost. 

 

I also said on that issue, Mr. Speaker, with those changes being 

directed at the ability of municipalities to tax mobile homes and 



4718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

trailers. I understand why municipalities want to go after every 

possible tax dollar. I understand why they want to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’ve been faced with a broken promise. 

They’ve been faced with a broken promise on the sharing of 

PST revenue from the provincial government. So I understand 

why they want to go after those tax dollars. 

 

And I also understand the very real problems that people living 

in those mobile homes may be facing because they’re facing 

increased tuition. They’re facing increased SaskPower bills. 

They’re facing increased SaskEnergy bills. They’re facing 

increased camping fees. They’re facing increased costs to get 

health care. There are increased costs across the board because 

life has become more expensive under the Sask Party 

government. 

 

So that was my first section of comments. My second section, 

Mr. Speaker, was on the issue of city councils to require 

criminal record checks in the electoral process. I said so long as 

the proper consultation has occurred with municipalities, I can 

see merit in this. But we have to ask ourselves as legislators — 

given the recent incidents we’ve seen around the issue of 

granting of pardons to individuals that are not reformed, that are 

not safe to be around young people — we have to ask ourselves 

whether with the granting of pardons as routine business, 

whether or not by introducing criminal record checks, whether 

that is the silver bullet that we need with respect to making 

operations in the municipality run better, run more efficiently, 

and in a more transparent manner. 

 

And my third area of comments, Mr. Speaker, was around the 

area of administrative changes that are of a technical nature and 

designed to streamline a process and make it better. So long as 

that is the actual intent, so long as it’s not the off-loading, and 

so long as it’s not the short-sighted cuts that we’ve seen in so 

many areas . . . Whether it’s Dutch elm, whether it’s 

chiropractic services, there are so many examples, Mr. Speaker, 

where this government has gone after small amounts of money 

to make a short-sighted gain that will have a long-term 

consequence and negative effect on the people of the province. 

 

So, so long as the technical changes are not of a hurtful nature, 

then I can see the merit in going forward with those changes. 

But that requires that proper consultation has occurred, 

something that this government has proven that it is not very 

good at achieving. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

No. 108, and at this time the opposition is prepared to send this 

Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs that 

Bill No. 108, The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 108, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 109 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to rise in 

this House and take part in the debate on this particular Bill. As 

a representative of the fine folks of Regina Northeast, I know 

I’ve said this before, Mr. Speaker, but it bears repeating: that 

whenever you travel this province of Saskatchewan, you meet 

nothing but fine people, and I can assure you, you won’t find 

any finer people than those in Regina Northeast. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is a not only a pleasure. It’s an honour to be 

able to represent them in this fine Assembly and, in this 

particular case, to take part in the debate on this Bill, Bill 109, 

the Act to amend the municipal Act and to make related 

amendments to the local government elections Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes I think perhaps we overlook the 

important role that local governments play in the administrative 

procedures of this province and to move this province forward 

in a very progressive way. And I’ve had the opportunity in the 

past, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure many, many members in this 

Assembly also have . . . is had the opportunity to serve in local 

government. I had the opportunity of being the councillor for 

division 5 in the RM [rural municipality] of Clayton 333, a rural 

municipality located in the northeast side of the province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it truly was an honour. 

 

It was, I suppose, my first way of entering into the world of 

politics at a local level. But it’s in some ways a very demanding 

role because it’s an area . . . of course it’s your home area. Most 

cases you’re representing your home area. And your friends and 

your neighbours, they become your ratepayers and your 

constituents, so it becomes a pretty demanding role. 

 

And I find it very important, and I believe very much in the 

importance and the role that’s played by municipal government 

and the representatives thereof to be able to move the area 

forward in a progressive way and to do so by extracting the best 

value for the dollars spent because it’s the taxpayers’ dollars 

that you’re spending. It’s your money as a taxpayer, but it’s also 

the money of your friends and your neighbours that you are 

using when you’re making that decision in regards to the 

decisions of a local government. 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4719 

Now when we speak of rural municipalities, I think it’s 

automatic that the first thing that comes into mind as a 

responsibility of a rural municipality would be to look after the 

roads in our municipality. And it certainly is a primary 

responsibility, and it’s always been a very important 

responsibility. 

 

And I can remember when the RM of Clayton that I had the 

opportunity of representing, I can remember as a youngster, the 

roads in that municipality were being improved at the fastest 

possible rate that the municipality and the officials within the 

municipality could at that time. 

 

But as the case, I believe, right across this province, it was a 

very dense population. There was perhaps a farm family on 

almost every quarter section of land. Certainly there was a farm 

family about a mile apart down the road, in some cases even 

less than that, and therefore there was a lot of demand for the 

improvement of the roads within the municipality. And I can 

remember as a youngster going to elementary school, well 

probably even past my high school years, before the road where 

my folks farmed was improved to the point where it was 

considered an all-weather road. 

 

Prior to that it was simply a dirt road that had I believe the local 

folks, the local people living along that road, chipped in on a 

regular basis and would pay part of the cost of having the road 

gravelled. And part of that cost would be shared by the 

municipality. The other part was shared by those people who 

lived along the road in order to be able to travel that road, 

particularly in the summertime when the rains would come. 

 

And if you’ve ever had the opportunity of travelling down a dirt 

road — a dirt road in Saskatchewan — after rain you know full 

well that that can be quite a challenge. And when that road was 

the only road you had to get in and out of your farmyard, well 

then of course it became a very important link to the outside 

world, and you would do what you could to improve that. 

 

And in this case it was the municipality, came up with a 

program where they would share in the costs of the gravel if the 

ratepayers who lived along that road would share in the costs 

also. And it was a good program, Mr. Speaker. It was a program 

that stretched the municipal dollars and made them be able to 

do a little bit more with the ratepayers’ dollars that they 

collected through the taxes. And it provided the opportunity for 

individuals — farmers who lived along that particular road and 

ratepayers lived along that road — to be able to chip in and then 

have gravel on that road so that when it did rain that they would 

have an all-weather road. They could get out to town or get 

back from town if they were in town and got caught in a rain 

storm. It was quite important, and it was certainly a step 

forward. 

 

Then came of course the extension of the grid roads program in 

this province which is I think a very valuable program and one 

that’s probably often overlooked . . . at the design of that road 

when it was first implemented and the design of that system 

when it was first implemented, how important it was to link the 

entire province together through a good quality, all-weather 

road. And as a result of that, we ended up with a really good 

network of municipal roads, municipal grid roads which are 

built to a high standard, a relatively high standard and that are 

able to withstand in a lot of cases the pressures of the 

modern-day farming, the modern-day farming having changed 

so much, so much in the last 20 years or 25 years. 

 

Twenty five years ago it was commonplace where, at least up in 

our area there, for a farmer to be able to take his proceeds, his 

grain to town to the elevator which by the way was located in a 

community. It was usually about every seven miles apart along 

the main line, along the railroad line I should say. 

 

And in the RM of Clayton’s situation, the railroad ran along 

basically the southern border of the RM, the sort of border of 

the RM being Highway 49, and the rail line ran basically right 

along the 49 Highway. And it connected the communities of 

Stenen, Hyas, Norquay as the three major communities in the 

RM, and they of course were the communities in which the 

elevator companies established their elevators and their 

operations. And therefore the grain that was raised in the vast 

majority of the RM moved to these three communities. Some, I 

think, along the west side probably moved into the community 

of Sturgis, but the rest of them moved into the three major 

communities in the RM, and they were all located along the 

southern end of the RM. So you can understand, Mr. Speaker, 

there was a flow of commerce from the rural area, from the 

farm land, that flow went south and to the three communities. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Therefore those links, those grid roads that were eventually 

developed and within the RM became very important because 

they were important links of commerce for farmers to get their 

products to the elevator system or their livestock to market. It 

was also a way of bringing the needs of the farm community 

back in, whether it’d be the fuel or the fertilizers or whatever 

those requirements might be. 

 

So in Clayton’s situation, in some ways we were a bit lucky 

because the No. 8 Highway in the . . . searching my memory 

here, but it was in the early, probably the early ’60s when No. 8 

Highway was established north of Norquay that ran all the way 

through the communities of Arabella and Swan Plain and all up 

to the forest reserve, the Porcupine Forest Reserve. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, was really a boost to the area because the 

Department of Highways took over. 

 

Before that, it was really a grid road, and I would say probably 

a grid road that was built to the standards of the ’50s. And then 

it was, when the Department of Highways took it over, they put 

a thin membrane surface on it and made it dust-free. And for 

many years, it was adequate because for many years the traffic 

on that road was not a heavy traffic. It was a traffic of farmers 

using 2- and 3-ton trucks to move their products to market. And 

that particular road was able to withstand that pressure. 

 

The other arteries of commerce — running north of Hyas was a 

grid road, a well-built grid road, a well-maintained grid road. 

And of course the grid road south, north of Stenen, was a 

primary grid road. It later became a primary grid road and 

therefore was built even to a little higher standards and 

therefore was able to withstand the pressures of the movement 

of commerce from the farm gate to the railroad sidings and to 

the elevator systems. 

 



4720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

So, Mr. Speaker, those became very important arteries to that 

particular RM. And I would say that I take my hats off to those 

people who were municipal leaders in that particular RM prior 

to my involvement because they were the ones that developed 

in a lot of cases new roads, a lot of cases old roads that were not 

developed before, at least not in a meaningful way. And they 

improved them to a standard where they were able to be more 

than adequate to meet the needs of the community, the farm 

community at that time. 

 

But as you and I both know, the industry of farming has 

changed dramatically in the last 20, 25 years. And today we’re 

seeing the elevator system that were established by our 

grandfathers some seven miles apart, and we see that disappear 

and being replaced by great inland terminals, and in many cases 

anywhere from 50 to 100 miles from the farm gate. And 

therefore it makes it no longer economically viable for a farmer 

to be able to move his product with a 2- or 3-ton truck. 

 

So what do we see it replaced with? We see it replaced with 

semi-trailer units. And a lot of them are B-trains which are 

more axles, more train, more weight, and therefore more 

pressure on our road system. So we’re seeing that a lot of the 

thin membrane highways — and I will use No. 8 again for an 

example — thin membrane highways just simply aren’t able to 

hold up to that increased weight. 

 

So we are seeing, for example in the RM of Clayton’s case, 

they have now come up with a designated truck route that’s 

taken the heavy trucks off of No. 8 and moved it on the grid 

road system, moved it on the grid road system so that No. 8 

highway now is once again still a thin membrane highway. But 

with removing of that extra weight, that commerce of 

agriculture off that highway, it is now become economically 

viable to maintain that highway as a dust-free surface and to do 

so in a way that the highway-motoring public can use that road 

and do so free of dust. 

 

And it’s an important link because really No. 8 Highway is not 

only a link for the agricultural community, it’s also a link into 

the forest reserve and a link for tourism to the lakes that are 

located north of there. Some of the better fishing in 

Saskatchewan can be found there, Mr. Speaker. And so it is 

important that that highway be maintained in a dust-free 

environment, but to be done so that’s economically viable. So 

to achieve that, the Department of Highways and the RM have 

entered into an agreement that has established a truck route that 

takes that heavy truck route off of No. 8 Highway, moves it 

over onto the grid system, and moves it then out to No. 49 

Highway. 

 

Then that has resulted in the increased truck pressure on the 

municipal roads, this is true, Mr. Speaker, but it’s by far more 

economical to be able to maintain a grid road or a gravel road 

than it is a thin membrane dust-free surface road. And the 

government has reached an arrangement with the RM that in 

exchange for a certain fee each year, the RM maintains those 

roads. And they do so, I think, with the extra government 

money, they are able to put extra gravel on the roads. I think 

they even been able to put extra patrols on the road to, or extra 

times the patrols go on that road, to help maintain it. And I have 

had the opportunity, just as recently as this last weekend, to 

travel on some of that and it’s a well-kept road. It’s a well-kept 

road, and my hat’s off to the municipality for doing that. 

 

And I remember when I was on council, we looked at basically 

an early version of a designated road system, and that we 

looked at the fact that we had three grid roads that really 

serviced the municipality and serviced the farmers within that 

municipality. And we needed to ensure that we were able to 

maintain those roads to the best of . . . at all possible, I guess 

you’d say, for the ratepayers of the RM because it was not only 

the artery for commerce for farmers to move their product to 

market, it was also the artery of transportation for the folks to 

go, whether it be into larger communities for other services or 

health care services or whatever they may need. It was also the 

artery of transportation for our bus system for our children to go 

to high schools and for the buses to run. 

 

So those three roads were quickly identified as the major, major 

arteries of that area. Therefore it was essential that they be 

maintained in the best possible way so that we developed then a 

program. And it was an interesting program because when I got 

on council — there was of course the six councillors and the 

reeve — but when I got on council, we had an interesting 

system of allocation of gravel for the RMs for the division was 

done simply that way. The amount of money that was allocated 

for gravel that year was divided by six and each councillor 

would receive that much allocation. 

 

And at first glance you would think, well that was fair. But in 

some ways it was, and some ways it wasn’t. Because at that 

time No. 8 Highway which ran through the divisions No. 2 and 

No. 6 — pardon me, No. 1 and No. 3 — that particular 

highway, which was the main artery for the area and for the 

crop farmers in that area, was maintained by the Department of 

Highways so that the two councillors there really didn’t have to 

put any revenue into that particular artery, whereas the other 

four councillors did. We had to share the other two roads. 

 

So it was determined, and I think it was a step forward, that the 

three major grid roads — the one running east and west and the 

two running north and south — they would be gravelled at 100 

yards per mile per year, and that would come out of the overall 

gravel allocation. That would come out of the overall gravel 

allocation. So those three grid roads would get gravelled every 

year, and the cost of that gravel and the cost of putting that 

gravel on those roads would come out of the overall allocation. 

The balance of that allocation would then be divided by six and 

each municipality got, each councillor got that amount of 

revenue to spend or that much money to spend on gravel in his 

or her division. 

 

And that I think brought a greater degree of fairness to the 

system because it ensured that all ratepayers were contributing 

to the maintaining of the major thoroughfares, the major 

arteries. And it was done on a regular basis and it was the 

advice, basically of the engineers that were available to us 

through the Department of Municipal Affairs, that to maintain a 

grid road and to maintain a grid road in good standing and to be 

able to extend the life of that road, it would require a minimum 

of 100 yards of gravel per mile per year. 

 

So basically we were meeting the minimum. But as that 

program was introduced and carried on year in and year out, by 

about year 5, year 6 you could start to really see a difference in 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4721 

the roads. They were much better condition; they were firming 

up. There was a lot less soft spots. There was a lot less really 

requirement for specialized services in particular areas of the 

road and that they were being . . . I think you’d say just starting 

to see some level of improvement on those roads because of the 

regular maintenance and the fact that that regular maintenance 

meant that the roads were being kept in better condition. And 

even though there was increased traffic on those roads, even 

increased weight on those roads, the regular maintenance made 

the difference, I think. And if you travel on those roads today, I 

think we’ll all agree that they are in good shape. And like I say 

that with a degree of certainty, having driven on a couple of 

them just this recent weekend. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is a real importance that we 

have the proper programming, I guess you would say for . . . 

meet the needs of the present, but also looking into the 

foreseeable future and to be able to do so in a way that’s 

cost-efficient to the ratepayers of this great province of ours. 

And with the rail line and the decisions made by the rail 

companies over the last decade or thereabouts to abandon a 

number of, hundreds of miles of branch lines in this great 

province, that has of course moved that weight, that extra 

pressure — I call it pressure — of movement of grain over onto 

the road system. It’s taken it off the rail bed and moved it over 

onto the road system. And, you know, we wonder why that is. I 

suppose when the grain companies — and the railroad 

companies, rather — look at the efficiencies, they would 

probably look at a reduced amount of rail line means greater 

efficiencies for them and perhaps a greater bottom line. 

 

And yet in other jurisdictions in the world which have been 

established a lot longer than Canada — and I’m thinking about 

Europe in particular, Mr. Speaker — you’ll find that in Europe 

the greater emphasis is on the rail line and less emphasis on 

moving product by road. And that product, including people, if 

you look at Europe, you’ll find that they have a rail network 

there that’s very efficient, moves their product but also moves a 

massive amount of people, moves so in a timely fashion. 

 

And it’s interesting that Europe has seen fit to move, I suppose, 

more and more of their product to the railroad system, and we 

in Canada are moving away from that and moving more onto 

the truck system where you are hauling smaller amounts of 

units over greater distances, and I think probably at more cost 

per unit. And it’s interesting that we’ve decided to go that way, 

and we’ll see what the future holds, I suppose. But in the 

meantime, in the meantime what this does is it creates greater 

pressures on the roads. It creates a greater pressure on the 

municipalities out there to maintain these roads. 

 

And the municipalities are limited, they’re limited in their 

ability to generate resources because basically they have the 

opportunity to generate resources and revenues only from one 

source, and that’s the taxpayer. And that’s through a property 

tax levy, and that has I suppose created some issues out there in 

rural Saskatchewan. And I would hope that the government 

would look at the pressures that the local governments are 

under and look at meaningful ways to support them in a more 

financial, secure way. 

 

And it has to be in a way, Mr. Speaker, where the municipalities 

can count on that level of finance, count on that level of support 

so they can make long-term plans. I think it’s very important 

that we have RMs that take a look at their municipalities and 

look at developing designated road systems within that 

municipality to ensure that they are able to maintain those 

systems in an adequate way, maintain them at a level that’s 

affordable to the ratepayers, but also provides the services to 

those ratepayers because that’s very important. 

 

[16:00] 

 

It is very important, particularly in today’s world where the 

agriculture economy has changed so much. It used to be that 

you could take a truckload of grain to town if there was room in 

the elevator and so on and so forth. Today it’s different. You’re 

called. The companies will call you and say you have so long to 

deliver your grain. They want this particular grade and they 

know you have it. They give you a call and say, bring it in and 

you have so many days to deliver it. And in order to do that, 

you need to have the ability to rely on a road system that will 

support that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we have those services 

available to us in rural Saskatchewan. As the population of 

Saskatchewan thins out — and I will use that word, thins out — 

it becomes even more important because you’re starting to 

travel greater distances between communities. You’re starting 

to travel greater distances between farmsteads, and you’re 

starting to travel greater distances, both for your own personal 

use or whether that be the involvement of your industry, 

farming. 

 

But also for the school buses out there that travel, in a lot of 

cases, along isolated roads carrying our precious future. The 

children that are on those buses are our future. And we need to 

ensure that they have good quality roads to travel on whether it 

be in the summer, or whether it be in the spring or fall or the 

winter, that we . . . Despite maybe a winter storm, that that bus 

is still able to travel and travel with a fair amount of safety to 

ensure that the children are able to get to school or, more 

importantly, get home from school if caught in a winter storm. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is important that we have the ability for the 

municipalities to be able to identify what their needs are, and 

what their needs are as far as being able to maintain their roads, 

and which roads need to be maintained and to what level 

maintenance needs to be to ensure that we have a good quality, 

safe road to drive on so that we have the ability to move the 

farm product to the market, whether it be through grain to our 

grain inland terminal or perhaps livestock. 

 

Although in Saskatchewan today, I think their livestock 

population is dropping and dropping fairly rapidly. Although 

there has been some changes, some minor changes in some of 

the prices as I understand it, but it’s still not enough to cause 

people to say, hey I want to, I had decided to get out of the 

business, but I will now stay in it. I haven’t heard any of that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I did have the chance this last week though to talk to a young 

fellow. I say a young fellow. He’s younger than I am. He’s not 

necessarily young, but younger than I am, and he’d been in the 

business for over 15 years. And he told me that last year was 

going to be the last year, but definitely this is. 



4722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

And he’s calving out something like 120 head of cattle or 

something like that — pretty well on the downhill side of the 

calving operation. I think he had 20 or 22 head to go yet, to calf 

out, but other than that he was done. But he said that was it this 

year. He wasn’t going to put up his feed with the intentions of 

feeding it. He’d probably put up, bale the hay with the 

intentions of selling it, but he certainly wasn’t going to stay in 

business any longer; it was enough. He’d operated his farming 

operation long enough and at, what he said, had a loss each and 

every year to the point where it was no longer fun. And once 

you lose the fun in something, I suppose that it’s very difficult 

to continue on. He was telling me it was just getting difficult to 

get up to go out in the middle of the night to check on the cows 

calving because it just didn’t have the same spring in his step. 

 

But that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that 

municipalities are properly consulted because they are the folks 

that are on the front line. They are the folks that make the 

decision. They are the folks that know what are required in their 

community, and they know what the folks require. And this is 

why it is important that the government sit down and consult 

with these people to get first-line information, first-line 

information so that they can make the right decisions, and that 

government can make the right decisions on a level of support 

to meet the needs of those municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is very important that those discussions take 

place and that the government has done a fair amount of the 

consulting and has actually sat down with farm leaders in rural 

Saskatchewan and gotten the information right from those who 

are facing the problems each and every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill, Bill 109, the right title here, An 

Act to amend The Municipalities Act and to make related 

amendments to The Local Government Election Act is a Bill 

that needs further study, and it needs to be looked at closely. 

And it needs to have the ability for the legislature here to be 

able to ensure that the government has done its consultation, 

that the government has got the information it requires to make 

the right decisions and has incorporated that in this Bill. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the role of the committee within our 

structure here. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, we’ll let the committee do its work. 

We know that committee will do good work. We’ll know that 

committee will bring back recommendations, whether it be 

through the committee system to the legislature or perhaps 

through to the government and they will make, if necessary, 

they will make whatever changes may be identified. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s time that we sent this Bill on to committee 

so that the committee could have the opportunity to look at this 

Bill and do the work of the committee. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate and move this 

committee to . . . I just move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 109 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 109, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill now stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 110 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 110 — The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased today to rise and make a few remarks about The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, this a 

substantial rewrite of The Northern Municipalities Act and with 

substantial changes within the Act itself. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a few specific changes I’d like to 

spend my time on this afternoon. One is a change that provides 

for criminal record checks for those running for municipal 

office in northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 

that the issue of accountability and the issue of being able to 

rely upon criminal record checks to check whether or not you 

want specific individuals running for you for elected office is 

one that we should all adhere to, Mr. Speaker. I know by just a 

matter of routine within our own political party, the New 

Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, it’s a requirement that all 

candidates for election or for nomination — in fact prior to 

being nominated in their constituencies — have to supply to the 

party a criminal record check. 

 

Now a criminal record check is used as part of a screening tool 

to look at suitability of potential candidates for elected office. 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the type of tool that should be used 

by organizations, political parties, municipalities to ensure that 

in fact the people that are running for elected office adhere to a 

standard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the problems I have, though, with this particular 

legislation is, Mr. Speaker, this is a criteria that’s established for 

northern municipalities but isn’t necessarily universal in its 

application to all municipalities. Again, Mr. Speaker, although I 

think it’s a good idea. And it should be applied, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that it should applied more generally to all municipalities, 

Mr. Speaker, because I think it’s important that all municipal 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4723 

officials and all provincial officials and — for that matter — 

federal officials, all meet a very high standard of conduct and 

principles of positions, Mr. Speaker, prior to running for elected 

office and that the people of Saskatchewan should have a right 

or the people of a municipality should have the right to know 

whether or not an individual has a criminal record or has a past 

that should be questioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the difficulty with this is we find this in The 

Northern Municipalities Act, but we don’t find it in other 

municipal Acts, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t see it in the 

Saskatchewan elections Act. Mr. Speaker, I think that would be 

an admirable change in The Elections Act, that it be a criteria 

that all candidates for election have to provide a criminal record 

check, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that they in fact have a 

criminal-free background, Mr. Speaker, and that those 

considerations have to be made and widely known, if not 

eliminating . . . I don’t believe it should be necessarily the case 

of elimination of a candidate, Mr. Speaker, but it should have to 

be a known to the general public that they are electing 

somebody with that particular background, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So where we require that for a select group of municipal 

officials in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 

require that today for provincial representatives, members of the 

legislature like myself and yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

others. We are not required to provide that same level of 

scrutiny. Mr. Speaker, I think that it would be appropriate that 

all members would have to provide that level of scrutiny. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in northern Saskatchewan, by the 

nature of their communities and the distance between 

communities, have a number of unique needs that aren’t 

necessarily the same in, as an example, highly populated cities 

or even smaller urban municipalities in southern Saskatchewan 

because some of the challenges in northern Saskatchewan, 

because of the remoteness to other areas create unique 

situations, Mr. Speaker. And so this legislation is trying to 

reflect upon those unique situations within this legislation, but 

also to bring it more into line with legislation, other municipal 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you can imagine, just providing some 

utilities and utility services in some communities in northern 

Saskatchewan might be more difficult, as an example, than 

providing those same utilities in a southern community. If you 

have a community, as an example, that doesn’t have road access 

year-round — and Wollaston Lake would be a good example, 

Mr. Speaker — there are certain challenges in providing 

services to a community without road access than there are in 

other communities where there are road access. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is about undertaking 

improvements to The Northern Municipalities Act and at the 

same time examining whether or not there needs to be specific 

legislation, specific sections to deal with issues in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that life in northern Saskatchewan 

is not necessarily the same as it is in southern communities, and 

the northern leaders need to have the ability to meet the 

challenges in different and more innovative ways in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker. You have a very small population in many 

cases over large geographical areas. Even in communities, 

you’ll see northern communities considerably more spread out 

than you will see in some urban areas in southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As well northern communities face unique social and economic 

challenges that governments need to be even more flexible and 

creative in working to establish even base services in their 

communities whether it be a service station or a grocery store, 

Mr. Speaker, or other very important services in their 

communities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is always important 

when you’re dealing with a piece of legislation that is as 

encompassing as this piece of legislation is, is that there be 

consultation with the communities and that communities feel 

that they have had input into the changes that are being made 

and into the direction the legislation is taking. 

 

Northern municipalities, like any municipalities, want 

autonomy. They want the independent right to make decisions 

in the best interest of their citizens. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

would like to be able to have taken into consideration in their 

decision making what’s best for their citizens in each and every 

case. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, as I indicated before, is a 

significant piece of legislation, some 170 to 200 pages in 

length, Mr. Speaker — basically a general rewrite of the entire 

northern municipalities . And, Mr. Speaker, because it’s so 

specific and such a significant rewrite, Mr. Speaker, that level 

of consultation needs to be greater than if it were just a matter 

of a few amendments. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we do understand that in general that the 

northern municipalities like the piece of legislation before us. 

With any piece of legislation, there are particular sections and 

areas where some of the leaders in northern Saskatchewan are 

not as comfortable as with other sections. And, Mr. Speaker, it 

is a process of both give and take. And northern leaders in 

general — my understanding is — see this as a positive step 

forward for their communities and for the people of the North. 

 

The one significant change that I had mentioned earlier, the 

criminal record checks, this is a positive step forward. But at the 

same time, as I’d indicated earlier, why is not the same level of 

concern there for southern municipalities, for those of us who 

have provincial responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, and for those 

from Saskatchewan quite frankly that have national 

responsibilities in elected life? 

 

I think we should always lead by example as politicians, 

provincial politicians. We should not impose upon somebody a 

standard that we wouldn’t want imposed upon ourselves. And I 

think that we should move with due haste, Mr. Speaker, if the 

members of the government cabinet are listening, to make it a 

criteria that all members of the provincial legislature also have 

to have criminal record checks. And if such, Mr. Speaker, have 

a criminal history or have been convicted of a criminal offence, 

that should be disclosed to the people of Saskatchewan for the 

simple reason that a criminal record should not necessarily 



4724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

exclude you from elected life, but I do think the public has a 

right to know and understand that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat disturbed that we would move, 

putting a criteria in northern Saskatchewan which are largely 

northern communities, are led by leaders of northern 

communities, but are largely of either Aboriginal or Métis 

history and ancestry, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And my concern 

is, why there and not across all of Saskatchewan? Why would 

we want to include a criteria for northern communities that we 

wouldn’t be prepared to include for all communities in 

Saskatchewan? But most importantly, why would we want to 

impose a law or a restriction upon people in northern 

Saskatchewan we wouldn’t and we don’t seem to be prepared to 

impose upon ourselves? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m a firm believer that governments need to lead 

by example. We as legislators need to lead by example. We 

need to set an example for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. So I do urge the government to bring forward an 

amendment to The Election Act requiring each and every one of 

us to have a criminal record check, Mr. Speaker, and that we 

should have to in fact disclose those . . . that information should 

be disclosed to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many, many people in Saskatchewan seem to have 

an interest in the fact that we are moving the criminal record 

checks for northern municipalities and not for all municipal 

officials in the province as well as provincial officials. I think 

I’ve spoken at some detail on this particular issue. And as I’ve 

indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the government to 

bring forward an amendment to The Election Act immediately 

to bring in criminal record checks for all elected officials in the 

provincial jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, whether it be members of 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker, or for that matter, members of 

municipal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated very early, this piece of legislation 

in general is supported by the majority of municipal leaders in 

northern Saskatchewan. It is a significant rewrite. I fully expect 

to see each of the next several years the minister responsible for 

Municipal Government bringing forward amendments. 

 

Any time you have a significant rewrite of this nature, it’s just 

about an annual occurrence that there be some amendments 

made to either correct oversights in the initial major rewrite or 

to, as you put a piece of legislation into practice, to make 

amendments that in fact better and improve the legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent a fair amount of time speaking on 

this particular Bill. I notice that I have many of my colleagues 

with a great deal of interest to speak to legislation that is yet 

before us, Mr. Speaker. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

now appropriate that this particular Bill be moved to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 110, 

The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

committee. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 111 — The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 

2009/Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m certainly pleased 

to enter into debate on Bill No. 111 today for a number of 

reasons. The Bill itself is essentially a . . . provides 

consequential amendments. But what they’ve done is they’ve 

put the cart before the horse here, Mr. Speaker, because the 

consequential amendments that they’re proposing are for Bills 

that aren’t passed. And so in a manner that has become custom 

for the Saskatchewan Party, they are putting forward 

consequential amendments to legislation that they have no idea 

whether it will be passed or not. But nobody should ought to be 

surprised, nobody should ought to be surprised at that. 

 

Now what this does essentially, is makes amendments to three 

different Acts. And those three Acts include The Interpretation 

Act to replace references to The Northern Municipalities Act 

with The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Now I suppose that there would be some folks who would 

quibble with some of the finer points of the legislation. But in 

effect the real issue is whether the legislation passed, making 

changes that make northern municipalities similar to southern 

municipalities. And we think in essence that that’s a good, a 

good thing to do. 

 

Now certainly there are some issues with the legislation. And 

those issues are, well, maybe small to some, or very big issues 

to others because if you look at one of the Acts that it’s 

amending, it’s The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009, and in 

that Act it’s asking for municipalities in northern Saskatchewan 

to be allowed to place restrictions on elections, and those 

restrictions are with respect to criminal record checks. Now I 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4725 

think that, well that’s an interesting and laudable goal, and you 

know perhaps we would applaud that in theory. 

 

What’s happened in this case is that this government has chosen 

to exclude provincial politicians or prospective provincial 

politicians from that process. And I would argue in this case 

that what is good for the goose certainly should be good for the 

gander. If you want to allow a municipality in the North to force 

a criminal record check before running for public office, maybe 

that should be something that we should consider for all 

provincial prospective elected officials, and so you would have 

a situation where anybody that runs and wins a nomination for a 

provincial political party to run in the next provincial election in 

November of 2011 would have to undergo the same criteria that 

somebody running for the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse or the 

mayor of La Ronge would have to undertake.  

 

And I think that, you know, in essence it seems only fair that if 

you would force these changes or force these criteria on 

municipal politicians in northern Saskatchewan, that you would 

also do that to politicians who would seek to serve at the 

provincial level. Certainly I think that that would be something 

that we would want to undertake. 

 

Additionally the government has chosen to limit disclosure to 

criminal convictions. And so I would question in this Bill, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendment Act, Bill 

No. 111, why you would stop there? If you’re making reference 

and making changes to Bill 110 because of 111, why would you 

stop at limiting disclosure to criminal convictions instead of 

requiring disclosure on somebody who may have been charged 

with a serious criminal offence but charges have yet to proceed 

to court? 

 

Now there’s certainly an argument can be made that that would 

be a reasonable thing to do. And so I think it’s a little strange 

that you would have a provincial government who would 

propose changes to the law in Saskatchewan that would require 

a certain level of scrutiny for municipal politicians and northern 

— specifically in this case northern politicians — when they 

don’t require those same level of scrutiny on the provincial 

level. And so I would propose that we certainly consult and 

determine whether or not it should be a requirement. 

 

Now speaking of consultation, like I’d said, the Bill No. 111 

affects three other Acts. And I’m certainly curious as to who 

has been consulted on this Bill because the record of the 

Saskatchewan Party government on consultation is frankly 

abysmal. 

 

You need look no further than question period today and news 

from all of last week where you have municipalities who say 

that they weren’t consulted at all when it comes to Dutch elm 

disease control programs. You’ve got experts in the field who 

will contend that they weren’t consulted. And while a $500,000 

reduction might not seem like a bunch of money on a 10.1-or-so 

billion dollar budgetary expense, certainly I think that the city 

of Regina would argue that with the 60,000 American elm trees 

in this city, that it’s a vital program for them. And I would tend 

to agree with that. 

 

Now additionally with some budgetary cuts that they’ve made 

in Prince Albert, they hadn’t consulted in Prince Albert either. 

They cut programs, including $165,000 from a community 

development program, and when I called and talked to the folks 

who run the program, they say they weren’t consulted at all.  

 

[16:30] 

 

And so I wouldn’t be surprised that on Bill No. 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, that 

there was no consultation on this Act either because again the 

list of a lack of consultation is what I would call lengthy. And 

another place that was borne out — certainly again because this 

is dealing with municipalities, and we’re asking about 

consultation — if you ask municipalities how much 

consultation took place with respect to the 1 per cent of PST, I 

think they’ll argue that there was very little consultation on the 

decision to break their promise to provide one point of the PST 

to municipalities. And so their history with consultation 

generally, but specifically as it relates to municipalities, is also I 

would argue rather lacking. 

 

There are certainly many other examples. If you would talk to 

different school boards throughout the province, they would 

certainly argue that with respect to educational assistants and 

the work that they do in support of the students in 

Saskatchewan. They do a wonderful job. I’ve had the great 

privilege of working in the school system in Prince Albert for a 

couple of different years, specifically with educational 

assistants, and they do a tremendous job. In fact if you ask the 

teachers in whose classrooms they work, they would say that 

they would be virtually lost without them. 

 

And so it is again a lack of consultation that we’re talking about 

here and need to discern whether or not they’ve had proper 

consultation on Bill No. 111. So with that said, certainly we’re 

interested in asking a good number of questions in committee 

on this Bill. And so I would move at this point to move this Bill 

to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

be moved to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 



4726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

committee. 

 

Bill No. 127 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 127 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

today to rise to comment on Bill 127, An Act to amend the 

Assessment Management Agency Act. I note with interest that 

some of the amendments, some of the proposed changes are 

structural and some of the changes are housekeeping, but some 

of them are more disturbing, and of course then more 

interesting. 

 

The SAMA — as we know this agency by, Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency — it does provide a valuable 

role in assessing property in our province for the purpose of 

taxation, so everybody watches to see what their assessment is. 

And it is a very thorny issue, and they make very tough 

decisions at this table. And I know it’s very difficult. Some of 

the meetings are difficult, and the professionals that sit on 

SAMA are very . . . They do their job well. And they’re also 

representative of a great, good portion of the people who have 

interest in this Act. 

 

When I was on the legislative instruments committee of the 

NDP government, which is the oversight committee for all 

legislation, we had this Act in front of us many times. And one 

time, I mentioned that we don’t have anybody on SAMA who 

actually has independent or private sector appraiser background 

and that was rectified. Now in the new proposal that I see, I 

don’t see — when there’s a change in the composition of the 

board taking it down from its current number down to 11 — I 

don’t see how that type of representation would occur on this 

board. I see that there’ll be two persons nominated by SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and two 

persons nominated by SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities], two provincial government members, 

and a board Chair who is also appointed by the provincial 

government following consultation with SUMA and SARM. So 

it’s going from the current 11-member board down to 7. So I’m 

wondering which, particularly which four, are not going to be 

represented. 

 

And I have a feeling that we aren’t going to see the 

representation from the private sector appraisers who actually 

do a lot of work in the province and actually have a feeling for 

what appraisals are and what they should be. So I’m concerned 

about that. I don’t know if there’s been any consultation with 

the Appraisal Institute and the Saskatchewan branch to see how 

they see this happening, and if it is true that they are not going 

to be represented, the loss that this will bring to the integrity of 

the board. 

 

And also, speaking of the integrity of the board, I noted the 

minister’s comments in his second reading speech which says, 

“. . . this Bill proposes to strengthen government’s role related 

to assessment policy making and help to ensure future decisions 

are consistent with provincial goals and priorities.” That was 

exactly my worry, that we were seeing this change in the 

composition of this board to do exactly this, to basically do the 

government’s bidding. And it does raise alarm bells with me 

and should with other people in the province that it isn’t simply 

adjusting the number of people on the board and how they meet 

and things like that, that are fairly innocuous. But it does — 

especially when the minister’s quite clear that this is going to 

strengthen government’s role in this — it smacks of real 

government interference. 

 

And given the recent discussions that have occurred in this 

House and out around the role of the Chief Electoral Officer 

and government’s interference of the hiring of that official who 

should be very independent of government, I have a real 

concern that this will also, this does signify loss of 

independence for this board. 

 

And it does speak to our system of democracy. And I think 

people are quite . . . I wouldn’t say comfortable with an 

assessment agency; it’s sort of a necessary evil. But I think it’s 

alarming if the government has an agenda that they intend to 

put through using this committee. And I don’t think people on 

the committee would feel comfortable knowing that that was 

what their job was going to be when they were assigned to this 

committee. 

 

I noticed today we have accepted the retirement notification of 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner and the Provincial 

Auditor. That does again raise alarms with me that we seem to 

see a trend here, and I worry about what process we will have in 

place to replace those individuals who do such a wonderful job 

protecting democracy of this province. 

 

Any changes that we do make to SAMA shouldn’t be taken 

lightly and especially, like I said, if the government has said — 

and the minister was quite clear — that this will make the 

agency more in line with the government’s goals. That does 

certainly suggest to me that there will be a fair amount of 

interference. 

 

And from my role as Health critic, I certainly have seen the 

change in the health boards that were directly appointed by this 

government when it took over in ’07. In Saskatoon we have 

spent over two years trying to get a meeting with the Saskatoon 

Health Board. That never happened before. The Saskatoon 

Health Board was open to both the government and opposition 

to discuss issues that are of interest to all sides and all people in 

Saskatoon. I worry that that’s the type of control that we will 

see on many different boards. 

 

I know when the Harper government was elected, friends of 

mine who served on committees said that there was a marked 

change in how the work of committees were done in the federal 

parliament, that there was no more attention to democracy, due 

process, the work of the committee, the obligation of opposition 

to have scrutiny and accountability and transparency. That was 

gone. So I worry about this when the minister has said directly 

that that is what his intent is. That should be a red flag for 

everyone. 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4727 

I have not seen any indication that this government consults 

people in any meaningful way. Everywhere we turn, there are 

regulations put in place like the changes to HIPA that were 

made that allow the government and the health district to let our 

names and addresses go out to fundraisers. Absolutely 

appalling. People are stunned and shocked by this. I sat on the 

first board of the Saskatchewan Health Information Network, 

and I was also the minister that brought in HIPA in its original 

form, The Health Information Protection Act. So I know that 

the public is very worried about their information and how it is 

used. Obviously we’ve seen 92 per cent of them said no, do not 

do this. Put an end to this. Stop doing it. Don’t talk to us about 

this anymore. 

 

So I think that when we talk about consultation and due 

process, I think people don’t, they don’t trust the government 

anymore to have followed through on this. So I think that this is 

another place we will want to find out exactly who was spoken 

to about these changes. What impact do they have on their 

organizations and what exactly they said in response to these 

changes? And I’m especially interested in the changes of the 

board members and how they’re appointed, and the direction 

that the government has obviously already stated of how this 

agency will be functioning, and that is basically at the behest of 

government with, it sounds like, direct interference. 

 

And we don’t know exactly how SAMA will be funded into the 

future. There is some indication that the funding will flow 

through the Ministry of Finance, where it formally came 

through Education. And of course some of the changes are 

initiated or come from, flow from the changes to the inability of 

school boards to now levy changes to the mill rates. They have 

no ability to tax anymore. So there is obviously some changes 

that have to be made to the assessment agency to reflect the fact 

that the school boards have no authority or power over the 

money that they are getting, which is a whole other 

conversation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we don’t know whether the money that was going into the 

education system will now come, the same amount of money 

will come to SAMA. We don’t know that. That would be a 

question that would of course be asked. When there is only four 

board members taken off, I can’t see that that would make a 

huge difference in the funding of the agency, the work that they 

do from the financial aspect. My questions still remain: what 

authority will they have and what interference will the 

government do? 

 

The school boards of course are worried where their funding is 

coming from, and people will of course be wondering about the 

assessment on their property. Where will the money go from the 

assessment? What will happen to their assessments, and what 

will the assessments be actually used for? How will levies be 

set to fund education and other things that the assessment 

numbers are used for? 

 

And SAMA, as I said at the beginning, is a group of very 

professional individuals, and they have worked hard. I know 

we’ve had them appear before us in committee, in the 

legislative instruments committee, and they take their job very 

seriously. An assessment is never a very popular thing. People 

do have appeals. That’s something that’s available. You can 

appeal your assessment and there are many who do. And that 

job is difficult too because people do not have sometimes the 

same view as the agency has for their assessment on their 

property. And they do attend difficult meetings and of course 

have to answer those difficult questions that people come 

forward with when their assessment does not meet with what 

their expectations were. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now I’m not sure if all the members that are going to be 

appointed . . . when I said that we were talking about how the 

different members will appear on the committee, how they will 

be actually chosen. There will be two persons of course 

nominated by SUMA. We can see that happening through their 

organization and the same with SARM. But two provincial 

government members, where will they be coming from? Will 

they be from the bureaucracy from within the departments, or 

will they be someone whose name is submitted, say, on behalf 

of the Appraisal Institute and maybe the chambers of commerce 

or someone else who has an interest in this sort of thing? And 

the Chairs also? So three out of the seven members will be 

directly appointed by government, and that includes the Chair. 

So that does raise a huge concern about the impartiality, the 

independence, and the effectiveness then of the board. 

 

Now some of the things I said were definitely going to be 

housekeeping because they’re taking out any reference to the 

boards of education, the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association], all that sort of thing has come out because there is 

no longer any attachment to the SSBA and the mill rates or 

taxes which are based on assessments. 

 

So we definitely see . . . I know that there are certainly 

problems with assessment. As I said, there is an appeal process 

that people get to use, and there are some legitimate concerns. 

And assessments are not always accurate. They do have some 

small errors. But my main concern is still the consultation. 

What has been done to talk to people about this legislation, how 

it will affect them, and for sure how will it affect the 

independence of the committee and the actual democratic 

process of how the committee or how the agency will work? 

 

Like I said, at the committee level, there has been already some 

indication about how the committees will function as recent as 

last week with The Tobacco Control Act coming to the Human 

Services committee. It was quite a fiasco, for want of a better 

word. Amendments came to the committee without having 

scrutiny not only from the Clerks and the Assembly but from 

the opposition. We never saw them, as opposition members. So 

there is a lack of commitment to due process, and there’s a lack 

of commitment to transparency and accountability. And it was 

unfortunate — or fortunate, depending on how you look at it — 

that there was a group of stakeholders that were concerned 

about The Tobacco Control Act in the room to witness how this 

worked. And they knew ahead of time that there was some 

difficulty moving the Act through the House, as there was some 

issues at the House level of how legislation will be moved 

through in this session. 

 

There has been a lack of consultation between the government 

and the opposition. There has been a lack of accountability and 

transparency between the opposition and government. And so 

there has been some difficulty from the point of view of people, 



4728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

the stakeholders from the tobacco Act, of how this would affect 

their Act. Well there’s a fundamental belief that those 

amendments in the tobacco Act were needed and so it would 

move forward. But the way it moved forward is, if that is the 

norm of how legislation will be moved through from now on, it 

will be much more difficult. 

 

I’m sure . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know if you can hear 

me, but I can hardly hear myself. There’s a lot of chatter going 

on. 

 

I think that at the committee level we don’t, we cannot see Bills 

come to the committee level without the correct amount of time 

to oversee what’s going on, to ask questions of the changes and 

what they mean to the agencies or the organizations that they 

will affect. And I don’t think, it’s certainly not fair to the 

opposition members who are there with the job of doing due 

diligence, with the job of doing oversight of different Bills and 

the intentions of the things that are coming through. 

 

There was a clear lack of respect for the staff as well in how the 

committee was conducted, where none of us were prepared. 

And I don’t know what message that was to send to the 

stakeholders and to the viewing public, but I do know that when 

the minister says in his remarks that this Bill proposes to 

strengthen the government’s role related to assessment policy 

making and help to ensure that future decisions are consistent 

with provincial goals and priorities, that doesn’t sound like 

something that’s going to be open and transparent. It sounds 

like that’s going to be directed, and when you talk about 

direction, you talk about interference. 

 

And I think people have seen that that is definitely what some 

of the things that have been happening lately indicate. And like 

I said, I think that the outstanding issue of the appointment of 

the Chief Electoral Officer is something that people really do 

worry about. 

 

And then when Bills like this come forward, and there are 

changes made that don’t necessarily have a good explanation, 

and have remarks covered in second reading by the minister 

that actually lead us to more worry than to be comfortable with 

how these things are going, then you do need to have a strong 

committee presence to deal with the questions that arise, to deal 

with the feedback from the stakeholders. And the consultation 

process in general has to be, has to be rigorous. 

 

I mean some things are housekeeping, but some things will 

have a cause and effect and will ripple through the system. And 

we don’t, I don’t have any confidence — and I don’t think very 

many people do anymore — of this government making 

decisions that look at cause and effect. The things that I’ve 

seen, that I have seen up to this point, have been made with 

basically a knee-jerk kind of reaction, very little forethought. 

And I think people are starting to see that and certainly come 

forward and say that. 

 

So there is more then, there is then a more defined onus on the 

opposition to actually do the proper scrutiny. So we do have to 

have . . . There’s several, there’s a lot of changes being made in 

this, and we can’t exactly say that all of it is only housekeeping 

and all of it will be very minor. It’s not going to happen. 

 

There is all kinds of things that will see things changed that will 

be, I think, will probably be technical. And that won’t really 

have a lot of impact on people, nor will they need to really 

know some of those details. But there are things that will 

change, and that is certainly the things about the actual 

composition of the board. I think that would be of grave 

concern to people who don’t see their issues represented and 

also to see the level of government control or interference. 

 

I don’t know what the SSBA says. I don’t know what’s left for 

them to say, given that they have pretty much been stripped of 

all authority or ability to enter into the assessment or the tax 

debate. So we have some changes obviously proposed here in 

the funding of the SAMA board because currently the Act has 

said that there’s 40 per cent of SAMA’s funding coming from 

education and 30 per cent on behalf of school divisions and the 

municipalities to provide 30 per cent. 

 

So those targets apparently have not been reached. But what 

will we see now of how the share will be, that the shares from 

government will be 65 and the municipal share will be 35. This 

says it’s going to reflect the actual current funding relationship, 

but we don’t know how SAMA, how SUMA and SARM do 

feel about this. It doesn’t . . . We don’t know if that’s fair or in 

their opinion, is it fair. And so we do have to have that 

conversation. 

 

We have to ask the minister when he comes with his officials 

before the committee to explain what all of it means, in light of 

his disturbing remarks, what this means to this board and its 

efficiency and effectiveness and its ability to have the public 

trust in its work. We don’t see that this is . . . I don’t see any . . . 

Of course we don’t get the Bill with any idea of who’s been 

consulted. So that will be something that we definitely have to 

look at. 

 

We also need to look at how the funding is done. How do we 

look at northern municipalities, how things will change in 

regard to that. And how SAMA . . . All these acronyms, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they do not tend to roll off the tongue that 

easily. 

 

We do have existing provisions that are changing around 

funding which seems to be complicated, so we will likely want 

to definitely have a good discussion on what those changes will 

mean and how SAMA will be funded, hopefully that it will be 

funded enough and effectively to do its job. And we don’t know 

that for sure either. The issues around the education portion, the 

education connection to SAMA are also the things we need talk 

about because there’s a whole bunch of issues around what 

happens because they’re removed. 

 

Then what changes to the municipality will be made when the 

school boards have been removed totally from the equation? 

What onus is there on the municipalities, both rural and urban, 

what onus is on them to pay? What onus is on them to . . . What 

type of person do they put on the board and what type of 

oversight do they have because this will affect them directly. 

 

So we do need to see, and we also need to see if there’s been 

any change in the appeal process because we do have a fairly 

solid appeal process which I understand is being used quite 

regularly. So will that change at all? And will there be any 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4729 

changes obviously too to the authority of any of the municipal 

officials or the assessors and inspectors? Is any of this going to 

change in this Act that will affect how people’s property is 

accessed? And that’s a question too we will have to ask. 

 

So we do have, in the current Act we now require assessment 

appraisers to obtain permission prior to going onto the property 

to conduct evaluation. The new provision requires reasonable 

effort to give notice. Well I don’t know where reasonable effort 

is defined, but I’m sure we’ll have to find out what that means. 

 

And SAMA is concerned about trespass, of course, if prior 

notice hasn’t been given or private permission has not been 

given. So we need to have certainly a conversation about what 

this means and what does it do to SAMA’s ability to actually do 

its work if there is no ability to get hold of people or access 

their property. 

 

We do have some, also some ability for of course the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations. And we 

all do want to know about regulations because regulations are 

really quite concerning about details of what happens. A lot of 

times, the things that you may not like or may not want to see 

appear in regulation, and there really is very little opportunity 

for oversight or scrutiny of regulations. They just appear on the 

order in council and there they are. So we would want to find 

out what exactly, when you’re giving the powers to the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations, what do 

you actually anticipate being in regulations, and how do you see 

it changing if you see any changes? 

 

There are changes that will affect The Cities Act of course, and 

that is legislation that we continue to see being changed and 

amended and strengthened. We want to see how this will affect 

The Cities Act and that we will have questions to ask about their 

appraisals. And definitely in the explanation about this change, 

about how the appeal board decisions in future years, not just 

current years, we want to make sure they’ve not changed. And 

there’s issues around that and the changes to market value. 

 

There’s also changes to disclosure of evidence, and this of 

course would be talking to the appeal board as well as the board 

of revision. And so we want to ask questions about that on what 

exactly the onus will be on the assessor or the assessment 

appraiser and what type of decisions will be left to the board. 

And I’m not sure the appeal board, since I don’t have the whole 

Act in front me, I’m not sure who sits on the appeal board. But 

again, given the minister’s remarks in the second reading 

speech that this will better reflect the government’s role relating 

to policy making, I’m a little disturbed that that might also 

affect the appeal process, and that people will not have an 

independent appeal process that they feel may be fair or would 

be fair, given that the government will be basically sort of 

reviewing itself. 

 

People don’t have much confidence in that. They like to see an 

independent review and then have some confidence that this 

will be fair to them. So I don’t think that, I don’t see that 

actually here because I don’t know who’s going to be on the 

appeal board and if the role of the appeal board will change 

around the assessments and around the composition or around 

their authority. So we don’t know that for sure. 

 

Not only The Cities Act is affected, but also The Municipalities 

Act and The Northern Municipalities Act. So there will be some 

consequential amendments to all of those Acts to ensure that 

assessor and assessment appraisers consider applying appeal 

board decisions into future years. That is something that will be 

interesting to have explained. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House now stands in recess until 

7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4697 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4697 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4698 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4698 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4698 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4699 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4700 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4700 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4701 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4701 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4701 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Condolences to Polish People  

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4701 

 Canadian Effort and Sacrifice in War 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4701 

 Remembering Edward Bayda 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4702 

 Holocaust Memorial Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4702 

 93rd Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4702 

 Granting of Pardons 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4702 

 Strong Economic Recovery 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4703 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Personal Health Information 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4703 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4703 

 Gynecologic Oncologists 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4704 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4704 

 Dutch Elm Disease 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4706 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4706 

 Finance and Electoral Issues 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4707 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4708 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4708 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4708 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4708 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Letters of Retirement  

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4708 

MOTIONS 

 Substitutions on Committee 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4709 



 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4709 

 Changes to Rule 142 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4709 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Condolences to Polish People 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4710 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4711 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4711 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4712 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4712 

  D’Autremont (transmittal motion) ........................................................................................................................................ 4712 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4713 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4713 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4718 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4718 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4722 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4722 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4724 

 Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4724 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4725 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4726 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


