




















































Hansard: March 31, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 31, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4635 

 March 31, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It gives me great pleasure today to announce and 

welcome Mr. Ken Hughes to the Legislative Assembly. Ken is 

sitting in your gallery. Mr. Hughes is the former Member of 

Parliament for the constituency of Macleod in Alberta, and so 

our proceedings in the Assembly may bring back some fond 

parliamentary memories for him. 

 

Ken is from Alberta, but make no doubt about it, he is a friend 

in Saskatchewan. Ken is the founder and president of Alpine 

Insurance and Financial brokerage in Alberta. Ken has a wealth 

of knowledge in governance, business, international affairs. He 

is an enthusiastic volunteer in Calgary for charities and the 

Calgary Stampede. 

 

But Ken has also been helpful to Enterprise Saskatchewan in 

our meetings with the Midwest Research Institute. He can tell 

you more about microbial enhanced oil recovery than anybody I 

know. He’s also been very helpful in assisting Alberta 

companies with which to expand and come to Saskatchewan. 

We’ve had some success in that area. So, Mr. Speaker, through 

you I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Ken 

Hughes to the Saskatchewan legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce some very special guests here today to 

the legislature, some members of the film and television 

community, the arts community here in Regina, that’s where we 

are. If everybody would just give a wave when I say your name, 

that would be great. I’d like to introduce Ian Toews. He is the 

producer and director of Landscape as Muse, a Gemini 

award-winning production. Sandra Birdsell, author here and her 

book The Russländer was a finalist for the Giller Prize. 

 

Director/writer, Rob King; Andrew Gordon, the president of 

IATSE [International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees] 

295; Jan Nowina-Zarzycki, president of Novina Motion 

Pictures. Lori Kuffner, the producer of Drug Class which the 

minister has talked quite highly of. 

 

We have Jeannie Mah, Bob Ivanochko, Bernie Hernando and 

Levi Carlton, who are filmmakers. And I think we were 

expecting Layton Burton and Mark Wihak but I’m not sure if 

they’ve arrived yet. So, welcome to your legislature. 

 

Please join me in welcoming the guests to our legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming our guests from the 

film and television industry to the gallery. Mr. Speaker, some of 

them I have met on previous occasions, others I have not. 

Certainly we look forward to, in the coming days and weeks, 

working with the industry as we look to move it forward, Mr. 

Speaker. And I again want to ask all members to welcome them 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of our 

highways. This particular petition applies to Highway 310, 

which has deteriorated to the point where it’s now a potential 

safety hazard for the residents who have to drive on this 

highway each and every day. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Goodeve, Kelliher, and Lestock, Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to present a petition that was put together by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. This petition is in support of the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund. That 

would be the scholarship fund promised by the Sask Party in the 

2007 provincial election. The prayer of the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s signators are from Moose Jaw and 

Liberty. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present a 

petition in support of maintaining educational assistants in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Members will know that in 

November of 2009 the Ministry of Education published a 



4636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

document that revealed significant reductions in the number of 

educational assistants in the province. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the city of 

Saskatoon and the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 

a petition today about the proposed harmonized sales tax. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

stand firmly opposed to the Sask Party government’s 

stated intent to pursue the implementation of a 

harmonized sales tax and thereby increase the taxes which 

Saskatchewan people pay on a range of items including 

agricultural products, books, children’s clothing, 

children’s footwear, dentures, electricity, food and drink, 

hearing aids, medical devices, newspapers, optical 

appliances, and orthopedic appliances; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

recognize the hardship it would cause to the people of 

Saskatchewan if the government implemented a 

harmonized sales tax; 

 

And in so doing to cause the provincial government to 

refrain from handing over taxing authority to the federal 

government. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this is signed by petitioners from Vanscoy and Sedley. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. And we know that many renters in 

Saskatchewan are facing a combination of rising rents and low 

vacancy rates in many communities, and we’ve seen some as 

high as more than $200 or even higher, month over month. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view 

to protect Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the city of Saskatoon. 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With a 

waiting list of almost one full year for our seniors, that is 

unacceptable. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a call on the Sask Party government 

to have their actions match their rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to again 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is signed by residents of 

Saskatchewan because the Saskatchewan Party government 

amended their retention program to specifically exclude 

students who graduated from post-secondary institutions 

outside of Saskatchewan and master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] graduates. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the three pages of signatures are from folks in 

Regina, Saskatoon, and Emerald Park. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4637 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on Sask Party’s lack of action with respect to 

climate change: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

undertake immediate actions to mitigate climate change by 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, actions which will 

serve to protect Saskatchewan people from the significant 

costs to our economy, global security, and the quality of 

life which climate change threatens to bring about, and to 

also protect Saskatchewan people from longer and more 

frequent droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers 

which feed our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more 

frequent and more serious flooding, and loss of at least the 

southern part of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest 

which is treasured by so many in our province; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

a meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation and substantial and meaningful regulations, to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made this serious and significant commitment 

was serving as the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, to reduce our province’s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent from the levels of greenhouse gas 

emissions which our province produced in the year 2007 

and to meet said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions by the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from 

now or one short decade away; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring the 

Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set about 

the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions, rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties to actually address 

this critically important issue which will directly affect our 

province’s economy and the quality of life for all of our 

residents; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that it generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan adapt to current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptation; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Creighton, Air Ronge, and La Ronge. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan must recognize 

the value of all health care providers by having a commitment 

to adequate funding and the installation of good-faith 

bargaining in the provincial collective bargaining process. And 

the Saskatchewan government with its heavy-handed essential 

services legislation is making a mockery, Mr. Speaker, of the 

collective bargaining process in this province. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents in North Battleford, 

Battleford, and Meota. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan in 

respect to this government’s disregard and disrespect for 

constitutional, legal, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 



4638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Prince Albert and 

Saskatoon. And I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets and they’re expecting 

action on this front. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Saskatoon, 

Regina, and Weyburn. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

present a petition again today in support of the Saskatchewan 

film and television industry. This speaks to the fact that the 

industry, the Sask Party government has let the industry 

languish for two years and has recently kicked it to the curb 

with the closing of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network]. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good residents of 

Moose Jaw, Liberty. That’s it for today. I so present. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before statements by members, I have a 

statement in response to the point of order that was raised 

yesterday. 

 

Yesterday I undertook to review the Hansard record in response 

to a point of order raised by the Government House Leader 

about comments made by the member for Regina Walsh Acres 

in a member’s statement. I reviewed the verbatim and I am 

prepared to rule on the matter. 

 

At the outset I want members to know that I have serious 

concerns about the tenor of debate in recent weeks and what 

looks like a trend away from the principle of fair comment. My 

concern goes beyond the point of order raised yesterday. I think 

it is necessary to take a few moments to remind members about 

a few basic principles that seem to be forgotten from time to 

time. 

 

First of all, members need go no further than our own rules that 

states members shall not use “offensive, provocative and 

threatening language.” And also that members shall not make 

“personal charge or accusation against a Member.” These rules 

should be familiar to members. 

 

In addition the House of Commons Procedure and Practice, 

Second Edition, 2009, at pages 604 and 605 states, and I quote: 

 

Since one of the basic principles of procedure in the House 

is that proceedings be conducted in terms of a free and 

civil discourse, Members are less apt to engage in direct 

heated exchanges and personal attacks when their 

comments are directed to the Chair rather than to another 

Member. If a Member directs remarks toward another 

Member and not the Speaker, he or she will be called to 

order and may be asked to rephrase the remarks. 

 

I think members also realize that these basic principles are a 

reflection of our long-standing practices which Speakers have 

expressed time and again over the years. On April the 23rd, 

1991, Speaker Tusa stated that reasonable comment did not 

include personal accusations, and members should treat each 

other with respect within the dignity and decorum of the House. 

 

On March the 5th, 1993, Speaker Rolfes ruled that innuendo 

and personal reflections create disorder and that insinuations 

about other members, whether made in jest or not, is 

inappropriate. On December the 29th, 1996, Speaker Hagel, 

stated that personal attacks result in escalation and retaliation 

which become increasingly personal. He implored members to 

engage in forceful and spirited debate without having to resort 

to such venues. 

 

On May the 12th, 2000, Speaker Osika ruled out of order a 

series of statements made in debate that attempted to connect 

certain members with criminal convictions. Speaker Osika went 

on to say provocations of offensive personal attacks exceed the 

bounds of fair debate. On March 23rd, 2001, he ruled out of 

order comments that alleged that a group of members, as part of 

a political party, were involved in illegal election acts. 

 

On May the 10th, Speaker Kowalsky made this statement, 

which I shall quote: 

 

. . . freedom of speech is considered fundamentally 

necessary under our democratic system. This privilege 

exists to allow members to perform legitimate functions in 

the legislature. This privilege also confers a grave 

responsibility to those who are protected by it. 

 

Members must bear in mind the possible effects of certain 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4639 

statements. It is not a legitimate function for members in 

debate to question directly or indirectly the integrity or 

motives of members individually or collectively. 

 

All of these statements, made by many Speakers over a long 

period of time, demonstrate the principle that proceedings of the 

Assembly are based on a long-standing tradition of respect for 

the integrity of all members. 

 

Recently certain members seem to have forgotten about this 

principle. This principle has been lost, despite recent rulings 

which I have called upon all members for their co-operation in 

addressing unparliamentary language and order and decorum. 

Despite my rulings and requests, the ugly personal attacks, 

innuendos, and insinuations continue. We had instances of this 

again yesterday. The member from Regina Walsh Acres in a 

member’s statement made comments about the private affairs of 

the member for Kindersley. She also stated that the Premier had 

to have been involved in theft. I find these comments to be out 

of order. 

 

If what I have said about the principles of fair comment in this 

place is not enough, I will cite what previous Speakers have 

said about similar comments. On March the 18th, 1999, 

Speaker Hagel stated the following: 

 

. . . I notice his reference to the use of the word steal. And 

I think the hon. minister will recognize that it’s improper 

to be using that word in debate to refer to the motives of 

other hon. members, and I’ll ask him to withdraw that 

remark and continue his debate. 

 

Similarly, Kowalsky brought a member to order on June 16, 

2003 for using the word stole. 

 

The member for Cannington who raised the point of order was 

also out of order yesterday for the comments he made in his 

member’s statement. The member for Cannington also reflected 

on the character of the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Besides the principles I have outlined earlier in this ruling, I 

also want to point out Beauchesne’s paragraph 486(1) makes it 

clear that members are not to reflect on the private character of 

another member. As previous Speakers have pointed out, 

personal attacks and innuendos have no place in the 

proceedings of this Assembly. The comments are hurtful and 

only create disorder and retaliation. I ask members not to make 

the period for members’ statements also a series of attacks ads. 

I ask you to not bring personal attacks and offensive opinions 

into this Chamber. 

 

I now call on the member for Cannington and the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres to rise, withdraw, and apologize for their 

unparliamentary remarks. I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw 

those remarks and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to withdraw the 

comments and apologize. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

CJWW Loses Familiar Voice  

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, starting tomorrow the radio airwaves in Saskatchewan 

will not be the same. Many in our province will miss the voice 

familiar to all who listened to Saskatchewan’s most listened to 

radio station, CJWW in Saskatoon. Steve Shannon has been a 

broadcaster and stand-up comedian for 30 years. 

 

He has been involved in emceeing hundreds of community 

events including 25 years of announcing the Remembrance Day 

service in Saskatoon. He has an enthusiastic way with words 

and heartfelt connection to people that is truly unique. Steve 

received the B’nai Brith “We’re Proud of You Award” in 2009, 

and his contribution as a volunteer to our province was 

acknowledged with the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal in 

2005. 

 

Today Steve is moving away from his broadcasting career to 

assume the position of CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation. He will have several 

months to shadow current CEO Randy Kershaw, and on July 

1st the transition will be complete. Steve is no stranger to the 

foundation, having spent one decade on the volunteer board of 

directors. 

 

Steve is a fabulous mimic, as many in this Chamber will know. 

His dead-on impressions of famous people such as the Right 

Honourable John Diefenbaker have audiences laughing every 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you and all my colleagues in 

the Assembly to join me today in congratulating Steve Shannon 

on his extensive broadcasting career and wishing him great 

success in the next chapter of his life. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatchewan Communications Network 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just for the record, 

TV in Saskatchewan won’t be the same tomorrow either. 

 

I would like to congratulate SCN on its nomination at the recent 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards. The Saskatchewan 

Communications Network was nominated under the Corporate 

Partner of the Year category for the anthology video series 

titled 15 Minutes of Fame. And what did they get for their 

recent achievements, Mr. Speaker? They got axed by the Sask 

Party government in last week’s budget. 

 

I know the Sask Party is in trouble with their math skills, but 

you think they should understand the financial benefit that SCN 

provides to the province. In 2007 SCN spent $1.6 million on a 

broadcast licence which multiplied tenfold into a staggering $17 



4640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

million in production. Even over the last two years, with the 

Sask Party trying to drive the film industry to dust, SCN still 

managed to help leverage $3.3 million of out-of-province 

dollars into the provincial film industry last year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even the Premier sees the value of SCN. He 

filmed a recent ad supporting Local TV Matters campaign, and 

he says, “Our life is much richer because we have local 

television.” 

 

Once again, we cannot trust what this government says. They 

pledge their support for local television, but in the next breath 

they completely cut SCN and the local services that it provides. 

Mr. Speaker, if this is how the government treats those who put 

Saskatchewan on the international and national stage and bring 

millions of dollars into the province, I’d hate to see how they 

treat those who do more modest and still important work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Support for Project Hero 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In today’s 

Leader-Post there’s a letter to the editor from two professors at 

the U of R [University of Regina] opposed to Project Hero. Mr. 

Speaker, these professors repeat their opposition to the project. 

They say that Project Hero glorifies war. I assume they think 

the same of the Scholarship of Honour, an initiative of this 

government supported by both sides of this Assembly. They 

also go on to say that Canada’s military efforts in Afghanistan 

represent Canadian imperialism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is it imperialism when Canadian soldiers help to 

open schools for young girls? Is it imperialism when Canadian 

soldiers bring water to impoverished communities? Is it 

imperialism when Canadian soldiers rid Afghanistan of terrorist 

training camps that are a danger to all people in our country? 

 

Of course it isn’t, Mr. Speaker, especially when those soldiers 

will leave when the job is done. Mr. Speaker, it is a ridiculous 

statement to equate the service of these men and women to 

Canadian imperialism. By the grace of God and the continued 

courage of our young women and men in uniform, there will 

always be heroes in the Canadian military. We should honour 

them, Mr. Speaker. And I would hope members on both sides of 

the House will stand in support of those heroes and against the 

position of these professors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Student and Kids Centre 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, SAKs, the Student and Kids 

Centre located at Nutana Collegiate in Saskatoon, is a 

non-profit organization funded through the Public Health 

Agency of Canada. The centre opened in 1994 to support 

student parents attending Nutana Collegiate. The SAKs Centre 

is open to all student parents as a drop-in centre where students 

can go for coffee and chat with staff. 

 

The centre offers support groups on parenting, healthy 

relationships, literacy for families, and healthy cooking. The 

centre also provides counselling, support, information, and 

referrals to other community services. SAKs directs students to 

agencies providing services for health, shelter, legal 

information, social services, First Nations and Métis culture, 

government services, post-secondary education, and 

employment training. 

 

[14:00] 

 

SAKs is also committed to broadening a connection to the 

larger community by partnering with other agencies to offer 

greater opportunities for student parents. SAKs success is 

measured by the success of the parents benefiting from these 

programs. Two project coordinators include Lise Kossick-Kouri 

and Kristine Divall. Board members include teachers at Nutana 

and professionals from the surrounding community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Nutana Collegiate and the 

SAKs Centre for the positive and dynamic work done with 

student parents, enabling them to continue their education and 

build stronger lives for themselves and their children, Mr. 

Speaker. I congratulate them for 16 years of successful work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Statistics for Weekly Earnings 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It must really irk 

the members opposite to hear good news about the province of 

Saskatchewan, even though business owners, workers, and 

those looking for work continue to see this province as a place 

to be. Day after day the tired, old NDP [New Democratic Party] 

has to manufacture reasons to tear Saskatchewan down. 

 

Today’s latest numbers from Stats Canada showed that the 

average weekly earnings were up 4.1 per cent over last year for 

the month of January. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the average weekly 

earnings for Saskatchewan rose to $828.24. We also have the 

second highest provincial increase when it comes to average 

weekly earnings. 

 

What this shows, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of 

Saskatchewan are moving forward. But this number reveals 

another thing, Mr. Speaker. This significant increase in the 

average weekly earnings show that the tired, old NDP is 

detached from the reality here in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, pretty soon the term NDP will become just another 

synonym for the words tired and old. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the good people of this 

province for their hard work in moving Saskatchewan forward. 

These numbers are a reflection of their commendable work 

ethic and industrial spirit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Regina Food Bank Opens Village Market Grocery Store 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

profile the Regina Food Bank’s new Village Market, a small 

grocery store that caters to food bank clientele. It offers core 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4641 

grocery and household products at a significantly reduced price. 

Our NDP leader and MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], including myself, had a chance to tour this facility 

just before Christmas. It is indeed an impressive facility. 

 

The Village Market was sparked by an idea from food bank 

CEO Wayne Hellquist, who recognizes the increasing need for 

food security in Regina. It was from this idea that Hellquist, 

Steve Compton, and the staff and board of the food bank set out 

to make this vision a reality in our city. The concept is the first 

of its kind in Canada and North America. It is noted that food 

bank hampers do not always supply a well-rounded diet, often 

missing core grocery items. Hellquist states, “This is not a 

hand-out for people. It provides dignity for people being able to 

shop for their own food . . .” 

 

The market is made possible by partnership with commercial 

grocers and support from corporate donors. This market serves 

another proud example of Saskatchewan people coming 

together with common sense and ingenuity to serve our 

community. I believe that this market will become a model for 

other communities across North America. I ask all members of 

this Assembly to join with me to recognize and thank the 

leadership from Regina’s food bank for pioneering this 

innovative program and to thank all of its donors and partners 

for their support. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Protecting the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Horse Federation nominated our Lloydminster MLA for an 

award that recognizes his efforts to protect the wild ponies of 

the Bronson Forest: 

 

“Tim contacted us personally, and we were immediately 

impressed by his initiative and genuine enthusiasm and 

interest in the welfare of Saskatchewan’s wild ponies. It is 

important to simply raise awareness on the plight of these 

animals and his accomplishments greatly surpassed that 

goal,” said Mae Smith, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Horse Federation. “Our province can 

hopefully enjoy these beautiful ponies for many 

generations because of Mr. McMillan’s efforts and that is 

extraordinary.” 

 

During the 2009 fall session of the legislature, Bill 606, An Act 

to protect the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest was passed. 

The member from Lloydminster was responsible for the 

introduction of the Bill. 

 

The member from Lloydminster was presented the Equine 

Welfare Award which recognizes a person who has taken an 

active role in effectively conveying equine welfare issues and 

raising awareness for the general public and the agri-food 

industry. He was presented with the award at the Saskatchewan 

Horse Federation’s annual convention on March 13th. 

 

Today there are only 37 ponies left in the Bronson Forest. 

Through the efforts of many dedicated people, we hope that 

they will be around for generations to come. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Film Industry Issues 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, today hundreds of people rallied 

to say thank you to SCN but not goodbye. They can’t believe 

this government would shut down a public broadcaster that 

spent more than 70 per cent of its annual programming budget 

buying Saskatchewan-made content and triggered millions, 

millions of dollars in investment from out of this province. A 

post at the SCN Matters group on Facebook, more than 3,600 

members and growing, describes the impact on the film 

industry: “Closing SCN is like cutting the roots of the tree and 

still expecting it to grow.” 

 

To the minister: why is this government cutting the roots from 

underneath the Saskatchewan film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to remind the member that there is support still in place 

for the film and television industry in this province in this 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are providing the film employment tax credit, 

Mr. Speaker. That hasn’t changed. Budget will be provided 

towards SaskFilm, Mr. Speaker. That hasn’t changed. Mr. 

Speaker, obviously the sound stage still exists in the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, and the operation of that is not going to 

change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I certainly appreciate the amount of number of people that have 

expressed their thanks to SCN and to the employees of SCN. I 

join with them in thanking those employees that have worked 

for SCN over the last 20 years, who have served this province. 

But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member is not 

correct when . . . Mr. Speaker, the member is not fully aware of 

what is in the budget because support does still exist in the 

province of Saskatchewan when it comes to the film and 

television industry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the problem with the film 

employment tax credit is that it didn’t change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ian Toews operates 291 Film Company here in 

Regina and is the producer and director of the Gemini 

award-winning SCN program Landscape as Muse, among 

others. SCN invested about $327,000 since 2004 to buy 

programming from Ian’s company. That investment generated 

more than three times that amount, more than $1.1 million in 

out-of-province investments — new dollars. 

 

Ian’s here today, and he wants to know why this government is 

shutting down a broadcaster that has brought so many 

investment dollars into Saskatchewan’s economy and created 



4642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

millions in spinoffs for local businesses. To the minister: why is 

this government chasing film industry jobs and investment out 

of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty rich to hear, 

from the NDP, talk about chasing people out of this province 

because when they were government 35,000 people left the 

province of Saskatchewan. Under this government, 30,000 

people have come to Saskatchewan over the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we were . . . [inaudible] . . . to formulate our 

budget, we wanted to make sure that we’re using taxpayers’ 

dollars in the most effective and efficient manner possible. The 

reality is, Mr. Speaker, in the 20 years that SCN has existed, the 

number of broadcast channels has exploded, Mr. Speaker. 

Twenty years ago SCN was one of maybe 20 or 30 channels 

available. Today it numbers in the hundreds, Mr. Speaker, and 

that doesn’t include the fact that people get their programming 

and their news through other sources like the Internet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to be working with the industry. 

Ministry officials have met with SaskFilm already today, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re meeting with SMPIA [Saskatchewan Motion 

Picture Association] tomorrow. There’s going to be a working 

group brought together next month, Mr. Speaker, as we look to 

move the industry forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — This is the problem, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, decisions get made before they talk to people in the 

industry. And speaking of chasing people out of the province, 

we’re okay . . . We want to retain people unless they’re film 

people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, SCN has given many young Saskatchewan 

filmmakers their start. I’ve been inundated with email and 

phone calls from film students who see no future in this 

province without SCN — inundated with phone calls and 

emails. One wrote: 

 

A few years ago I was excited to know that I was part of 

something greater than myself — a rising film industry in 

Canada that was making a name for itself. Now my 

government has abandoned me and other artists like me. 

 

Another wrote: 

 

Personally I love Saskatchewan and was planning to 

pursue a career here. Why am I, a resident that has just put 

$40,000 into education in Saskatchewan, not important to 

the government? 

 

To the minister: why is this government driving young 

filmmakers out of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again I will remind the 

member that support remains in place in this budget in terms of 

funding to SaskFilm through the film employment tax credit 

and with the sound stage here in the city of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, obviously we are working . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask members to 

allow, give the minister the same opportunity as the member 

had to place the question, so those interested in hearing the 

answer can hear it. I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly one of the things 

that we are looking at is what happens with the CRTC 

[Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission] licence that had been granted to SCN. I can tell 

the members opposite that there is a process that’s going to be 

beginning very shortly where we will look to see what 

interested parties there are that have an interest in the licence, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re working with the CRTC, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member will know that Saskatchewan is one of only four 

other provinces that did have a public . . . do have an 

educational broadcaster, Mr. Speaker. But there is the 

experience of another province, Mr. Speaker, that did have an 

educational broadcaster that moved on into the private sector, 

Mr. Speaker, and it still exists to this day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The last SCN 

annual report indicated that 16 per cent of Saskatchewan people 

watch SCN, not 4 per cent — 16 per cent. And those viewers 

are upset. Carol from Avonlea phoned my office and talked 

about the work SCN has done on drug awareness. 

 

The minister himself praised Drug Class just not very long ago, 

an award-winning show about substance abuse which many 

people credit for helping to turn their lives around. He described 

it as an exceptional show, powerful and poignant, and a 

valuable resource for students, parents, and teachers. That’s 

what this minister said just a few months ago at the SCN 

premiere for Drug Class. To the minister: what changed your 

mind? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, when we were 

formulating our budget, we needed to look at how government 

is using taxpayers’ dollars in the most efficient and effective 

manner, Mr. Speaker. Certainly a number of programs that have 

aired on SCN, we certainly hope that those will find other 

broadcasters, Mr. Speaker. We are working with all of the 

production companies, that we have existing contracts through 

SCN, to ensure that we honour all of those existing contracts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to be working, as we have in the 

past, we’re going to be working with the industry to move it 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4643 

forward, Mr. Speaker, in a time that has seen a number of other 

jurisdictions across North America see productions reduced. It 

is a cyclical industry, Mr. Speaker. Right now we are in one of 

those periods, but we look to move the industry forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow — after 38 years of 

coverage — the Sask Party government will delist chiropractic 

care. As a result, 125,000 patients per year will be paying 

hundreds of dollars in chiropractic care fees. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s still time for the minister to see the error in his ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he admit this is not a 

well-thought-out plan, reverse his decision to delist chiropractic 

care, and stop punishing the Saskatchewan people for his 

government’s fiscal mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had this 

discussion many times on this floor and debated the subject. 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving in the direction that many other 

provinces have. In fact we’re doing better than most provinces. 

 

There are many other provinces to the east of us, not including 

Manitoba, that do not cover chiropractic service at all. We are 

joining in with British Columbia and Alberta that are covering 

for low-income, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba remains the only 

province that are covering chiropractic service to the limit of 

12. Mr. Speaker, that is the decision that our government has 

made. 

 

I find it absolutely curious, though, because today she’s arguing 

why don’t we fund a private provider in a public system, Mr. 

Speaker? How does that work, when yesterday all they could 

complain about is putting private providers into a public 

system? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, in January a deal was reached with 

the chiropractors. A joint press release was written in which the 

minister said, and I quote, “I’m pleased that we’ve reached a 

deal.” Then the minister refused to sign the deal. Mr. Speaker, I 

have a March 25th letter written from the president of the 

Chiropractors’ Association to the minister that says, “You 

[meaning the minister] have made a mockery of the collective 

bargaining process.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what message is this sending to any group or 

organization who bargain with the government? How does 

anyone trust this government and that Premier in future 

negotiations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, that it 

would not be prudent for any government to move forward and 

sign a contract that they couldn’t fund. Mr. Speaker, we were 

not about to sign a contract that we couldn’t fund because what 

we would have had is a signature on the bottom of a contract 

that would’ve had to have been ripped up. 

 

Do you remember that, Mr. Speaker? I remember a GRIP [gross 

revenue insurance program] contract that thousands of 

producers signed with that government and had it ripped up in 

front of their faces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I can’t believe this minister can stand in his 

place and talk about prudent. If we’re talking about what’s 

prudent, they have no leg to stand on — last year’s budget, this 

year’s budget, absolutely ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the time the minister announced the delisting 

of the . . . The implementation date was one week, seven days. 

Chiropractors today don’t know if they can refer patients for 

X-rays or to a specialist. That’s absurd. Mr. Speaker, 

chiropractors have agreements for services with SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board], and private insurance companies that 

end tomorrow and have to be renegotiated. Well we understand 

what he knows about negotiation, so perhaps he missed this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ontario allowed a 6-month transition period, and 

Alberta allowed a 3-month transition period. Will the minister 

at the very least move the implementation date to July 1st to 

allow for a smoother transition? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this question was asked 

a number of days ago regarding referral. The only thing that has 

changed, Mr. Speaker, is our government is no longer 

subsidizing a portion of the visits. If chiropractors referred in 

the past, they will be able to continue to refer into the future, 

Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t change. 

 

What changes is the portion of subsidization that our 

government covers, Mr. Speaker. And it’s interesting. Some of 

the cases we’ve seen come forward, the one just recently in the 

media, the person was at the chiropractor about 130 times. 

There isn’t a province or state in the country that would cover 

that many visits, Mr. Speaker. We will cover, what we will 

cover . . . 12 visits, Mr. Speaker, for low-income as in Alberta 

and 10 in British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, that is a new low in this House, to 

bring a patient’s name and circumstance into this debate. He 

referenced who was mentioned when . . . I mean this is not very 

hard to find the . . . [inaudible] . . . Anyway, Mr. Speaker, 

tomorrow chiropractic patients will be forced to seek care from 

emergency rooms, general practitioners, and specialists because 

they can’t afford the treatment. This off-loading onto the health 



4644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

system will increase wait times and add extra costs. This is 

typical Sask Party math. Save a dollar; pay three. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has chosen to disregard any assertion 

that delisting chiropractic care will cost the government more 

than it saves. Will the minister today, Mr. Speaker, have the 

Saskatchewan Health Quality Council conduct a study to 

determine the actual human and financial impact and financial 

. . . the costs of delisting chiropractic care tomorrow? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said from the 

outset, this budget that was introduced last week is a record 

budget. Every province in Canada is seeing increases. We were 

able to bring a budget in that sees spending less this year than 

we saw last year, Mr. Speaker, it’s something we should be 

very proud of. The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is we have to 

go through line by line on every expenditure and make difficult 

decisions. This was not an easy decision for our government, to 

no longer subsidize chiropractic services. I have said from the 

outset that there is no question about the efficacy of their 

services, Mr. Speaker. That is not the issue whatsoever, Mr. 

Speaker, but difficult decisions have to be made. 

 

This decision has been made in every other province, Mr. 

Speaker, reducing the amount of subsidy and in many provinces 

— nine provinces and territories — where the subsidy has been 

completely eliminated, Mr. Speaker. We are following along 

with the provinces to the West, British Columbia and Alberta. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Health Care Provision 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, instead of investing funds in the 

Regina ambulatory care centre, the minister has decided to 

invest in the private system. The Sask Party’s surgical initiative 

plan talks about, and I quote, “Ensuring that shorter wait times 

can be sustained into the future.” Can the minister enlighten the 

House and advise us how he’s going to sustain shorter wait 

times into the future when he has chosen not to invest in the 

publicly owned infrastructure, and is it all going to be done 

through the private system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly . . . I 

think the editorial in today’s Leader-Post explains it very, very 

well. And I’m just going to quote from that editorial, and it 

says, “So a pair of small private clinics, whose services, 

significantly, would be covered by the provincial health . . . 

dollars [Mr. Speaker], would hardly amount to privatizing the 

vast health-care system . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they’re trying to . . . they’re trying to frame 

it that we’re privatizing the health care system. Nothing could 

be further from the truth. What we are doing is ensuring quicker 

time, quicker, shorter wait times, Mr. Speaker, for people in this 

province. But that’s exactly what they’ve asked for for the 

Patient First Review. It’s unfortunate that they’re letting their 

ideology get in the way of some very good decisions. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the minister 

announced part of his plan . . . is to quote, “Making better use 

of acute care beds through timelier patient transitions to long 

term [care] beds.” Now last year, the Sask Party broke its 

promise to fund 13 long-term care facilities that were not 

creating new capacity but were replacing existing beds. 

 

So to the minister, we want to understand his new plan. How 

does this work? He’s going to move people into long-term care 

beds when he’s not building any new capacity, and in fact he’s 

cancelled 13 long-term care facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, let’s make 

sure that the members opposite understand that there are 13 

long-term care facilities that are going to be built in this 

province. Those 13 long-term care facilities will replace aging 

facilities that quite unfortunately, through many, many years of 

neglect under the NDP government . . . they failed to get it 

done . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are 13 facilities 

around the province that will be built. Mr. Speaker, once the 

community has their share in place, once the scoping has been 

completed, those facilities will move forward. They are much 

needed facilities. And unfortunately you don’t have to go too 

far in our province to see neglect from 16 years of NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s in education, whether 

it’s in health care, we are moving on it, Mr. Speaker. As soon as 

the communities are ready and their funds are in place, we’ll be 

there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they sure are moving on 

it because they’ve reduced 115 long-term care beds in the 

province of Saskatchewan since coming to government. 

They’ve eliminated them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy only gets worse because one 

of the first things the Sask Party did was cut the dental sealant 

program for schoolchildren in core neighbourhoods. Now the 

minister is trying to tell us the government is “working to 

improve children’s oral health in populations at risk.” Now does 

anyone know what’s going on over there? 

 

To the minister: how can he cut the dental sealant program and 

improve children’s oral health? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly children’s oral 

health was identified in the surgical care initiative. As we move 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4645 

forward, as a preventative measure, Mr. Speaker, we are 

looking at how we can best do that because certainly the 

prevention of oral disease in the outset certainly saves money in 

the long term, and we are moving in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are making many steps. First of all, it’s funny 

that they would only . . . for the longest time look at third-party 

delivery instead of looking at the whole surgical care initiative, 

which quite frankly is selling very well throughout the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s plan also 

provides an additional 2,500 MRI [magnetic resonance 

imaging] and CT [computerized tomography] scans through the 

private system. And so I guess to the minister: can the minister 

enlighten the House and the population on where are these new 

private MRI and CT scanners going to be located and how 

much is this going to cost the public system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I feel I have to stand and 

at the start of each question, answer for me, from her question 

. . . is I have to correct the misinformation that is being spread 

by that member. Number one, that there are going to be 25 

more CT-MRI scans. They’re not all going to be done in the 

private system that that member mentioned. There is capacity 

that we can work on within the public system. We’re already 

doing that. We’ve made great strides in the two and a half 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, there is private delivery of health care services 

from British Columbia to Quebec and probably past into the 

Maritimes — I haven’t looked into that — but there is private 

delivery across Canada both on diagnostics and on surgical 

care, Mr. Speaker. We’re the outlier, Mr. Speaker. We’re going 

to make sure we’re there for patients as we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has 

rejected the candidate chosen by a bipartisan committee for the 

position of Chief Electoral Officer and has not provided a 

reason. By doing this, a StarPhoenix article says, “. . . the 

unmistakable impression is created that the only reason the 

Saskatchewan Party would refuse his appointment would be an 

effort to gerrymander the electoral boundaries or to subvert the 

electoral process by stacking the office.” 

 

Is the Premier today less excited about his fixed election date 

and more excited about a date for a fixed election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the member 

opposite and the members of the House to know that I contacted 

yourself earlier this week with a request that you initiate a 

meeting of the Board of Internal Economy so that we can 

attempt to move this process on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had indicated earlier in the House that the 

selection of the Chief Electoral Officer is not a decision made 

by one individual, one committee, or one party. It is not a 

committee decision. It is not a Board of Internal Economy 

decision, Mr. Speaker. It is not an opposition decision. It is not 

a government members’ decision. It is not a media decision. It 

is a choice of all of the members in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I read section 4(3) of the Act earlier, and I will 

read it again: “The Chief Electoral Officer shall be appointed by 

resolution of the Assembly.” Mr. Speaker, it does not say 

anything in there that there shall be a committee or a process in 

there that will subvert that meaning of that section, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the selection is a selection of 

the Legislative Assembly which has been appropriated by the 

Premier of the province. Will the Premier make it absolutely 

clear why he will not accept the candidate chosen by the 

bipartisan committee for the position of Chief Electoral 

Officer? And if not, will he agree to call a public inquiry into 

this matter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the 

members opposite to focus and to direct their mind on the 

specific issues that are in the legislation. Mr. Speaker, for 

greater clarity, I will refer them to section 4.3 of the Act, which 

talks about the appointment of an interim officer. That one says 

that when the Chief Electoral Officer has resigned or is ill or is 

otherwise unable to, then the Board of Internal Economy 

appoint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a fundamentally different section than 4(3) 

which talks about a resolution of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 

they are two different processes. And the process that we are 

under now, Mr. Speaker, is the appointment of a Chief Electoral 

Officer. It is imperative that the Chief Electoral Officer enjoy 

the confidence of all members of the Assembly, not just the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that this 

particular officer enjoyed the confidence of the Minister of 

Justice until he was told, until he was told to withdraw his 

recommendation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite will also know, Mr. Speaker, that their 

actions have devastated the morale and the national reputation 

of our elections office. Will the Premier withdraw his veto and 

restore credibility to the electoral office in Saskatchewan? 

 

[14:30] 

 



4646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am one member of the 

Board of Internal Economy as is the member from Regina 

Dewdney. We each represent our respective caucuses. We take 

information back and forth. We share the information with our 

caucuses. Recommendations come forward. 

 

What we want to have, Mr. Speaker, is a process that we can 

bring the name of a proposed candidate to this House and have 

that candidate pass, either unanimously or with as many people 

as is possible, Mr. Speaker. There is no reason in the world that 

we should be having this kind of debate that embarrasses any 

one, particular individual, Mr. Speaker. This is a system that 

should be fair, apolitical, impartial, and those members should 

realize it, Mr. Speaker. And they should accept it and work 

towards finding that resolution. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member for Cannington on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member from Cannington to state his 

point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

from Hansard yesterday, page 4579, I would like to quote the 

Leader of the Official Opposition and he said, and I quote, and I 

quote, “people could care less whether it was privatized, 

referring to medicare.” Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition was talking about the Minister of Health. On page 

4580 he said as well, and I quote the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, “I want to quote from the minister when he said, 

people could care less whether it was privatized, referring to 

medicare.” 

 

I would now like to quote what the Minister of Health actually 

said. And I quote, “When a person is put into an ambulance 

here in Regina or Saskatoon, they could care less whether it was 

private.” Period, Mr. Speaker. The word privatize was never 

used. Clearly the member from Regina Douglas Park was 

editorializing, Mr. Speaker, not quoting. Quotes need to be 

accurate not editorial comment. I would ask that the Leader of 

the Official Opposition withdraw that remark and apologize for 

misleading the House. 

 

The Speaker: — First of all let me say this, and then I’ll 

recognize the member if he wants to respond. 

 

As I was listening, it seems to me that the point being raised by 

the Government House Leader is more a point of debate and a 

point of difference and misunderstanding in the Assembly. And 

I really do not feel that the point that the Government House 

Leader at this time is really a point of order. It’s a point that 

could be raised in debate between members of the Assembly. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1098 through 1136. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1098 through 1136 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Yates.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m coming close to the end of 

my remarks, but I do want to put something on the public 

record. 

 

Last night the Minister of Education launched quite an attack on 

the Education critic for the opposition, the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana, which is myself. Fair enough, Mr. Speaker, 

fair enough — he can say what he has to say about Education 

capital. He can say what he has to say about infant child 

daycare in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But the one issue that I think the minister was not being totally 

honest and forthright on was a letter that he read parts of, that I 

had sent to him, into the public record. Now the minister is 

correct. I sent a letter to him on February 11, 2010. And I 

indicated in that letter that I was contacted by a citizen, and I 

was asked to bring a number of issues to his attention. I 

indicated in this letter on several occasions that I understood 

from the citizen . . . and I went on and on. I said I’d been told 

by the citizen, and at the end I said . . . and I want to put this 

into the public record: 

 

There are many other issues that have been brought to my 

attention regarding governance in the City of Humboldt. 

This city does not have its own ward and this is seen as a 

significant problem. I would appreciate [and I’m quoting 

from the letter, I would appreciate] your response to these 

few issues I have been asked to raise with you. I would 

appreciate an opportunity to have a further discussion 

with you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I thought, as an elected member of the 

opposition, I had every right to send a letter to the Minister of 

Education on behalf of someone who had written me. I don’t 

know this person. This is a person that lives in the city of 

Humboldt. And I indicated to that person that I would write the 

minister on their behalf, and I did. I asked a series of questions. 

I asked for clarification on behalf of that citizen who I do not 

know. 

 

And what did the minister do? He took my letter and he said 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4647 

that I had insulted teachers, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to put it into the public record. The minister and I can 

have a debate about school capital. The minister and I can have 

a debate about question period. But when I send a letter to a 

minister of the Crown on behalf of a citizen, I don’t expect that 

minister to misrepresent, misrepresent what I have written in a 

letter on behalf of the citizen. When I’m asking questions and 

clarification on behalf of that citizen, I presume that the 

minister will not take that letter out of context which he did. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there has to be some honour here. We can 

have debates about who said what. But when you send a letter 

on behalf of a citizen, I don’t expect that letter to be read into 

the record in the Assembly out of context. And I would really 

appreciate the minister . . . If we’re going to, as MLAs in the 

opposition, to write letters on behalf of constituents, I would 

urge the government not to read into the record a letter and not 

read the whole letter so that people can understand the context 

within which that letter was sent. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the respect that I showed the minister 

at the end of the letter . . . when I said: 

 

I would appreciate your response to these few issues I’ve 

been asked to raise with you. I would appreciate an 

opportunity to have a further discussion with you. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, the minister is a teacher . . . was, was a teacher, 

no longer belongs to the profession. I am a teacher. And I 

would think that when we’re at least corresponding with each 

other, we could at least be respectful which I think I have tried 

to be with that minister. 

 

And I didn’t expect, Mr. Speaker . . . I expected the school 

capital question, and yes, he could give me heck about that. He 

can give me heck about the questions I ask in the House about 

infant child daycare. But I would urge the minister to show 

grace, show grace in this Assembly when a member of the 

opposition writes him a respectful letter on behalf of a citizen 

— who I do not know — seeking clarification on behalf of that 

citizen. I would expect the minister to show some grace and not 

read parts of the letter into the record but not all of the letter 

into the record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has to be some honour, and there has to be 

some class. And I would hope — it may not take place in this 

forum — but I would hope that when a member of the 

opposition or any member of the legislature writes a letter to the 

minister that it wouldn’t be read into the record only bits and 

pieces but not the whole letter with the whole context, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have put my remarks on the public record. 

I obviously have great difficulty with this budget, great 

difficulty. I think this budget is a dishonest budget. It is quite 

clear that not only are we going to have a 660-odd million 

dollar deficit — the second deficit since this government came 

to office — but they’ve moved a lot of that deficit off budget, 

really, onto health boards. We’ll see what the real deficit will be 

at mid-year, I suppose, or next year. But, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that we left them with $2.3 billion in cash. They have 

essentially spent it all, and we still have a debt, a deficit last two 

years of over $1.2 billion. 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would take my place and I would 

thank the members for listening to what I have to say on this 

budget. And I can tell you that I will in fact be supporting the 

amendment to the budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into the budget debate, Mr. Speaker, as it is 

every year, as it has been for me as the MLA for Swift Current, 

whether I’ve sat on that side of the House or this side of the 

House. Mr. Speaker, I am mindful today of those I serve in 

Swift Current, those constituents who first sent me to this place 

in September of 1999, and I want to just say for the record, put 

on the record my gratitude to them for the chance to serve, for 

the chance to represent them here in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to, on the occasion of this budget 

speech, as I do in any address in reply to a Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, is put on the record my gratitude for all of those who 

help me carry out the duties I have, both as the MLA and the 

other job I’m honoured to have, Mr. Speaker. Those who are a 

part of this team, the women and men that make up this caucus, 

at the top of that list, Mr. Speaker, and others who, on the staff 

side, who do a great service to the province. And most 

importantly, to my family, Mr. Speaker, back home in Swift 

Current — to Tami and Megan and Colter and Faith for their 

constant support and encouragement — and I just want to again 

state for the record how grateful I am to them for the chance to 

serve in this way. 

 

We have had a change in our constituency office here recently 

as a constituency assistant that has worked in our office in Swift 

Current for some time has now joined the staff here in the 

legislature and is helping people with their health care files in 

the able Minister of Health’s office, Mr. Speaker. And so back 

home in Swift Current — maybe watching on TV, but probably 

not because she’ll be working on casework for constituents — 

is Nola Smith who I want to welcome to our team and thank her 

as well for the service she provides to the constituents in Swift 

Current. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there has been much debate in this 

Assembly and around the province about this particular budget 

and the decisions the government has taken. There’s been some 

debate obviously in this Assembly about the nature of the 

budget, whether it is balanced and whether there is a surplus or 

whether there is not a surplus, Mr. Speaker. And you know it’s 

very interesting because on the very first day of the budget 

debate, I guess, when the Leader of the Opposition had a chance 

to stand in his place and give the reply to the budget, the first 

reply to the government with respect to the budget . . . And by 

the way, by the way, it was a unique budget day, Mr. Speaker, 

in this province. 

 

As I recall . . . I haven’t been around that long, but people like 

the member for Cannington, well they have been around a little 

longer, and I’ve asked him, Mr. Speaker, this question. We 

can’t remember a day, we can’t remember a budget day in the 

province of Saskatchewan where the Finance critic, who has to 

do all the work over on that side . . . and we know something 

about that on this side of the House. We’ve had very able 

Finance critics: the current Deputy Premier, the current Minister 



4648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

of Enterprise. They were all Finance critics. And we know the 

amount of work that goes into that in advance of the budget to 

make the opposition’s case to hold the government accountable. 

We know the amount of work that goes into the budget during 

the lockdown when the opposition members get that particular 

budget document, and we know the amount of work the Finance 

critic does. 

 

You know in this case, the member for Regina . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Rosemont. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Regina Rosemont. The member for Regina 

Rosemont’s done a lot of work. We don’t agree with the things 

necessarily that he has said. But no one can doubt his passion, 

no one can doubt the fact that he has taken his job as the 

Finance critic very seriously on behalf of the opposition. 

 

And here he was on budget day, his chance to make the case for 

the opposition to hold the government accountable. And for the 

first time that I could ever remember or even the much more 

veteran member for Cannington can ever remember, the Leader 

of the Opposition stood in his place and did all of the work on 

budget day, did the scrum, did all the press conference, and then 

stood up in his place when the galleries are filled to make his 

case for the opposition. Mr. Speaker, I thought it was strange. I 

thought it was strange. 

 

We understand on this side of the House, when it comes to 

building a budget, we understand the importance of teamwork. 

We understand that the Minister of Finance . . . We were in 

opposition. The critic for Finance has a lot of work to do in 

advance of the budget and on budget day and thereafter. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is a special day for either the critic or the 

minister — in our case, our minister — to be able to stand up 

and deliver a budget for the province of Saskatchewan. And we 

know, Mr. Speaker — on this side of the House anyway; I can’t 

speak for that Leader of the Opposition opposite obviously — 

but we know on this side of the House the importance of 

teamwork and the importance of our Minister of Finance to 

stand in his place on budget day and deliver what I think are, 

and what the national media I think are referring to if only 

indirectly, as the strongest set of financial sheets of any 

province in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. But on that 

day when the Opposition Leader took his place to talk about the 

NDP’s position with respect to this budget, he referred to our 

green sheet.  

 

A green sheet is the summary that comes and has come with 

most budgets for some period of time. In fact it’s a tradition that 

dates back to the previous administration. The previous NDP 

government used to issue a green sheet. And it’s not a prop. It’s 

what I’m going to read from, Mr. Speaker. But I happen to have 

it and this is actually the shade that it comes in and it has 

always come in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, the Opposition Leader tried to paint this picture 

of the budget as being, well not balanced. And he quoted some 

things from this particular green sheet in our budget, some 

numbers that showed the summary deficit surplus at about, in 

our — this is actually from an earlier budget — but well south 

of 600 million on a summary basis. He showed the summary 

deficit, did the Leader of the Opposition, and then he 

highlighted the fact that revenues and expenditures were, there 

was a difference between revenues and expenditures in our 

budget of about $190 million or so. And so then, he went to 

great lengths to say that the government was not then presenting 

the budget as balanced because of what was evidence on the 

green sheet he was quoting from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I’ve got a green sheet here from 2007 and 2008. And 

here’s what’s on that green sheet in wording that is almost 

identical to what we saw from the previous administration, from 

the NDP when they presented their budget. 

 

Here is the NDP budget 2007-2008. It says right at the top, 

General . . . Well, and the member for Rosemont will want to 

hear this. It says at the top of the sheet, General Revenue Fund 

in surplus for the 14th consecutive year. But when you look 

down, Mr. Speaker, when you look down at the numbers, you 

see that there’s actually an operating deficit, that revenues are 

below expenditures by over $500 million. Not $190 million to 

be taken from the cash account, from the savings account, but a 

half a billion dollars, the NDP said in their budget, they would 

take, they would take from their savings account, which by the 

way finally had cash in it. 

 

Because people in this Assembly will remember and people 

watching will remember, that it wasn’t very long ago, under the 

NDP, where they had this savings account with no actual cash 

in it, Mr. Speaker. In fact it was a debt instrument. It was a line 

of credit. So as you took more from the savings account, the 

debt of the province actually went up. And we’ve worked hard, 

by the way, to reduce the debt of the province we’ve inherited 

from members opposite. We reduced the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] debt by 40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP budget now that they said was a 

balanced budget. Members opposite said it was a balanced 

budget. And they highlight the fact that revenues were going to 

be short of expenditures by 500 million and that the summary 

deficit was $700 million, Mr. Speaker. But that was a balanced 

budget. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, some enterprising people have looked 

through some Hansard and found what members opposite said 

about that budget in ’07 and ’08. The same members that are 

talking about the fact that the budget we presented isn’t 

balanced, they make the case it’s not balanced, and we’ve all 

heard the debate. 

 

The same members, in fact the member that just stood up, the 

member that was just involved in debate, the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana, in the budget debate, the last NDP budget 

debate said, on their budget which had a $500 million operating 

deficit and a $700 million summary financial deficit, she said, 

“Now the . . .” And here’s what, and we’ll be very clear about 

this, this is the member for Nutana, 2007, on the NDP budget 

that had a massive half billion dollar deficit they were going to 

cover with the savings account said, “Now the final thing I want 

to say to the members opposite is this. We’ve now had 14 

consecutive balanced budgets.” That’s what she said. That’s 

what she said. 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4649 

What did . . . Well I just can hear the member for Regina 

Dewdney is always interested in getting into the debate. What 

did he say during the budget debate of 2007? We’re always 

interested to read his speeches, Mr. Speaker. Just a year ago, for 

example, I remember the member for Regina Dewdney giving 

some very, very articulate and compelling speeches on the 

importance of civil servants — and I assume politicians that 

work for the government — who are retired, not coming back 

and earning their salary while they’re collecting a pension. I 

remember that speech, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday though, 

apparently he forgot about that speech. Apparently he can’t 

really have that position any more because I think his boss, his 

boss might call him up a little bit short if he were to go make 

that case. 

 

But here’s what he said about the budget in 2007. Remember 

what I said, Mr. Speaker: the last NDP budget was to be 

balanced by a withdrawal from the savings account, the very 

same, the very same initiative that this government is enacting, 

Mr. Speaker, although to a much lesser extent — half a billion 

versus 190 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member for 

Dewdney says, what were the NDP like, I think is what he said. 

Here is what he said, here is what he said about that budget: 

 

I’m not going to question the experts who say this [is a 

balanced budget]. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that, 

combined with 16 straight credit rating upgrades, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it speaks for itself. 

 

That’s what he said.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the current member for Regina Coronation Park, 

Coronation Park, he said this in response in the House. I’m not 

sure. You know sometimes when you quote the member for 

Regina Coronation Park, you have to make sure you take it all 

in context. Otherwise, it’s difficult to understand. But here’s 

what he said: “Premier, we’ve got money, we’ve got cash, we 

can pay cash for some things. They say deficit. What nonsense, 

Mr. Speaker. What absolute nonsense.” 

 

Here’s what the member for North Battleford said, Mr. Speaker, 

on that same budget with respect to running a big operating 

deficit. The member for North Battleford said this — this is 

telling. “Take a look back to the 1980s . . .” he said. And that 

surprises me, that a NDP member would want to look back the 

’80s. 

 

I think those who watch the NDP’s convention — and we had 

some folks over watching the convention here just this last 

weekend — I think they counted about 19 references to the 

government of the 1980s and to that decade in the Leader of the 

Opposition’s speech. And he exited the stage to “Don’t Stop 

Believin” by Journey, which actually isn’t even the ’80s. I think 

that’s the late 1970s. So it’s a theme that we’re used to. 

 

But here’s what the member for Battleford said. He said: 

 

Take a look back to the 1980s and the government of 

Grant Devine where, Madam Deputy Speaker, they didn’t 

have surplus accounts to draw from as we do in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, Madam Deputy Speaker, to ensure 

that all programs are able to be funded, Madam Deputy 

Speaker, and have balanced budgets. 

Mr. Speaker, if the NDP agreed in 2007 that you could use cash 

in the bank, in your savings account as revenue and balance the 

budget, Mr. Speaker, if they believed that in 2007, they ought to 

vote for this budget, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, this is 

what we’re doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of highlights in this budget of 

course, and I’d like to touch on some of them if I can. I want to 

say that this government has began at the top in terms of 

restraint. Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you and I would tell 

members of this Assembly, that when it comes to government 

advertising, we’ve cut it in half — from 16 million to $8.5 

million, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to government travel, it’s 

down 15 per cent — $45 million under the NDP; we’re down to 

$38.2 million even though the costs of travel are actually up. 

That’s a decrease of 15 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ministerial travel in the last year of that 

administration, ’06-07, the last full year . . . The amount we 

have cut in ministerial travel — 38 per cent. Which is no small 

feat, Mr. Speaker, because in this caucus we’re proud to have 

members in the cabinet and otherwise who are from urban 

Saskatchewan, many in Regina, and many of course from rural 

Saskatchewan in the cabinet of the province for the first time in 

a very, very long time. And so distance to travel arguably is 

going to be a little bit longer, and yet we’ve actually cut back 

the amount of travel from the NDP days when they spent almost 

$1 million, at 975,000 in ’06-07. We’re down last year 603,000. 

That’s a net reduction of 38 per cent, and it’s coming down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as regards Executive Council, well that’s the 

office of the Premier, as you know. Executive Council in this 

budget cuts the budget, reduces the budget by 3 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve started from the very, very top. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to political staff, we have fewer 

cabinet ministers to begin with than the NDP had in their dying 

days. But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that even with those, with 

the smaller cabinet today under a Saskatchewan Party 

government there are 30 fewer political staff — 17 per cent less 

political staff than the NDP. Overall monthly salaries for the 

Sask Party government are $158,000 less or 15.1 per cent less 

in terms of the staff of this building than the NDP. So we’re 

working very hard, Mr. Speaker, to start at the very, very top. 

 

There are a number of things in this budget that I would like to 

address. I know that a number of other members want to join in 

the debate, and so I’m going to focus on just a few of them. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going to focus on infrastructure, on capital, and 

then a little bit later on, I’d like to focus on the wait times 

initiative that the Minister of Health has announced more 

formally earlier this week but that was funded in the provincial 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to infrastructure, let me just say this: 

I believe any fair assessment of the budget of the Saskatchewan 

Party government since the election in 2007, any fair 

assessment will show you that no government in the history of 

the province has invested more in our highways and in our 

health care facilities and in our educational facilities and in 

municipal infrastructure and in rural roads. No other 

government has invested like this government has. 

 



4650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

That trend continues with a third . . . Even in this time of 

restraint, even with an overall reduction in the expenditures of 

government — which is pretty unheard of in this day and age, 

whether you’re in North America or around the world — even 

in that context, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing the third largest 

capital budget in the history of the province and the second 

largest Highways budget in Saskatchewan history as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet there is more work to be done. 

 

The reason that there is more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, is 

that members opposite sat on these benches for 16 years. And, 

Mr. Speaker, well beyond the time of fiscal austerity and the 

program that was implemented in those years, well beyond that 

timeline, Mr. Speaker, there was opportunity. There was ample 

opportunity for that side of the House to pay more than lip 

service to the infrastructure needs of this province, whether it 

was in the city or especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

This government surveyed the massive infrastructure deficit gap 

we inherited after the ’07 election. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, 

we had a sense, I think intuitively we knew that the deficit was 

huge. The CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] would 

value the deficit in highway infrastructure alone at $1 billion. 

They said there was a $1 billion gap in terms of highway 

spending in this province in the highways infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that gap lays at the feet of members opposite. That 

gap lays at the feet of the Leader of the Opposition who sat on 

these benches. And when rural Saskatchewan sent him walking, 

when rural Saskatchewan issued their severance papers to the 

member now for Regina Douglas Park, he slipped into Regina. 

There was a nomination situation there in Elphinstone — no 

surprise frankly, Mr. Speaker — but he slipped out of rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Part of the reason he got that pink slip, part of the reason his 

message isn’t resonating there today is that the people of rural 

Saskatchewan understand with clarity that the infrastructure 

deficit we have in this province that we are digging our way out 

of, that we are paving over in this province, is the result of 

ignoring the problem. That’s what we saw from members 

opposite for years and years and years. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we signal with our first two budgets and we 

signal it with this budget, even in a time of restraint, that that 

has changed for good in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, there have been, there have been so many projects that 

we could point to that have been funded in our first two budgets 

and that will be funded in this budget. For those who drive 

down College Avenue and see the piles there for the Academic 

Health Sciences facility there — now not just press releases 

about it, but actual construction happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

For those who heard the good news from city council in 

Saskatoon about the construction of one of the largest traffic 

projects in the history of the province, made possible by our 

partnership with the federal government, by $100 million from 

the province, and by the city of Saskatoon, that construction 

will be under way and be a constant reminder of this 

government’s commitment to infrastructure. 

 

Or whether it’s the global, or whether it’s the global 

transportation hub in this community, Mr. Speaker — maybe 

the single most important economic development-related 

infrastructure project in Western Canada, certainly in the 

province of Saskatchewan — funded by the government in a 

significant way, both through our Saskatchewan infrastructure 

growth initiative and also through grants, also through the 

support that we’ve given to the global transportation hub. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is evidence all over this province, whether 

it’s highways that are finally paved, finally done, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve got great news in Leader. We were able to give some 

great news in Leader earlier this week on Monday when we met 

there with the community leaders and with those who own the 

Sand Hills terminal there, the producers that own it. Their 

question of course was, is Highway 32 going to get done this 

year? Because we’ve been working at it, working very hard. 

The member for Cypress Hills worked hard on it on opposition. 

His pleas fell on deaf ears from the NDP. He became the 

Highways minister. It was obviously an important economic 

project. It continued under the current Highways minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we’re able to tell the people in Leader that there is no need, 

the NDP are not in power anymore so there’s no need to put 

together those calendars that featured, that featured volunteers 

in various stages of undress. Because that project, in the 

restraint budget, is going to get done this year, Mr. Speaker. 

Finally it’s going to get done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if members opposite drive up 

Highway 32 very often, if they have cause to. But I want to tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, when they drive up that highway, and when 

they used to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member 

for Regina Dewdney’s saying he has been up the road. I wonder 

when he drove up that road. I know he’s got relatives down in 

the Southwest. I wonder if he drove up that road, Mr. Speaker, 

when he sat in the cabinet. 

 

When he sat in the cabinet of the NDP government, did he 

report back, Mr. Speaker, to the cabinet and to his caucus about 

the number of pumpjacks he’d see on either side of Highway 

32? Did he report back about the gas that’s being developed 

there, the compressor stations? Did he report back to his 

cabinet, say, you know what, Mr. Speaker, we are getting a lot 

of money out of that area of the province. That highway’s pretty 

key for us to keep that development going, to keep those 

royalties coming in so we can support health care and education 

and social services. I don’t think he did tell the cabinet that, Mr. 

Speaker. Or if he did, like so many other things when it comes 

to the member for Dewdney, his colleagues ignored him. 

Because nothing happened, Mr. Speaker. Nothing happened. 

 

Our government takes a different view. And we know there is 

work to be done, Mr. Speaker, because the NDP left us such a 

huge highways infrastructure gap. But our position is decidedly 

different, and it is reflected in this budget. We understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that the natural resources of this province are in rural 

Saskatchewan. That’s where you’ll find them. 

 

We understand, Mr. Speaker, we understand, Mr. Speaker, that 

that’s where the potash is, that’s where the oil and gas is. We 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that that’s where, in northern 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4651 

Saskatchewan, that’s where the uranium mines are. That’s 

where half of the arable acres in Canada are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so, unlike the New Democrats, you can’t simply cash the 

cheques that are coming in, the tax revenues and the royalties 

that are coming in from rural Saskatchewan. You’ve got to put 

something back. You’ve got to invest in their infrastructure. 

You’ve got to respond to their health care needs. You’ve got to 

fix the schools. And we went through a renovation of a school 

in Maple Creek. We went and toured the old Maple Creek 

Hospital that this government’s going to replace, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw the manifestation of a government’s 

understanding that you’ve got to invest back in rural 

Saskatchewan in order for us to continue to grow as a province, 

just as we must invest in urban Saskatchewan, and just as we 

have invested in urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, these capital investments, especially as 

it relates to highways, are very much a part of the budget that 

we are debating today. I think the member from Regina 

Lakeview, who was the Health minister, just said from his feet a 

very interesting question, in the budget debate. He said, what 

about Preeceville? There was a hospital that’s been needed in 

Preeceville for a very long time. 

 

And I’m glad the member that represents Preeceville is not here 

because I’d have a very hard time keeping him in his seat at this 

point because that member would raise the issue of the 

Preeceville hospital with that minister and any other Health 

ministers that existed over on the other side. 

 

And what did we see, Mr. Speaker, in lieu of actually doing 

something about the Preeceville hospital? Count them, seven 

press releases. Well, the member for Lakeview is saying, get 

your facts right. I’ll tell you what. When it comes to collating, 

and fact collecting and accuracy, I will take the word of the 

Deputy Premier, the member for Canora, over that member any 

day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Seven press releases. They issued seven press releases and no 

hospital. We took a different approach. We took a different 

approach. Rather than issue the press releases about a new 

hospital, here’s a novel idea, we thought we would build the 

hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rather than issue press releases about the Academic Health 

Sciences Centre in Saskatoon, we thought we’d start building 

the Academic Health Sciences Centre. Rather, Mr. Speaker, 

rather than issuing press releases about the need for 

infrastructure improvements in Saskatoon for a new bridge, we 

thought we’d start building the bridge in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s under way. And the same is true for the 

global transportation hub. The same is true for the massive 

amounts of investments we’ve made in Regina, for the 

Humboldt hospital, Mr. Speaker, for the school that we did tour 

in Maple Creek, for the new hospital that’s coming to that 

community as well, to Oxbow’s hospital. The list is long, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Members opposite, members opposite were good at generating 

a lot of press releases. The member for Nutana is now chirping 

from her seat. She also got into the spirit of issuing press 

releases. 

 

You know, we take a different approach. And you know what, 

Mr. Speaker? I think that’s why, I think that’s why the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, I think it’s why the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan in poll after poll after poll say, 

we like the approach of actually doing stuff rather than the NDP 

approach of just talking about stuff, Mr. Speaker. And we see it 

in survey after survey. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when the budget was tabled, prior to 

the budget being tabled, when the third quarter report was 

issued for the province, our opposition talked about the need for 

cutbacks, for restraint. That was the Finance critic. I think he 

quite rightly pointed out, look, the government needs to reduce 

spending. That’s what the member said. That’s what the 

member for Regina Rosemont said. And I’ve got quotes here. 

 

He said in Hansard, he said, there is spending that the province 

can’t afford if it’s not taken under, if something’s not done. 

 

Here’s another quote from the Finance critic from March the 

2nd, 2010 in a NDP news release. 

 

With the next provincial budget only weeks away, we 

need a clear signal from this government that it has a plan 

to get out of deficit and a detailed plan to reign in its . . . 

spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the member to vote for the budget because 

that is exactly, exactly what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we could see why, we could see why when it came to the 

budget, we could see why he got sat down on budget day, why 

he got benched unfortunately on budget day, notwithstanding 

his good advice. The reason that happened is because the 

Leader of the Opposition didn’t agree. The Leader of the 

Opposition’s advocacy to this government is that we just spend, 

just keep spending. Here’s what he said to The Sheaf. He said, 

well this a Sheaf article and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker, “The 

Saskatchewan Party is in belt tightening mode on the . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Well here it is, there it is, the member from Nutana is asking for 

the whole article. Well I could read the whole article actually. 

It’s all pretty good because it highlights the fact that the Leader 

of the Opposition never got the Finance critic’s memo about 

what we should be doing in the budget. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party is in belt tightening mode [it 

says in this article] on the 2010-2011 budget, but with 

resource revenues steadily improving [steadily 

improving] from last year’s figure, opposition leader 

Dwain [and I’m quoting, opposition leader Dwain] 

Lingenfelter says, it’s no time to cut services. 

 

He said this, and I quote: 

 

The price of oil is up 20 per cent from where it was last 

year . . . We also expect that revenues from potash will be 

back somewhere in the area of $400 million in the coming 

year. 



4652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

He went on to just talk about the need for the government to 

avoid cutbacks, to avoid restraint. That’s what the Leader of the 

Opposition said, Mr. Speaker, in advance of the debate. 

 

Now since then, since then because the wind started blowing a 

different direction, for politically expedient reasons, he’s 

changed his tune a little bit. And he’s a little bit more in line 

with his Finance critic, although his Finance critic has not been 

able to get on his feet much in question period, post the budget, 

maybe because he’s not been allowed to, maybe because his 

advice was pretty sound, maybe because he’d be more 

comfortable with our position of restraint rather than his 

leader’s position of spending, Mr. Speaker. That well may be 

the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . There’s many other 

parts to the budget, Mr. Speaker, that I could talk about. But I 

just want to finish with the discussion, if I can, about the 

budget’s component with respect to the surgical wait times 

initiative in the province. I think it’s the most important part of 

the budget. There is $10 million in cash for a specific surgical 

wait times initiative, Mr. Speaker. You will know that our 

government has said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

hon. member for Lakeview has just said it won’t work. It won’t 

work. You can’t set a goal for wait times. You can’t say, look, 

we’re going to guarantee people a wait time of no longer than 

three months within a four-year period. You can’t do it. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? I think I’ve heard that before. I 

think I heard it from the former minister of Health who was 

asked by SUN, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and by our 

party in opposition, why don’t you at least give us a target for 

nurse recruitment and retention? I remember what he said. It 

sounded just like what the member for Lakeview just said. Well 

we don’t want to set targets, he said, Mr. Speaker, because we 

probably won’t make them. He said it, Mr. Speaker. They say, 

well he couldn’t have said that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Her seatmate just said it again in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, well, I mean, the member for Nutana may hate 

that he said it, but it doesn’t change the fact that he said it. And 

if she doesn’t believe that the member for The Battlefords said 

it when he was Health minister, she should at least be listening 

to the person sitting right beside her, the member from Regina 

Lakeview, who said it won’t work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also said it wouldn’t work when we set a 

target to recruit and retain, well, to add 800 nurses to the 

province of Saskatchewan. Members opposite said it won’t 

work. That’s what they said. Can’t do it. Mr. Speaker, we are 18 

months away from an election, and at the halfway point, Mr. 

Speaker, it was pretty clear that we were well beyond halfway 

towards achieving our target, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I 

think that the people of the province appreciate the fact that 

targets were set and that targets are kept. And we’re going to do 

the same thing when it comes to wait times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we saw a glimpse of the debate might come, although the 

NDP opposition stayed 100 miles, or tried to stay 100 miles 

away from the debate their leader tried to get into yesterday on 

the issue of the surgical wait times. Because, Mr. Speaker, the 

debate that’s about to ensue is going to be very interesting in 

the province of Saskatchewan. It’s going to test the old NDP 

paradigm, the old NDP vision of Saskatchewan, of health care, 

and really of the province in general. 

 

Their vision of the province is a have-not province. Their vision 

of the province is as a place that can’t even keep up to the 

national average in population growth. And their vision of the 

province, their vision of a province whose only vehicle to 

deliver better health care, even though we have a private-public 

mix today that came from their members opposite, their vision 

of course is that any expansion, any improvement in health care 

must never include private components, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 

vision. 

 

In this particular initiative, Mr. Speaker, the surgical wait times 

initiative, the minister announced the details of it earlier this 

week. And it’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that in addition to 

using facilities to a greater extent around the province — 

including in places like North Battleford and Swift Current, 

Weyburn, wherever there’s an operating theatre that we can use, 

Mr. Speaker — in addition to giving patients more flexibility to 

determine which specialist may be available, some common 

sense there, Mr. Speaker, and in addition to the notion that we 

are also going to perhaps engage private sector partners to deal 

with this huge, this huge bulge, this surge that we have to deal 

with in terms of wait times, Mr. Speaker, all we get from the 

members opposite is ideology. 

 

They kind of were running away from it a bit today, and I think 

I know why, Mr. Speaker. I think they realize that they are so 

off base with the people of the province. I think they realize that 

even though they’ve been now two years-plus in the wilderness 

after getting beat in the last election, they are as out of touch 

with Saskatchewan people as ever they were. 

 

Because you know, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 

House, we travel the province as well. I’m sure members do as 

well. I don’t think they’re listening. We hear from people of all 

walks of life, from all walks of life, Mr. Speaker, in all sectors 

of our economy. 

 

People who engage in the debate about wait times, for example, 

Mr. Speaker, say this: if you can make it part of the public 

system, universally accessible and single-payer paid — one 

payer, the Government of Saskatchewan — if you can make it 

part of that then we are not so worried about who holds the 

scalpel, whether they work for the government or whether they 

work for themselves. We just would like the surgery. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, those of us who have neighbours who are just a 

few houses down who’ve lost their business, their business, 

waiting for orthopedic surgery, waiting for an operation on their 

back, I can assure members opposite as long as it’s a 

single-payer system, as long as nobody can jump the queue — 

and that is what we’re talking about here, Mr. Speaker — they 

don’t much care whether the clinic is one that the ministry is 

dealing with now or whether it’s the status quo. They would 

just like to have some pain relief, Mr. Speaker. They’d like not 

to lose their business. 

 

I think we’re going to hear a lot more about this issue that’s 

highlighted in the budget, Mr. Speaker, in the months to come. 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4653 

And I think it will highlight . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

the member from Nutana is still talking from her seat, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s going to be very, very interesting to see what that 

member from Nutana has to say to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan — loquacious as she is from her seat — what she 

might say to the people of the province of Saskatchewan when 

she says to them, I’m sorry, we can’t engage a private clinic. 

We’re not going to do that because it says right here in the 

manifesto that we can’t, because it says right here in the 

ideology that we can’t allow you to go to that clinic even 

though it’s a part of the universally funded medicare, even 

though that there’s a single payer. Well the member’s laughing, 

Mr. Speaker, because that is what they’re saying. When the 

people of this province want health care and timely surgery, the 

NDP want to give them ideology. We will take that debate any 

place, any time, anywhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are excellent initiatives happening within the 

Health, excellent initiatives happening within the Health 

ministry, part of the reason why CIHI [Canadian Institute of 

Health Information] reported last week that wait times are 

actually down in the province, notwithstanding the information 

that’s coming from the benches opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of innovations that are also 

coming within the Health ministry that . . . I want to salute the 

front-line workers who are part of this process, who are a part 

of bringing lean techniques to the health care system. And I 

want to acknowledge the deputy minister and the senior team 

over in the Ministry of Health because they’re leading by 

example. And these same lean techniques, Mr. Speaker, that 

they are implementing in Health are now being looked at in 

other ministries and are going to inform, also, actions in 

ministries and executive government and also in the Crown 

corporations as we seek to shrink the size of government. 

 

And I’ll close on that note, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

well-debated points in the budget is the fact that the plan of the 

Government of Saskatchewan is that we would reduce the 

government by 15 per cent over the next four years, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re going to do that through managing the 

vacancies that come about as a result of retirements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP we saw a lot of, you know, we saw 

a lot of expansion in government. Since I was first elected in 

’99, which isn’t that long ago, the expenditure in government’s 

doubled and the rate of growth in the public service has far 

outstripped the rate of growth in the population that they serve. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just the fact of the matter. 

 

Our government’s saying it’s time for government to live within 

its means. Our government is saying, look, we have so much 

going for us economically in the country right now. We need to 

do whatever we can to preserve that position, to preserve a 

leadership position within the country. We need to make sure 

that government’s growth, the growth of the government itself, 

doesn’t threaten the growth agenda that’s paying off so well for 

the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we enter the last few hours, as we enter the last 

few hours of the budget debate today and tomorrow, there’s 

going to be more focus on the specific numbers in the budget. 

But do you know what people in Saskatchewan are thinking 

about actually, Mr. Speaker? People in the province are 

thinking that this is a great place to be at an absolutely, at a 

great time, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking about the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Imagine this, Mr. Speaker. They’re surveying the province of 

Saskatchewan, are those that we work for, those that we serve, 

and they’re thinking when they have a moment perhaps that we 

just came through the worst international recession since the 

Great Depression. And it was in that recession . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member for Dewdney’s helping me 

out. He’s helping me out. Mr. Speaker, during that international 

recession, Saskatchewan set the job creation record for our 

province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what happened. I don’t know. 

Does the member for Dewdney have any other . . . He wants to 

offer more assistance. I can give him some more information. 

 

During that recession, the international recession, we set the 

population record for the province of Saskatchewan and now 

we’ve since added to it, Mr. Speaker. During that international 

recession, we maintained debt reduction. We maintain historic 

tax cuts, which frankly helped, I think, help us through that 

international recession, Mr. Speaker. And this pains the 

members opposite greatly. Because you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? Their short-term, expedient, political interests are well 

served if Saskatchewan’s not doing as well as it is. That’s the 

truth of the matter. That’s why last fall they were actually 

saying, Mr. Speaker, unbelievably, members opposite were 

actually saying that our economy was in a free fall. That’s a 

quote from Hansard from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

When the people of the province would look to this Assembly, 

the members on both sides of the aisle, to provide confidence in 

the economy of the province of Saskatchewan, the Leader of the 

Opposition said our economy is in a free fall, months after we 

set the job creation record for the province, a month before we 

set the population record for the province, Mr. Speaker. And 

MLA after MLA on that side of the House has characterized the 

economy of this province at such an amazing time as this as a 

bust. Mr. Speaker, nobody believes that. 

 

There is this huge gap between the NDP’s view of the province 

and the government’s view of the province, Mr. Speaker. It 

manifests itself economically. They’re talking about 

state-owned potash companies again. They’re talking about 

state-owned oil companies again, Mr. Speaker. They’re talking 

about increasing royalty rates, Mr. Speaker. They’re talking 

about taking this province back to a time that we want to get 

away from as fast as we can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to health care they have an ideology that says, if 

it’s not in the public system, we can’t partner with the private 

sector even though that partnership exists. 

 

It’s true in file after file of government. They want to go back to 

the way it always was in the 1970s or some other decade, Mr. 

Speaker. The people of this province aren’t interested. They like 

the new Saskatchewan that leads the country. They like this 

place that’s a have province. They like the province that can 

afford to invest in infrastructure, fix highways, and add 

relocatable classrooms as we’re announcing today. They like a 

new Saskatchewan that can invest in an innovation agenda, that 

it can invest in our post-secondary institutions, that can 



4654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

welcome young people back to the province like we have never 

seen, Mr. Speaker. They want that kind of Saskatchewan, and 

this budget sets the stage for that new Saskatchewan to continue 

its momentum. So I’ll be voting against the amendment and I’ll 

be voting in favour of the budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a 

pleasure for the Finance critic to engage in debate within this 

Assembly. It’s an honour, Mr. Speaker, to enter the debate on 

behalf of this opposition and on behalf of the good folks of 

Regina Rosemont. I’m not going to spend much time here today 

with introductions and thank yous and all those kind of things 

because we’ve got to get to the matter at hand here, and that’s 

the devastating budget that’s been put forward. I would like to 

certainly recognize my lovely, beautiful, intelligent wife and all 

that she does within our life together. 

 

What I find interesting though, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier 

is up speaking today. Now, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t tradition. 

And in fact it would be unprecedented, I believe, for the 

Premier to be speaking on the second last day of budget debate. 

I thought he was supposed to be the closer, Mr. Speaker. I 

though he was supposed to be the closer, and just to lead into a 

short little message from the Finance minister. But what do we 

expect, Mr. Speaker? Well what do we see? We see the Premier 

pop up like a gopher out of its hole in spring at a time least 

expected, and to stand up here with an empty hall and 

half-empty benches to speak to the budget. And when he speaks 

to the budget, Mr. Speaker, he provides more attention to the 

members opposite and individual stories, and tries to sort of 

play games with members opposite than focusing at the task at 

hand, Mr. Speaker. And I can understand why the Premier 

might be hiding and might be trying to pop up today, on a day 

least expected to provide his presentation. 

 

Because the fact, Mr. Speaker, is this is no budget to be proud 

of at all, Mr. Speaker. It should bring huge embarrassment to 

the government of the day and that Premier, Mr. Speaker. At a 

time of unprecedented revenues in this province we see a 

government that’s accruing, that’s growing the debt in huge 

ways by the billions of dollars in the past two years alone, Mr. 

Speaker, contrary, contrary, Mr. Speaker, to the billboards that 

they spend big money to try to trick and pretend to the rest of 

the public. 

 

And that gets to the crux of the argument that has been driven 

home by every last speaker of the opposition, is that this is a 

dishonest budget. It’s a budget that can’t be trusted from a 

Premier and a government that cannot be trusted with managing 

the finances of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask members 

to be mindful of how they choose their words given the 

statement that I made this afternoon to elevate and lift up the 

debate. Thank you. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And while I 

will not be making a personal statement I will say 

unequivocally that the people of this province do not trust this 

government and this Premier to manage the finances of this 

province. That comment is fair game and it’s bang on when you 

look at the facts. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, as well to see the Premier hop 

up at a time in debate when he’s not supposed to. He’s 

supposed to be sort of lining things up tomorrow for a big 

rah-rah-rah out the door if this was a half-decent budget, which 

it’s not. So he stands up here today. 

 

And I also suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier stands up here 

today because of his lack of ability to manage himself, lack of 

ability to manage himself. What I point to, Mr. Speaker, is 

budget day. We’ve got a packed Assembly with a good 300 

New Democrats in this crowd and a good couple hundred of 

Saskatchewan’s . . . the finest of Saskatchewan business in this 

Assembly. And what does the Premier do, Mr. Speaker? What 

does he do? He loses control in a childish fit, Mr. Speaker, and 

attacks a personal member of the opposition in a classless, 

childish affair, Mr. Speaker. It’s unprecedented. 

 

And I know we had the opportunity to speak with many, many 

leaders from across Saskatchewan within our party over the 

weekend, and it was stated and restated. It was restated by many 

of the business people in the halls, outside in the rotunda, that 

they had never seen such a display where a Premier lost all 

composure, could not control himself, and went on a personal 

attack on a member of this Assembly and couldn’t focus on the 

miserable, embarrassing budget that he had tabled that very day. 

 

So the opposition is going to stand opposed to the budget that’s 

put forward. We don’t trust it. We believe it’s dishonest. We 

don’t believe it puts the facts on the table. This is a government 

that doesn’t just have a Premier that can’t control himself from 

his seat though, Mr. Speaker, or from his feet, we also see a 

government that can’t control itself as it relates to following 

through with its commitments. 

 

I reference back to the last election. They put forward a budget 

document to Saskatchewan people. This is what we do during 

an election — we put forward the road map and what we’re 

going to offer up to Saskatchewan people, and people vote on it. 

And then they expect you to follow through, Mr. Speaker. What 

we know is after promise after promise has been broken by this 

government, as it relates to health care, as it relates to cost of 

living, as it relates to privatization within our Crown 

corporations and health care itself, Mr. Speaker, the trust is 

broken. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party can pretend all it wants that 

the NDP is out of touch with what’s going on in this province, 

but nothing is further from the truth. We can go into any corner 

of this province with our head held high and have strong 

discussion, raise the points and the matters of the day in any 

constituency in this province. For the Premier to pretend 

otherwise, that rural Saskatchewan loves the Premier, is not 

true. Not true. 

 

The fact is that people across this province are expecting a 

Premier and this government to advance on the important fronts 

of health care, the rural doctor shortage that we are 

experiencing, the huge, huge wait for surgery in this province 

that, in the Premier’s own riding, that wait-list has grown by 90 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4655 

per cent. This is what the people of the province expect the 

government to focus on, Mr. Speaker, they expect the Premier 

to focus on. And they’re sick of his spin. They’re sick of his 

rhetoric. They’re sick of his empty promises that ring hollow, 

that get broken. They’re sick of hearing that Premier say I’m 

sorry; I’m sorry I broke that promise; I’m sorry I did that. What 

they want is someone who’s a man of their word or a woman of 

their word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look back at that election platform, among many things 

that have been broken, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the finances 

specifically. And I look at a spending promise of this 

government, and basically what they put before the people was 

something they had no intention on following through with. 

 

[15:30] 

 

If I can reference the page here, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

forecast for revenues and expenditures and spending of this 

government, the spending program. And they pretended in this 

document here to be a government that was going to be able to 

manage the finances. This is what they’ve said in this 

document. What have we seen since then, Mr. Speaker? Well 

we’ve seen unsustainable, runaway spending implemented by 

this government — 32 per cent over two years. So at the time 

where we have record revenues, more money than ever before, 

this government outspends itself. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, 

and devastating to the future opportunities in this province. 

 

But back to the promise. What I’ll take you to, Mr. Speaker, 

and this went into every single mailbox in Saskatchewan, I 

believe. People opened it up; they read it. And there’s a trust 

then that’s created with those who vote for a document that 

outlies what that government’s going to do. And what does this 

document say, Mr. Speaker? Where are the broken promises? 

 

Well it points specifically to the very poignant criticism that 

this opposition has had from day one, and that’s that their 

spending program has been unsustainable. What they promised 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that in 2009-10 — 

that was last year, Mr. Speaker, or last budgetary cycle — that 

they would spend $8.9 billion. Well what did this government 

spend? Well over 10 billion. And then people ask, well where’s 

the $1 billion deficit? Well it’s right there, Mr. Speaker. Simple 

math, not Sask Party math, but just straight math, real 

calculators, computers, the facts. 

 

When we look at this year here, 2010-2011, what was the 

spending promise of this government? The spending, the 

expenses — $9.09 billion, Mr. Speaker. What do we see? 

Again, over $10 billion. What’s the difference of those two 

things, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s a $1 billion deficit, and that’s 

why we stand today opposed to this reckless budget. That’s why 

we stand today opposed to seeing a government that’s running a 

deficit that they put on a . . . their own balance sheet says it’s 

622 million. That we know is understated in a huge way. 

 

We stand opposed to a government that at a time of record 

revenues, record revenues, is growing the debt in this province. 

So we have concerns, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . And I hear one of the members shout out just about, going 

out to have some meetings in rural Saskatchewan. And I have to 

say, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing that I enjoy more than 

spending time meeting in coffee shops across this province, 

meeting in Legion halls, meeting across this province in 

seniors’ centres, all sorts of locations, as do many, many 

members across this opposition. 

 

The reason we need to do this, Mr. Speaker, is that we are a 

government-in-waiting. We’ve got 18 short months, and it’s 

incredibly important that we’re out there tending to these 

grounds on the many, many issues that are being overlooked 

with constituents that are being taken for granted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if any of those members, if any one of those members 

think that they’re so precious to their constituents that they take 

for granted and break the promises of, I dare them, I dare them 

to join us on a little tour of rural Saskatchewan. And I dare 

them to hit the same podiums, to have the same coffee shops. 

And I welcome that. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

And I hear one of the members opposite and I welcome that, 

one of the members from Cannington. And I look forward to it. 

And I look forward, next week, to taking him up on this right 

now, and I look forward to going down and having a meeting in 

any community in his constituency. Any one. Because what I 

know about the member from Cannington, Mr. Speaker, is he 

was nominated again here recently, to the dismay of most in his 

constituency. Or it was an AGM [annual general meeting], he 

hasn’t made that decision yet. He couldn’t find a nominator 

maybe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, is that he had about a dozen people 

in his meeting, his AGM, his big annual meeting — about a 

dozen people. But guess how many people were standing 

outside with placards. At least as many. At least a dozen, 15 

health care workers in his own riding who were protesting the 

fact that they can’t get a fair contract from that government, the 

fact that their representative won’t stand up for them. 

 

And I only seek out the member from Cannington because he 

shouts from his seat. What I wish he would do is speak at the 

cabinet table. But he’s not there. Right. But I wish he’d speak 

with one of the cabinet ministers or at the caucus table because 

the fact is what we have going on in the Southeast is really 

problematic and really worrying. When we look down there and 

we recognize that Arcola, Carlyle, Redvers, Oxbow, Coronach, 

and Estevan are under huge strain, particularly as it relates to 

health care and the doctor shortage, and the pressure that puts 

on Estevan and the residents all within that area, and no 

solutions. 

 

We have a member from Cannington, Mr. Speaker, who stands 

up at a town hall meeting about a year and a half ago, Mr. 

Speaker. And under pressure about why he couldn’t get nurses 

into his community, very different message than when he was 

in opposition when he simply had simple answers for 

everything, he ducked. He weaved, he hid. And then what did 

he do, Mr. Speaker? Well he got angry. He got angry. And he 

threw the gauntlet down to the community and he challenged 

them. What are they going to do? What are they going to do? 

And if they’re not going to do it for themselves, then someone 

else is going to do it and they’re going to lose out. 

 



4656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, this points to the very different role for 

government that this side of the House believes in. We believe 

that government has a responsibility to the people of the 

province, to their constituents as it relates to matters such as 

health care. Maybe nothing — nothing larger, Mr. Speaker. And 

I know it was a big stressful evening for that member . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . He says no, it wasn’t a big stressful 

night. It was no big deal when 150 people were jammed into a 

hall and ripped him and ripped him and ripped him and ripped 

him and asked for solutions. It was no big deal, is what he says 

here today. 

 

Now I don’t know which one is more offending, Mr. Speaker: 

to be able to say that was stressful, or to say that that was no big 

deal. Either way I think it’s a shame, and I know that 

Cannington residents deserve better than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see the dishonest billboards across this province, and 

Saskatchewan people laugh at it and get regular emails about it 

saying, how can they say this? And, you know, it’s a bit of a 

chuckle, and you know it’s a rallying point, where really people 

say it’s a matter of desperation, a government that knows that 

the wheels have come off the cart, that they’ve lost their way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I recognize in the seats opposite that the 

robust support for one another, the cockiness, the confidence 

that was there two years ago is completely deflated. And I 

recognize why and I’m glad to see that humbleness, although 

we don’t hear it in their speeches yet. That should be there soon 

too, Mr. Speaker, but they are a dejected bunch, Mr. Speaker, 

and rightfully so, because the mistakes of this government and 

the choices of this government are taking this province in the 

wrong direction. 

 

At a time where we can be rightfully proud of an economy put 

into full swing by the people of this province, by the resources 

within our ground, and the good policies of New Democrat 

government, to see those revenues flowing into coffers and to 

see at this very time billions of dollars of debt growth, and to 

see the Premier’s mug actually up on these billboards that are 

dishonest, not true, Mr. Speaker, is a real break in the trust with 

the people of this province. 

 

It’s a risk, I think, that’s a big mistake for that party. But I’m 

not here to give them political advice, because I believe that the 

day, which is coming now and that people are recognizing, that 

when the Premier speaks, when the Premier speaks and we hear 

his voice on these expensive radio ads and billboards, that you 

can’t believe what’s actually being said, that’s a huge problem. 

And our word is only as good, we’re only trusted as good as our 

word is and how we follow through with that. It’s a bond of 

trust that’s been broken with Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I will say, Mr. Speaker, and I know we’re strong in the city 

in raising the issues that are galvanizing Saskatchewan against 

this mismanaged government, but I know, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

not as pronounced as the change that’s going on in rural 

Saskatchewan. When you have municipalities paying up to 

$800,000 a year in additional pay to try to take care of their 

health care needs, that’s a provincial responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker. Provincial responsibility, and off-loading of all sorts 

of responsibilities onto municipal government. 

 

So I point to something that should always be important to any 

government, or when you’re judging finance, and that would be 

the debt to equity ratio of a government, Mr. Speaker. And what 

do we note here? We note that a trend has been reversed. It’s 

not a positive reversal, Mr. Speaker. What we knew is that we 

were on a decade-long betterment of our debt to GDP [gross 

domestic product] ratio, something that puts us in good stead 

with the bankers who loan us money, with the ability to lend 

our own dollar and basically put ourselves onto the world and 

international and global stage in a very proud fashion. 

 

We see the debt to equity ratios going backwards. I’ll cite the 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, from their own budget document, page 

63 in 2009. And just to refresh, Mr. Speaker, this is right after 

the Sask Party took office and were left with windfalls of 

money from the New Democrats and a booming economy for 

which they could apply to things such as debt and different 

priorities. 

 

We, at that point in time, 2009, had a debt to equity ratio of 

11.9 per cent. Now that’s an enviable position, and it was a 

continued trend of reducing that debt to equity ratio. That’s a 

goal for any government, to be reducing debt, Mr. Speaker, to 

be not spending unsustainably and not be adding debt to your 

province and not to be doing it faster than the growth within 

your economy. 

 

But that trend has reversed, Mr. Speaker. Business people 

across this province are concerned by this. Students across this 

province are concerned by this. Those needing health care, all 

of us, should be concerned by this. What we see in 2011 is that 

we now see a debt to equity ratio of 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

So from 11.9 per cent, it’s increased to 15 per cent. That’s after 

a decade of reducing that number, of reducing debt, Mr. 

Speaker. Anyone who manages a business, a farm, or a 

household knows that this is going in the wrong direction. 

 

Which is why we get to the fact that we say this is a budget that 

can’t be trusted from a Premier and a government that can’t be 

trusted with managing the finances of this province. And we 

expect at this very time, we expected this government to be able 

to get its spending under control. They couldn’t do it, Mr. 

Speaker. They haven’t been able to do that. They still tabled a 

deficit. We expected, Mr. Speaker, that we would see some 

leadership by example because, Mr. Speaker, at a time where 

you see a bit of constraint and poor choices as they are, people 

are paying for the mismanagement at this point in time. 

 

But we see, Mr. Speaker, not the inner circle of the Premier, not 

the inner circle of the member from Kindersley — really the 

rest of the caucus and cabinet don’t matter because there’s only 

two that make decisions over there anyways, Mr. Speaker — 

but the inner circle, Mr. Speaker, of the Sask Party has not been 

hurt at all. No reduction in the size of the cabinet. No reduction 

in the Premier’s pay. No reduction in the ministers’ pay. We see 

that in Alberta; we see that in Manitoba. We call that leading by 

example. 

 

No reduction, Mr. Speaker, in the number of communication 

staff that are paid millions in this province by this government 

to spin and sell and photo op their way through politics. That’s 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. We see no cuts — not a single cut, Mr. 

Speaker — in the ministerial staff, the political staff, political 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4657 

staff of this government. 

 

These are the same very staff that receive 100 per cent 

increases, a double in salaries, once this government took 

office. And they brought in their hacks and flacks and friends 

and paid them twice what the New Democrats were paying, Mr. 

Speaker. Not a single reduction. Yet they’re going to lay off 

people across this province. They’re going to issue 100 

terminations at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to go out and make 

those kinds of tough decisions, you’d better be prepared to lead 

by example, Mr. Speaker. And it’s despicable to see this 

government think that they can be at the trough with their 

friends, themselves, and with their cronies getting all sorts of 

contracts, Mr. Speaker, while we see cuts across the board for 

common people — my constituents, your constituents, 

constituents across the way, every single one of us, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we see cuts, Mr. Speaker, that are problematic; we see 

broken examples. So it’s not just a government that’s not 

leading by example. We see a government that’s off-loading its 

own responsibilities and making other levels of government do 

their dirty work. 

 

They sign an agreement with great fanfare, Mr. Speaker, an 

agreement with municipalities to provide 1 per cent of the PST 

[provincial sales tax]. They chose that, Mr. Speaker, 1 per cent 

because it’s not impacted by the volatility and resource 

revenues, Mr. Speaker. So they choose 1 per cent of the PST, 

they lock that into agreement. They walk out hand in hand with 

municipalities that provides them with a little bit more control 

over the revenues that they have. 

 

Municipalities then are able to go about and plan for the kind of 

growth that they’re experiencing, to be able to lay out the kind 

of infrastructure that they need, and they take on borrowing, 

Mr. Speaker. All of this costs money. Now the very purpose, 

the logic of using the PST was that there’s not volatility in the 

same way with PST as there is with resource revenue. So we 

fast-forward, Mr. Speaker, many, many photo ops, Premier all 

fluffed-up, pompommed out, Mr. Speaker. Six months later, we 

see a different message. 

 

What we see, Mr. Speaker, we see a ripped up agreement, a 

ripped up agreement with municipalities left in the dust, having 

to do the dirty work for this government. Now the logic of 

course was that this was not tied to resource revenues. So the 

Premier takes the stage in front of municipalities and says, well, 

we screwed up. We screwed up. We really mismanaged our 

resource revenues; therefore we have to break this promise. 

Well it doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. That was the very 

protection that was supposed to be built into that agreement. 

They break that agreement. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now we get to the consequence of that, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

consequence is that every single member in this Assembly and 

all of our constituents from across this province are likely to see 

major tax hikes this year as a result of this budget, this broken 

promise, and the financial mismanagement of this government 

— major tax hikes in Saskatoon and Estevan and Weyburn and 

Moose Jaw. What does he say, the Premier? Well he says I’m 

sorry. I’m sorry. Just get ready for another photo op. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s unacceptable to off-load that kind of 

responsibilities to municipalities and make those mayors, those 

councils, those RM [rural municipality] reeves do the dirty 

work of that Premier right there who’s mismanaged our 

finances in our province. 

 

As a Regina MLA, I want to speak specifically — and quickly 

because I don’t want to occupy too much time within this 

Assembly — but I want to speak to the shameful treatment of 

the film industry and of SCN. This is something that’s not only 

important to the culture within our province, but it’s important 

to our economy. And it’s incredibly important to the provincial 

economy but also Regina. We think it’s shameful to see a 

government go about their ways in ham-handed ways cutting 

things that in fact assist our province in big ways, Mr. Speaker. 

And he’s attacked some of the most creative and young 

individuals in this province, and again I think that’s a huge 

political mistake as well, Mr. Speaker. But from a very 

economic argument, big mistake. 

 

And I can’t believe the members from Regina — sitting in the 

back here right now, disinterested in what’s going on as usual, 

Mr. Speaker — wouldn’t have had a backbone to stand up or sit 

up at that caucus table and say we won’t tolerate that, Mr. 

Speaker. Where was the member from Regina South on this 

front, Mr. Speaker, or the other members that are here? 

Shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I speak specifically to another economic and social 

institution within our province, that being our proud First 

Nations University, Mr. Speaker, no debate from this side of the 

House. You bet we’ll fix the accounting and the governance. 

That’s what governments are there to do, to work with 

institutions. But I tell you. What that institution means to the 

future of Saskatchewan — to the economy, to our social 

well-being, to our quality of life — is fundamental. To see the 

irresponsible, the irresponsible treatment of this file, and to now 

see an institution that has been basically put on life support by 

this government and their actions is devastating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to stand opposed. We’re going to stand up for that 

First Nations University. And we expect that the minister 

responsible and the Premier exercise any kind of strength they 

might have at the federal table. We know it’s not much. But if 

they can focus on one project, that’s one we’d prioritize right 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We recognize the terrible math of the Sask Party. We talk about 

it regularly, the fact that they can’t — in times of record 

revenues, more money than ever before, historic highs — 

balance their books. And in fact they’re growing our debt. But 

we see that Sask Party math in many of the decisions that are 

made, not being able to understand the economic impact of their 

decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One such . . . and I’ve pointed out the film industry, and I’ve 

pointed out First Nations University, but I’ll also point out 

chiropractic care in this province, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

short-sighted decision, Mr. Speaker, that affects 125,000 

patients or more within this province. This is a subsidy that’s 



4658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

now being removed from government. Twelve dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s going to be pushed onto the other costs of health 

care — to doctors, the cost of seeing a doctor, to a specialist. 

It’s going to bottleneck surgical wait-lists, Mr. Speaker. This is 

the same kind of short-sighted, Sask Party math that we see in 

other areas: cut one dollar and spend three more somewhere 

else, Mr. Speaker. Cut one dollar in chiropractic care and 

bottleneck your system somewhere else, Mr. Speaker. This is 

not the way to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to be looking at more holistic ways of making sure 

that our society is healthier and more well . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The member opposite from Rosetown speaks 

out here right now and offers some sort of a statement here. I 

would probably assume, not hearing it, that it wouldn’t have 

made much sense. 

 

What I would ask him to do is to speak up at his cabinet table. 

And I’d ask him to address the issues of health care — 

specifically the rural doctor shortage, specifically, which by the 

way has grown by 50 per cent — the vacancies in this province 

by 50 per cent under this government, under the Sask Party, 

under this Premier, Mr. Speaker. And we also see at the same 

very time, Mr. Speaker, we see the surgical wait-lists getting 

longer. We hear all sorts of plans getting trotted out by the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone, but it’s the same empty 

plan, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t trust these promises, Mr. 

Speaker, because the fact is they were elected to fix this from 

day one, Mr. Speaker, and the plan has gone sideways. In fact 

it’s gone backwards. In the Premier’s own riding alone, surgical 

wait-lists have grown — this is fact, Mr. Speaker — by 90 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s fact. These are the issues that need to 

be addressed. 

 

This budget does nothing to address one of the biggest issues in 

this province, being cost of living. That’s wreaking havoc on 

the well-being of families and individuals, urban and rural, Mr. 

Speaker, about their ability to access post-secondary and 

improve their lives and improve Saskatchewan as a whole — a 

better tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. This government goes 

backwards. And we see no address, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, 

this budget that can’t be trusted from a government that can’t be 

trusted and a Premier that can’t be trusted governing the 

finances of this province, Mr. Speaker. We see no improvement 

in the financial disarray and the financial mismanagement, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know it’s embarrassing because I look at them 

and they’re dejected and they’re deflated, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would be too. But how did you get here and when are you going 

to fix it? Where is your plan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

At a time of record revenues flowing into government, record 

revenues, more money than government has ever had before in 

the large measure, this government is running a deficit and a 

deficit, Mr. Speaker, that’s understated, that’s understated in a 

large way. They’ve understated the deficit, Mr. Speaker, by not 

including certain parts in this budget. So they say our deficit is 

622 million. Well first of all that’s unacceptable. 

 

Second of all, Mr. Speaker, it’s much larger than that — closer 

to $1 billion, if not over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, when you 

factor in the costs that they slid off the balance sheet, Mr. 

Speaker, some of which have simply been off-loaded onto 

Treasury Board and onto Crown entities, Mr. Speaker. Trickery 

with the balance sheet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess I’d reference to the academic from Greystone to go 

back and reference the Gass Commission, Mr. Speaker, of 

1992. You’d find this document incredibly relevant once again. 

And it would be hugely worthwhile for you to read this 

document and realize that it has new application with the kind 

of accounting practices of your own government here, Mr. 

Speaker, at a time, Mr. Speaker, where you’re changing 

accounting practices for political self-interest and expediency. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask and remind that member to go back 

and review that report, to then explain and ask his colleagues 

and question his colleagues, why are we returning to the 

accounting of Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We see it in a phony and artificial spending. You know, it’s . . . 

[inaudible] . . . last year, Mr. Speaker, that the revenue 

estimates of this government were artificial and they were . . . 

$3 billion is what the Minister from Energy and Resources said 

we were going to receive from potash. Well, boy, he was 

wrong. He didn’t understand that he took advance payments in 

the size that he did. He didn’t understand the capital 

expenditure deduction that companies are allowed to make, that 

depreciate that deduction at 120 per cent, thus reducing the 

profit, the profit’s tax you pay to government. He didn’t 

understand any of those things, Mr. Speaker, so he overrode the 

Finance minister and Finance officials, and he had the Premier 

with them. And we saw an unprecedented era that has hurt 

Saskatchewan people dearly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this year, it’s not the revenue estimates that we’re as 

concerned with, Mr. Speaker, although the Canadian dollar 

might be pegged a little low when we’re looking at all the 

recommendations that come out around close to parity. What 

this year we’re worried about, Mr. Speaker, is the phony 

spending estimates put forward. They put forward a plan that 

they say includes constraint. We don’t buy it. The expenditures 

are artificial, Mr. Speaker. They don’t include in health care any 

ability to settle a health care contract. They don’t have any 

dollars to assist surgical wait times. They don’t have any money 

for the rural doctor shortage and the doctor shortage across 

Saskatchewan. They don’t have any money for the utility costs 

that health regions are going to see increased as a result of this 

government’s mismanagement. 

 

And as a result, health regions in this province are going to 

grow unprecedented deficits, offloading debt from their own 

balance sheets in accounting trickery onto other entities, Mr. 

Speaker. This is shameful. We see it in Education, an Education 

minister who says he’s going to go and bargain but not in good 

faith, Mr. Speaker, because he has not a single dime or dollar 

for any of the local level agreements or the provincial teachers’ 

contract. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or he could bargain with the 

chiropractors. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Right, or he could just bargain like he 

did with the chiropractors, bargain with them for a year, settle a 

contract, have it ratified, do the news release. And then stall it 

right there and say, oh yes, no, that was all in jest. Whoops. We 

did it wrong. We’re going to rip that up, Mr. Speaker. Just trust 

us, Mr. Speaker. Just trust us. And that’s what this government 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4659 

always says; just trust us. But the fact is that people don’t. 

 

We see it in forest fires — a cut, you know, betting on good 

weather. And I hope that the forest fires come in low, Mr. 

Speaker. I sure hope they do because our northern forests are a 

gem, Mr. Speaker, and the people that live there need their 

safety. But we see those cut in a large way. 

 

We see a capital amortization policy that’s instituted for one 

reason. Not because it’s consistent with some level of public 

sector accounting standards, because it serves the political 

self-interests of a government that has mismanaged their 

balance sheet. We see offloading onto all different government 

entities that should be rightfully out of operational spending, 

Mr. Speaker. And all it is, is accounting trickery. 

 

So what we know is, when we see all these accounting tricks, is 

that the deficit of 622 million in conjunction with the different 

spending . . . And we’re going to find more, Mr. Speaker, 

because we haven’t really dug into it in the way that we need to. 

Committee will provide that although I could see these guys try 

to hide from coming forward with that kind of accountability 

and transparency. But we’ll see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we know is that this deficit that right now they state is 

622 is phony. We know the expenditures are phony. They’re 

much higher, as is the deficit, as is the debt growth in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Speaking directly to the actual debt growth in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, I refer to the green sheet. I noticed in 2009 after the 

NDP left $2.3 billion in a booming economy, Mr. Speaker, they 

had a debt at that point of just under $8 billion — $7.966 

billion. What do we see now, just two years later, at a time of 

record revenues flowing into this government’s coffers? Well 

we see that debt going up. We talked about the debt to equity 

ratio. But further, Mr. Speaker, we see the real number growing 

to $9.192 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Right, oh yes, no, they’ve 

the billboards of course that we know aren’t true, Mr. Speaker. 

We talked about those billboards that aren’t true, Mr. Speaker. 

But that’s about the only thing you can expect from this 

government, Mr. Speaker, is that when these members are out 

trouncing around the province and putting forward all sorts of 

advertising is that what they put forward isn’t true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it took me a second to do the math on what the actual 

government debt is, and the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is 

because they’ve actually removed a line. And you’ll wonder 

what line they used here. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’m all 

for eliminating debt. I’m all for that. To do that though, you 

need to place money there. 

 

What this government’s done is they’ve whited it out. They’ve 

simply erased it from the balance sheet. This government, at a 

time where every level of government at every single 

jurisdiction is being pressed for more accountability and more 

transparency, removes the total debt reporting line from their 

budget. They no longer include guaranteed debt in their 

definition of total debt. Just do what’s good for you, hey guys? 

Just do what’s good for you to serve your own political interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are smarter than this. They 

have math skills much beyond that of the Sask Party, and 

they’ll see through this. But New Democrats will reverse this. 

Trust me, Mr. Speaker. In 18 short months, you’ll see total debt 

reported again, the kind of transparency and accountability 

Saskatchewan people deserve when dealing with accounting, 

Mr. Speaker, and the money that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a few things in public sector accounting 

that a government should do when they change accounting 

practice. And I’ll reference from the Canadian Institute of 

Chartered Accountants website, public standard accounting, 

specifically PS 2120, Mr. Speaker, 18, I quote: 

 

For each change in an accounting policy in the current 

period, the following information should be disclosed: 

 

(a) a description of the change; 

(b) the effect of the change on the financial statements 

of the current period; and 

(c) the reason for the change. 

 

And this comes from September 1997 from the Canadian 

Institute of Chartered Accountants. Those are the three 

expectations when you change accounting policies. And how 

many of those three expectations do you think this government 

included in there? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Zero. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the member from Coronation Park 

is right — zero. They didn’t include one of those, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know the auditor will likely be weighing in on this. 

Certainly the opposition will be in coming weeks. 

 

But they haven’t even followed the accounting standards that 

are laid out from an international governance perspective, Mr. 

Speaker. A province that’s going in the wrong direction under a 

Premier and a government that you can’t trust with the finances 

of our province, that you can’t trust with the health care of our 

province, that you can’t trust with the cost of living in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

We’ve seen a budget that is full of cuts and financial trickery. 

We know that it’s a dishonest document that’s put before us. 

It’s something that we stand hugely opposed to. We’ve seen a 

reckless fiscal record since this government has come to office. 

And we see a government right now that, in their own forecast 

. . . And we don’t like when this government forecasts because 

they usually miss the mark. We hope they would on this one. 

We hope they balance the books next year. Optimism’s not 

there. But, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that’s now 

content putting out their own plan to the people of 

Saskatchewan that will table another deficit budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. Saskatchewan people expect 

more. They deserve more, Mr. Speaker. And, in closing, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s . . . we’ve quoted many times Eric Howe, 

economics professor from the University of Saskatchewan, who 

calls himself a fiscal conservative who’s scolded this 

government repeatedly for its lack of spending constraint, for its 



4660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

runaway spending. And what he states, Mr. Speaker — I don’t 

have his exact quote so I’ll paraphrase — is that the costs of 

such mismanagement are straightforward. There’s no one in 

between the government and who it affects other than you and 

I. And it affects each and every one of us, all of our 

constituents. 

 

We expect more, Mr. Speaker. We stand opposed to this 

budget, this reckless budget of dishonesty. And I’m proud today 

to stand up and stand up on behalf of the opposition, the people 

of this province who are being failed with the management of 

this Sask Party, and I stand opposed to the budget and I support 

the amendment put forward by the opposition. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise in the House today to speak in support of the 

budget motion. Mr. Speaker, I think I’m like a lot of MLAs. I 

like to go home on the weekend and probably don’t admit it to a 

lot of people but I do like to watch the reruns of question 

period. 

 

Last weekend I came home, turned on the TV and started 

putting away my things and thought, well it’s a little bit raucous 

and perhaps the language is a little rougher than usual. And then 

I thought, well perhaps I had a question period from another 

channel that was being played on CPAC [Cable Public Affairs 

Channel] and then I was listening some more, and I was 

wondering who Ricky, Randy, and Bubbles were. And then I 

realized, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I had a completely different 

program. But I was amazed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at how much 

that show sounded exactly like the opposition members during 

question period. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, usually at this time the members, when 

they speak to the budget speech, will usually thank people that 

they’ve had dealings with during the past number of months 

and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to do that. I would like 

to thank the citizens of Saskatoon Southeast for re-nominating 

me to be their Saskatchewan Party candidate in the next 

election. I value their wisdom and candour and input. I enjoy 

travelling around in my constituency. I frequently come across 

people that I don’t know that will come up and say we’re doing 

a good job and wanting to endorse or give their support to the 

government. I value that. And sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they come with criticism — some more friendly than other — 

and we value it how and whatever form it is given. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to thank my colleagues 

on this side of the House. The MLAs that I serve with are some 

of the finest women and men that I’ve had the pleasure of 

knowing in my life and I enjoy and value working with them on 

a daily basis. I would also like to thank the people that we work 

with in the Assembly — the Pages, the House staff, the building 

maintenance people, the security, the people that work in the 

cafeteria. These are some of the people that all members come 

in contact with and are often people that are not appreciated as 

well as they should. So I would like to ask all members when 

they see these people to thank them for their good and 

continuing hard work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to thank my constituency 

executive who work very hard and are able to make my work as 

an MLA very easy — my president, Peter Voldend; my 

secretary, Marie Koop; our treasurer, Al Johnston, who has sort 

of been the treasurer for life. He has been there as long as I have 

and does a very good job. The past president who’s now gone 

on to be president of the Saskatchewan Party, Gary 

Meschishnick. People like Earl Priddle, Pat and Jim Humeny 

who are always available and always doing hard work. I have 

very good staff in my Saskatoon office, Gordon Rutten and 

Laine Goertz. I also have wonderful staff to work with in 

Regina — my chief of staff, Denise Batters; the assistants that 

work in my office, Jean Watts, Michelle Chyz, Judy Langford, 

and Lara Zaluski who have been wonderful to work with, very 

hard working, very competent, professional people. 

 

I would also like to thank my wife, Sandy, for her support. It’s 

difficult for MLAs when they’re away from home as much as 

they are and it’s important that they have the support of their 

family and I want to thank Sandy for being there and being 

supportive. 

 

I usually at this time comment on the health of my mother. My 

mother is now nearly 90 years old and watches question period 

and watches television on a regular basis. She often has some 

comments. The other day I stopped by to see her and she said, I 

saw you on TV the other night. And I said, oh, did I know what 

I was talking about? And she said, and I quote, “Oh, I just press 

mute.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, she did at that point smile and say, 

“I didn’t really press mute. I really listened to what you had to 

say.” And then she said, “and I wish you wouldn’t be so hard on 

Frank Quennell.” In any event, Mr. Speaker, I say that as a 

direct quote from my mother and . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’ll just remind the member that he’s 

not to address the other members by their name. By their 

constituency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — In any event, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

appreciate the point and will respect that. And I will also 

respect my mother’s admonition as to how I treat other 

members in the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituency is growing and continues 

to grow. I’ve got the area of Rosewood which is now rapidly 

filling in and over the last year or two I’ve had huge growth in 

the area of Stonebridge. And I know that after the next election 

there will be redistribution, and I’ve been out door knocking in 

most of these areas. And I suspect that after redistribution this 

constituency could easily be broken up into three or four ridings 

that would be willing to elect a Saskatchewan Party member, 

because, as large as it is right now, there’s huge support there 

for the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Right across and through part of the constituency will be the 

new south bridge. I’m pleased that the province has provided 

nearly $100 million for that project. We’ve had good support 

from the federal government and from our mayor, Don 

Atchison, who has been extremely gracious, and I want to thank 

him and recognize him. His wife Mardele has faced some 

significant health issues in the past few months. Hopefully the 

worst is past. And I would like to ask that all members would 

keep Mardele in their thoughts and prayers. 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4661 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spend about half my time in Regina 

during session, and in spite of the friendly rivalry between our 

cities, Regina is a beautiful city. And the people here should 

take a great deal of pride in their city. It’s a wonderful city. It’s 

beautiful in the summer. If I had any suggestions for the people 

in Regina it would be they might want to elect a few more 

Saskatchewan Party MLAs. And come November of 2011 they 

will have that opportunity and I expect they will probably avail 

themselves of that opportunity. 

 

One thing though that Regina does very well is produce great 

police chiefs. I’ve gotten to know and appreciate the hard work 

of Troy Hagen. He has worked well and has done a very good 

job of reducing crime in the city of Regina. He should be 

commended and recognized for that. We thank him for his 

continuing hard work. 

 

One of the former officers in Regina was Clive Weighill, who is 

now the police chief in Saskatoon. He has moved to Saskatoon. 

He is one of the police chiefs that has almost become legendary 

throughout Western Canada. He has connected well with the 

members. He has connected with the community. He has made 

reduction of speeding and safe driving one of . . . and an 

increase in safe driving a mission. 

 

There’s a significant difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in how 

people drive between our two cities. In Regina, if you are 

stopped at a light and you are behind somebody, you wait for 

the light to turn green. And it’s almost a contest to see who can 

wait the longest when the people are in front of you and you sit 

there and scratch your head and wonder what’s going to 

happen. In Saskatoon, there is a fundamentally different 

approach. People wait, count down the light, and then streak 

across there as if they were on a drag strip. So the police chief 

has got his work cut out for him, and I want to wish him every 

success in doing that. I’d like to urge all people as they drive in 

our provinces and in our cities to slow down, pay attention, and 

make sure that they use their hands-free device. 

 

While talking about police, I would like to recognize and thank 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers. These are a 

wonderful group of women and men who work very hard to 

ensure the safety and security of all of the residents of our 

province. I have gone to people like Bernie Eiswirth, Stan 

Goertzen, and Evan Bray for advice and direction. I value and 

appreciate their input. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to make some specific 

comments on the budget. The overall budget shows an 

infrastructure budget of some $632 million. That brings capital 

investment to almost $3 billion in the life of this government. 

There is a nearly 30 per cent increase in funding for municipal 

infrastructure, $177 million budgeted this year, $161.6 million 

for approximately 470 kilometres of highway construction for 

the rural highway strategy. Work on that project, completed, 

will see 600 kilometres of highway resurfaced. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be $16.6 million for the 

Saskatchewan Research Council to continue its current research 

and development projects; $391.2 million will go to 

universities, federated and affiliated colleges, including 

increases of $16.3 million to help minimize growth in tuition 

costs. 

This budget will maintain over $100 million in funding for 

labour force development programs. It will have some $7.9 

million to post-secondary institutions for the continuation of 

health care training seats. There will be $3.5 million to continue 

the physician recruitment strategy and agency. $6.6 million will 

be included to continue medical education system 

enhancements. This is such things as physician training seat 

expansion, postgraduate, and international residency seats. 

 

I am incredibly proud of this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. $123 

million increase, which is a 5 per cent increase, to regional 

health authorities to provide base funding of $2.6 billion to 

maintain and improve delivery of health care services to 

Saskatchewan people. $10.5 million to begin the process of 

reducing surgical wait-lists and wait times. There will be $7 

million spent this year for a patient-first initiatives fund to 

support the health system in adopting a patient- and 

family-centred care approach. $109.3 million, which is a $10 

million increase, 10.1 per cent, to the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency. This is for funding for drugs and medical supplies as 

well as operating costs. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be $2.6 million in new funding 

to address increased cardiac care volumes, including expansion 

of electrophysiology services in Saskatchewan. As well there 

will be a pilot project for autism services which will be some 

$2.5 million. The people that have got somebody with autism 

spectrum disorder in their family are greatly appreciative of this 

initiative. 

 

Within my ministry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 1 per cent 

increase to community-based organization that carry out 

important work with victims of crime and others. There will be 

efficiencies achieved by making Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission an independent agency. Stage one of a 

computer system that will link police, courts, and corrections 

. . . [inaudible] . . . to streamline offender files and more 

efficiency in managing programs, that will start and will be 

likely completed this year, at least phase 1 of it. There will be 

an automated case management and filing system and an 

automated trial scheduling pilot project in Saskatoon Provincial 

Court. In co-operation with Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing, we are continuing to expand video conferencing 

facilities to young offenders facilities and Court of Queen’s 

Bench locations. 

 

We will later this year add 30 new police officers which will 

bring the total police officers added since we formed 

government to 90. This is 90 of the 120 that was committed by 

this government, by the Saskatchewan Party before it formed 

government. We are well on the way to fulfilling this important 

election commitment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am also responsible for SaskTel. This 

year I’m pleased to state that SaskTel will invest $239 million 

in its Saskatchewan network in 2010. Residential and business 

customers in communities across the province can expect 

improved and expanded SaskTel services as a result of this 

major capital investment. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The expansion will bring SaskTel’s network up to date and will 



4662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

allow for 3G compatible devices such as the iPhone to be used 

on our network. That is something that will happen later this 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SaskTel will reach 100 per cent high-speed Internet coverage in 

2010 following the launch of high-speed Internet service from 

private sector partners RFNow and YourLink in some 15 

communities. In 2010 SaskTel will invest $17 million to expand 

and improve its existing wireless network including the addition 

of new digital cellular sites across the province scheduled to be 

completed in 2011. 

 

This year SaskTel will invest $31 million to expand rural 

broadband. This includes upgrading the rural backbone 

infrastructure to provide an enhanced transport network that 

will upgrade basic high-speed Internet from one and a half 

megabits per second to 5 megabits per second for download 

speed. This will take place in this year, 2010, in over 200 

communities. 

 

SaskTel is continuing to expand cellular service into rural areas 

under the three-year rural infrastructure program. There will be 

55 new digital cellular sites that will be added over the 

three-year life of this program. The result will be that 98 per 

cent of the population will have cellular coverage by the end of 

2011. 

 

In Saskatoon, my hometown, the budget establishes Innovation 

Saskatchewan with a base budget of $1.3 million; $480,000 of 

this funding will go to TRLabs in Saskatoon to support the 

work they do in telecommunications research. 

 

The InterVac facility in Saskatoon provides capacity for animal 

and human disease research on current and emerging infectious 

diseases. Funding is being provided to InterVac through the 

Innovation and Science Fund. The province’s total multi-year 

commitment is $57.1 million, which is approximately 40 per 

cent of the total cost. This is a $3.8 million increase that will 

also go in addition to that to the Irene and Leslie Dubé Centre 

for Mental Health. 

 

And I think I mentioned earlier but would mention again, it’s 

probably something that cannot be mentioned often enough, is 

the $100 million that is going for the new south bridge in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that bridge was tendered, 

tenders were awarded just this last week, so we will see 

construction started this year. That will be a major link between 

east and west side Saskatoon and will provide great access and 

will make our city a lot easier to get around, and will form a 

bridge between the east and west side communities, where 

there’s often seen as a rift or a difference between the two of 

them. This will allow people to access cultural recreational 

facilities, allow access to the farmers’ market. Things will be 

. . . It will make our city more one sense of a better and more 

closer knit community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just conclude by sort of a brief 

comment about where I think the members opposite are at. I 

have sat and I’ve listened to them and I think we see a new 

leader over there, a new leader that’s trying to struggle with his 

own personal/political identity. He’s tried different methods of 

doing this or doing that to try and relate to the people. And I 

think what he’s trying to do is perhaps emulate some of the 

American pop politicians that we see on TV. 

 

And I wasn’t exactly sure of who he was trying to . . . and I 

know it’s changed periodically. I know that he was making a lot 

of statements that seemed to not be really in touch with reality, 

but very vigorously, very vociferous in how he’s making those 

statements. And I looked at him. And when you look at him, 

you don’t really make the connection. But when you stop and 

you look away and you just listen, you know, you are hearing 

the voice of Rod Blagojevich. 

 

Now the member opposite, the leader, does not have the hair, 

but certainly the voice and the projection. And you know, I 

think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not that the leader opposite is 

willing to take advice from me, but he may want to find a little 

better role model, perhaps not worry so much on focusing on 

the hair, but something a little bit different, something a little bit 

more, one that would have something that he may want to 

emulate. 

 

I watch some of the other members over there. And I sense — 

sort of in with this you betcha slogan that are over there — I 

swear that some of the members over there are going to show 

up with some new rectangular glasses saying, you betcha, 

maverick, and going along with the Sarah Palin look. Now I 

guess if that’s the direction they wish to go, I leave it to the 

members opposite to decide what they wish to do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I am going to do and what I’m proud 

to be doing is, I will be supporting the budget. I will not be 

supporting the amendment. What I would like to urge the 

members opposite to do, when they have their opportunity to 

speak to the budget, would be to say specifically, these are the 

items in the budget that I support; these are the items that I do 

not, so they very specifically should put their position on 

record. 

 

It’s one thing, I’ve heard some of the members stand up and go 

on a general rant, but what I’d like to encourage them to do is 

state specifically what in the budget they don’t agree. Do they 

not agree with increasing funding for health care? Do they not 

agree with infrastructure? What are the things on there that they 

don’t agree with and what are the things specifically that they 

do agree with? 

 

And I challenge them to put their comments very specifically 

and precisely on the record, especially the things in that budget 

that they do not agree with. It’s not enough to do a general rant. 

We’re in the legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The members 

opposite know full well that they have to be held to account by 

the people that brought them here. So they should be able to go 

back to their electors when the next election is called and say, 

this is what I voted for, this is what I voted against. 

 

There are a lot of things in this budget the members opposite 

should be supporting. And if they’re not, they should have the 

courage to stand up and say, I’m not voting for increased health 

care. I don’t want more hospital beds. They should be willing to 

say that. And they should be willing to put their careers and 

their credibility on the line, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you very much. And I would like to 

indicate once again, I will be supporting the budget motion and 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4663 

will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

am very pleased today to stand up and enter into the debate on 

the budget. Before I actually start into the remarks that I had 

thought I was going to give, I want to talk about what I have 

just heard from the Premier, because I’m already getting emails 

talking about the absolutely disgusting performance. 

 

The budget speech which people would expect to have given by 

the Premier should include maybe some of his themes, like 

balanced and forward-thinking and all that. People are saying 

he was extremely red in the face and basically didn’t have 

anything to comment on his vision for the budget. He was 

commenting on our budget speeches, our history . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Nothing. I’m not talking about what I heard. 

I’m talking about what emails I’m already getting and so are my 

colleagues. So I mean people are watching. If we think we’re 

living in a vacuum here, we’re not. People are actually watching 

this. 

 

And people that watched the Premier on budget day have a 

temper tantrum basically in this Assembly when there was 500 

people in the building and in the galleries and how many more 

at home watching, it was disgraceful. And if I was a caucus 

member of the Sask Party, I’d be embarrassed by that. And so 

many people are talking about that. In fact, the Premier, 

unprecedented, had to apologize, apologize to the House. So I 

mean, everybody in the province knows now that the Premier is 

childish and talks like he has temper tantrums whenever. He 

needs a time out. And I think the people in November of 2011 

will give him one. 

 

And I’m happy to actually talk today, and I know my 

colleagues have covered the budget in great detail, many times 

from their critic area of perspective and on the global basis. 

Because I’m the Health critic and there is so much to talk about 

in Health, I think I’m going to try and keep my remarks 

basically to Health, other than the fact that the words balanced, 

forward-looking and responsible have replaced what was last 

year’s buzzwords which were, transparent and accountable. 

Obviously those are gone because this is not a transparent 

budget. It’s not accountable to anybody, and I can understand 

why they’d want to take those out because they certainly 

couldn’t live up to them last year. 

 

This budget is about trust. I’ve heard it called deceit in deficit. 

And the people . . . the place I can see it the most deceitful that 

is tied to deficit and debt is in the health districts. If anybody 

thinks that the health districts can survive with the services that 

we expect on a 3 per cent increase, are truly living in a bubble 

and dreaming in Technicolor. It’s not going to happen. It is not 

going to happen. 

 

So what are we going to have when the health districts have to 

look at their programs? They’ve been told . . . right now 

Saskatoon has a $14 million deficit. Regina has a $7 million 

deficit. They were told to cut more money out of their health 

budget. How? When you cut your health budget, you cut 

programs. You cannot just do it in the air like some of the 

mathletes over there think it can be done. 

 

We’re talking about actually starving the health districts so they 

are going to have to cut programs. They’re going to have to cut 

services. And then people will say, well if you have to put some 

of the services into the private sector, I guess that’s all the 

choice we have. That is the danger of how this budget is 

constructed. And this ideology of the Sask Party government 

will affect people. It isn’t about the ideology of privatization. 

It’s about the ideology of trust and accountability and being 

straightforward and upfront. 

 

I don’t think people liked to be taken for fools and I don’t think 

they like to be fooled. And if you’re trying to get privatization 

in because that’s your ideology, well go ahead and try. Go 

ahead and try, but at least be upfront about it. Don’t take the 

money from the health districts. 

 

They have got . . . In the budget book, there’s a projection in 

2010-11 of $76 million of a deficit. The forecast in ’09-10 was 

136.9. The estimated was they were going to have a surplus. 

Well oops, they’re now running deficits. And if you give them 3 

per cent, 127 million was what we heard the numbers . . . We 

were told in a budget briefing that $100 million of that 127 is 

going to salaries for nurses. That leaves $27 million for 13 

health districts to deliver programs. 

 

With the increased costs in electricity, and utilization increased 

costs, any other health providers increase in salary, how on 

earth are they going to do it? This is not going to happen. It’s 

not going to happen. And this is why I think it is so deceitful 

because you’re trying to say this is a balanced budget. You’ve 

off-loaded this debt and this deficit onto the health districts. Let 

them run the deficit. Who’s going to pay for that? The taxpayer 

will pay for it. It is a public debt, and to say anything else is 

simply not true. 

 

And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people are starting to 

think, well okay, I don’t have a choice. I can’t get my knees 

done because I can’t get it done in the public system fast 

enough. Why not? Because we don’t fund the private system 

accordingly. And I heard the member from Southeast talk about 

we would be against, will we be against increasing hospital 

beds? Where’s that going to happen with no money? Children’s 

hospital’s been cancelled. That’s not going to happen. 

Long-term care beds, not going to happen. So there’s nothing in 

there that we should support. 

 

If they wanted to build more facilities and increase beds, let’s 

hear it. We haven’t heard it in this budget. There is nothing that 

speaks to what will happen to improve the health system. And if 

people think that this budget will do it with 3 per cent, they’re 

going to be sadly disappointed. And this is political suicide 

which . . . You know, the Sask Party obviously is going to 

gamble that people will buy this. I don’t think so. I don’t think 

Saskatchewan people are that gullible. They’re not going to buy 

it. 

 

And it’s interesting that we now have 25,000 health care 

workers. They deliver the services. They look after my dad in 

Sherbrooke. They’re not some unionized thug. They look after 

my dad in Sherbrooke and I see them all the time, what they do 

for my dad. And I think they deserve a fair contract and I think 



4664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

they deserve respect. And they’re not getting it. They are not 

getting it. Where’s the money for those contracts? Twenty-five 

thousand health care workers — that might cost a penny or two 

to give them a contract. And they’re also going to get 

retroactive pay because it’s been two years since they’ve had 

one. 

 

And everybody is looking at what happened with the 

chiropractors. This has set the bar for bargaining on the floor. 

There is no honour in bargaining anymore with this 

government. Nobody believes it. If you can bargain for a year 

and come to an agreement and take it out and ratify it with your 

members, come back and the minister says, oh sorry, no it’s not 

going to happen — that is bargaining in bad faith. And any 

worker in this province who knows about contracts and knows 

about working and knows about bargaining understands that. 

 

And I know, I know the Premier has said we’re going to war 

with labour. Well you really would have to ask yourself, why? 

Why would you do that? Why would you talk about 

undermining the economy, undermining the growth of the 

province, by going to war with the people who work here? Why 

would you think that that would get you anything? It might’ve 

been a cute clip on Gormley, but it certainly does not go 

anywhere in the public and in the real world. 

 

Twenty-five thousand health care workers without a contract. 

Nothing in the budget to accommodate that. Nothing in the 

health budget. So health districts are supposed to get that money 

from where? Increasing their debt? Increasing their deficit and 

increasing their debt. That’s the only option they’re going to 

have. 

 

[16:30] 

 

If you think that laying anybody off is going to work, well how 

are the services going to improve? How are you going to do . . . 

All the things you talked about in the Sooner, Safer, Smarter is 

going to be later, very dangerous, and dumber. I mean none of 

that is going to happen. They’re good buzz words. 

 

But you have to have money and you have to have the will to 

make it happen. There is no money. There’s no money for the 

patient-first the commissioner talked about. He said we need an 

electronic health record. Well they took the money away from 

the electronic health record, from SHIN [Saskatchewan Health 

Information Network]. It’s taken money away from there. How 

is that meeting what the commissioner said? 

 

They talked about increasing the acute care beds that long-term 

care people are in, moving people out of those acute care beds 

in hospitals in our bigger cities and moving them into long-term 

care beds. Where? There’s already 115 less long-term care beds 

in the system than there was two years ago. That’s the Sask 

Party record — 115 long-term care beds less. So you promise to 

move people, long-term care people out of acute care beds and 

put them into long-term care faster? How? 

 

That’s no plan. You can talk all you want, and the minister can 

dance around in his seat and get redder and redder and tell me 

that I should know. Well that’s the problem, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I do know. That’s the problem. And that’s why he’s so 

mad. He’s gone from curious a few months ago when he said, 

why didn’t I get a question? He’s gone from curious to furious. 

 

And he’s done nothing in between. I mean his answers are 

absolutely ludicrous. And the people watching are commenting. 

And it’s really a mistake to think that what we do in this 

legislature and in front of these cameras goes unnoticed. There 

is nothing that goes unnoticed. Somebody sees it and somebody 

talks about it on email and Twitter and all the social networking 

— it just goes like wildfire through the province. 

 

I have never in all my time I’ve been here, in the various 

portfolios I’ve had, had as many doctors phoning me and 

emailing me about what’s wrong. I’ve never seen that. It didn’t 

take but a few days after the minister announced his physician 

recruitment strategy to have emails starting to pour in from 

doctors who are saying, this isn’t going to work. And they’re 

gathering up more. I’ve never seen that before. I’ve got media 

calling me from small towns and asking me to comment. I’ve 

not seen that before. 

 

So if anybody thinks that they are representing rural 

Saskatchewan by what they’re doing, rural Saskatchewan’s 

phoning us. And they’re asking us, what do you think about 

this? And they’re printing it and they’re broadcasting it. 

Because what we’re saying, people understand and they think 

it’s true. They saw last year’s budget and they’re not going to 

be burned twice. And there’s nobody that can sell balanced, 

forward-thinking, and what’s the other word? I don’t know. 

That can’t sell either. There’s nothing, there’s nothing that can 

sell in this. It’s not too catchy. Put up a billboard. I don’t think 

it’ll even sell then. 

 

And it’s interesting that what we first saw when we came into 

opposition was a whole province intimidated. There were 

organizations who were afraid to talk. They were afraid to come 

forward because they felt threatened by the Sask Party. And that 

has not gone away that they are afraid. But you know what? 

They’re not afraid to come forward any more. They are coming 

forward in droves. There are so many people coming forward 

and saying to us in all of our critic areas, I don’t like this. This 

is what’s happening to me, and I’m not going to take it any 

more. They see that this is not the government they thought 

they were getting. 

 

All the promises in ’07, the Premier can stand up and tick off 

the ones that he’s kept. Well he has let down many people by 

the ones he hasn’t kept — big ones. The children’s hospital, 

gone. The long-term care facilities, gone. The municipal tax 

sharing, gone. The school boards, left on their own. God knows 

what they’re going to do. They don’t have money for teachers 

either. 

 

How is this going to work? Somebody was making up this 

budget in a bubble, not understanding what it means. It isn’t 

going . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That’s the third one, thank 

you — responsible. Well I think most people are thinking it’s 

fairly irresponsible. There is nothing in it that . . . I have heard 

nobody say to me, that’s really, those are good words. Those 

are good words. I think I like that. 

 

This budget can’t be sold. It’s dying a quick death. Almost a 

week has gone by since we’ve heard it. It’s dead out there. It’s 

dead out there. I can’t believe the people who are calling, the 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4665 

people who are asking for our opinion, for our help. I’m just so 

surprised actually that people have . . . 

 

First of all I was really, really disappointed they were so 

intimidated, but I can see this in this House. I’ve been here for 

12 years and the people that are saying, oh, don’t say that to our 

Premier, oh, don’t say that to the member from such-and-such a 

place because you’re hurting his feelings. I sat here for 12 years 

listening to the absolute hostile, vicious comments from many 

of those members over there. So to forget that, I don’t think so. 

And to whine and go waah, waah, waah, now my feelings are 

hurt — that doesn’t work. You could dish it out, but you cannot 

take it. You can’t take it. You are waah, waah, waahing all the 

time. 

 

And I don’t know how many times the Premier has apologized. 

He has a record for someone who has to apologize. The things 

that are on his record are absolutely atrocious. Someone who 

would think that that is Premier-like, and that’s how someone 

that we’ve supposedly elected as a province, we want to show 

this to be who we think is a good leader? I don’t think we’re 

going to be fooled much longer. The shine is coming off big 

time. The shine is coming off. 

 

And I think when we see temper tantrums like we saw on 

budget day, we see the Premier’s speech today when he had a 

major opportunity to talk about what this budget meant for his 

vision and forward . . . whatever he was talking about. Where 

did it go? It went into personal attacks on the members over 

here, regurgitating our speeches and trying to tear them apart 

and think it was funny. And actually, you know what? I don’t 

think most people think he’s funny anymore either. Most people 

have said to me they’ve been at events where his jokes are the 

same as the one they heard last time. So he’s basically, you 

know, a mile wide and an inch deep, and that’s starting to be 

shown quite clearly. 

 

We’re starting to hear it all over. So people that think we’re . . . 

people like me who are stuck in, say, Eastview in Saskatoon — 

and I only represent an urban riding; I don’t hear stuff from 

rural Saskatchewan — well stay tuned, because rural 

newspapers are calling me. We’re going out to rural places and 

I’ve been out there to many of them. And they want us to come 

and they want to tell us their stories because they don’t believe 

the people over there are representing them. They do not. And 

it’s only taken two years. So I don’t think anybody should get 

comfortable in those seats over there because they’re not going 

to be in there very long. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan have seen now the second 

budget where they’ve been abysmally disappointed. Last year, 

well, sorry we made a mistake on potash revenue projections. 

Big oops. Not that people didn’t warn them. I saw Harry Van 

Mulligen sitting next to me telling the members opposite, I 

mean that is ridiculous. And we were pooh-poohed and mocked 

and mocked. And now who’s got the last laugh? Although no 

one’s laughing because it hurt all of us. It hurts the whole 

province. And the economy is perking along really nicely. It is 

perking. So as long as the Sask Party isn’t there for more than 

four years, we’re going to just be fine. 

 

But the Sask Party, I think people have really lost their trust. 

They’ve certainly lost any amusement, and they don’t believe 

anything they’re hearing any more. They’re extremely 

skeptical. 

 

And you’ve made people very . . . I don’t know how the 

business community views this. This is something the business 

community would think is a good idea, to have a budget like 

this where the debt and the deficit are being slid under into the 

health districts, into the school boards? What are we going to do 

with this money? 

 

I’ve got seniors coming into my office telling me they can’t turn 

on their power because they can’t afford it. They can’t buy 

dentures. They can’t buy new glasses. They’re starting to think 

about selling their gravesites. Come on. I mean we’ve got to do 

. . . And there’s not a thing in here about seniors except 

decreasing their income — not a thing. And the minister told a 

group of seniors that came to visit him . . . Because there’s 

nothing on the website either of the Sask Party about seniors. 

That’s disappeared. There’s nobody paying attention to seniors. 

Well you know what? Seniors vote. Seniors vote. And they are 

not happy. 

 

And they’re coming and saying, I’m not taking my medication. 

I’m cutting the pill in four and taking it every, you know, a 

quarter every day instead of one a day. And they’re not taking 

them, sometimes not at all. They’re not turning on their stoves 

to cook because they can’t afford the electricity. I mean . . . And 

the seniors’ rec centres that used to be places where seniors 

could go and meet in their small communities — and these are 

small communities where seniors gathered to have games and 

have dances and have conversation and actually keep 

themselves busy and out in the community — they can’t afford 

to keep them open because they can’t afford the utilities. 

There’s no help. There’s no recognition. Seniors are totally 

ignored. The minister told seniors’ groups who came to visit 

him, I’ve been busy. I’ve been busy. 

 

So it’s interesting to see that there is not even, there’s not even 

a minister responsible for seniors. And seniors see that. They 

see that they’re not, I mean, they’re not even recognized or 

notified or noticed. Their issues are . . . They’re on fixed 

income. Seniors are not the rich people in the province. Sure 

there’s some who have lots of money, but there’s so many more 

who are coming into our offices talking about their rent 

increases, their drug costs, their utility costs. They can’t afford 

to live here. How is that fair? How is that fair and responsible? 

We’re looking at a whole group of people who are 

disadvantaged and have nothing in the budget for them. 

 

I’m also the critic for women’s issues. This is a whole other 

thing. There is nobody in that government that even knows 

anything about the status of women. When they’re called, 

nobody answers. People say if they call and ask for the status of 

women something . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What happens? 

 

Ms. Junor: — Nothing. I’m sorry, I don’t know who that is. I 

don’t know. What is the status of women? What is the status of 

women, was the answer. I’m sorry, I don’t know that. Is there a 

minister responsible? I don’t know that. That’s the government 

answering the phone, which is a whole other thing when people 

are calling us in our constituency offices saying nobody 



4666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

answers the phone over there. There’s all these high-priced 

political people supposed to be in the ministers’ offices. And 

the phone rings and rings and rings and nobody answers. 

 

So they’re coming to us and saying, I’ve gone to my MLA’s 

office. It isn’t even open. It’s never even open, so I’m calling 

you to ask you what you can do for me. How is this 

representing the people of Saskatchewan? How is this 

representing your constituents, when you don’t even answer 

your phone? There’s hundreds of people telling us that, so it’s 

not just an isolated incidence. This is a culture of this 

government. You don’t want to talk to people. You want to 

intimidate them to be quiet and not bring up their issues, just 

take it. Because somehow you have the God-given right to 

govern, and the rest of us are garbage. And people are not going 

to take that. They aren’t going to take it. 

 

The Sask Party has totally underestimated the people of 

Saskatchewan. They will not take it. They will not be fooled by 

another budget that’s just totally going to take us into debt. It 

isn’t fair, balanced, straightforward, forward-thinking, 

whatever. None of the above. It certainly lost the words 

transparent and accountable a long time ago. Nobody buys it, 

and nobody’s bought this one. And I can see by the faces of the 

members opposite they don’t buy it either. They’re looking 

extremely uncomfortable. They came to this legislature in 

government pretty darn cocky, extremely cocky, arrogant. They 

were rude, obnoxious. Now there’s nothing. There’s . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would caution the member when 

talking about other members not to use unparliamentary 

language. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I was talking rude and arrogant, so I’m not sure 

if you could tell me, Mr. Speaker, which ones of those are not 

parliamentarian. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — First of all, member not to question 

the Speaker. You were talking about members with them words. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll try to use 

better words. I know that the Speaker has ruled that we can 

certainly use “simply not true,” so I do think that people 

understand that these members, the members of the Sask Party, 

what they’re saying to people is simply not true. When they talk 

about all the things that they’re doing and giving and all the 

good things in the budget, they’re not true. They’re not true. 

There’s things in this budget that . . . People are going to really 

suffer. And my colleagues have pointed many of that out, many 

of those things out. 

 

And when I talked about some of the things that other of my 

colleagues have talked about, I also want to talk about some of 

the plans that have been announced. The physician recruitment 

was announced in May of ’09, ’09, a year ago. The strategy was 

announced in ’09. Then the plan was announced in 2010. So it’s 

no small wonder that the stakeholders, like the doctors who are 

emailing and phoning me, are a little bit leery that anything will 

actually happen. 

 

There’s all kinds of plans have been announced, but nothing has 

happened. Nothing has happened. Big announcement about, oh, 

we support the children’s hospital. Not going to happen. Oh 

we’re going to build long-term care. Not going to happen. And 

here’s a new one. We’re going to have an isotope reactor here. 

Well no, we’re not. We’re not going to have it. This special 

relationship with the federal government is non-existent. We 

have seen nothing that this government can get out of the 

Harper government. I don’t know if they return phone calls, if 

they take meetings, but obviously nothing is coming to 

Saskatchewan from them. So that’s another promise or another 

big, grand idea that’s bit the dust. We’re not going to see 

anything from that either. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So I think the people of Saskatchewan are pretty clear. Seniors, 

pretty clear nothing there for them. Women are starting to take 

notice that nobody’s paying attention. Taking away the work of 

the violence centre for women that have been abused, that’s 

noticed. Those things are noticed. And if you try to sell 

something to cover it up, people don’t . . . They’re not 

interested in having smoke blown up their nose. They 

understand what this means. People are looking at this and 

saying, well you fooled us last year, but you’re not going to fool 

us again. 

 

And I don’t think anybody is . . . I can see by the faces of the 

members opposite that nobody’s actually too excited about their 

budget because I haven’t heard any excitement from the 

Premier. All he brought up was what we’ve said, criticizing 

that. He had the opportunity to be the leader, to tell people how 

exciting this was. He didn’t. Obviously he doesn’t think so, so I 

guess I can understand why his colleagues in caucus don’t feel 

that way either. Nobody’s excited. I can mostly see pretty darn 

dismal-looking faces when we talk about . . . And I’m sorry if 

that’s unparliamentary. But it wasn’t personal. It was 

expressions over there are not exactly happy. 

 

And I think one of the things I really, really want to talk about 

is that we are not helping rural Saskatchewan, the doctors in 

rural Saskatchewan. The SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] convention talked about health being one 

of the big issues. I was there to hear that, and I understand that, 

and I know that doctors in rural Saskatchewan are a huge issue. 

And nothing’s going to help that. The doctors who are emailing 

me are saying this isn’t going to work. This strategy isn’t going 

to work. In fact they said it was being put, the strategy was put 

together by people who don’t even know what they’re talking 

about. 

 

So it’s not going to, it’s not going to help rural Saskatchewan, 

and the members opposite are supposed to be the ones elected 

to represent rural Saskatchewan, even if some of them have 

only driven by a farm. That’s still the message to SARM, that 

we’re the people that represent you, the farmers. Well my 

grandfather was a farmer, and I was there on his farm a lot of 

times. So it’s not that we’re too far removed from that lifestyle 

and that culture. And I think it’s quite insulting. 

 

And I understand that when you talk about rural issues . . . I 

listened to one of the members talk about Rural Women’s 

Month and talk about women as caregivers and volunteers, 

missed the whole point of women’s contribution to the 

economy in rural Saskatchewan. How many of those 25,000 

health care workers work in rural Saskatchewan and contribute 



March 31, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4667 

to the economy and the growth of their communities? And 

they’re sitting without a contract and feeling totally 

disrespected. How many of them are farmers’ wives? How 

many of them live in small towns and basically maybe support 

their farm? 

 

We’re totally disregarding that aspect in thinking that somehow 

these 25,000 workers are union thugs. And some just . . . The 

disparaging remarks against unions is quite, actually disturbing. 

People that are involved in unions are workers like you and I. 

They’re workers like you and I. And I’ve been a union leader. I 

understand this. I understand who I represented. And I 

understand who they were. And I don’t see that at all. I don’t 

know if any of the people opposite have ever even talked to a 

union member with any intent to understand what they do. 

 

And like I said, my dad is looked after by a union member at his 

nursing home. I see what they do. This is not a person who’s a 

union thug. That’s what I get, the feeling that all the members 

opposite think of unions as the big, bad thugs. 

 

And these are people who do the work of this province. They do 

the work that delivers the services for you and I. They’re men 

and women. And many of them women. Eighty per cent of 

those 25,000 health care workers are women. And what is this 

saying to women? They’re getting the message. They 

understand what it’s saying to them. We don’t respect you. We 

don’t respect your work, and we certainly have no intentions of 

actually honouring your work or honouring you. 

 

We don’t even have a member, a minister who is taking the 

Status of Women seriously, so why would we? I was recently at 

a meeting in Quebec or with the MLA from Quebec, and she 

found out that the minister here responsible for the Status of 

Women was a man. She was appalled, absolutely appalled that 

this would happen. And it’s even more appalling when we find 

out that no one knows there’s a minister responsible for the 

Status of Women, let alone that it’s one of the male members. 

 

People don’t even . . . I mean, there’s no mention of women. 

There’s no mention of seniors, and there’s people out there who 

are noticing that. It’s just, it’s not . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s Rob. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Yes. In case you didn’t know, it’s the Minister 

of Advanced Education, Learning, Labour and whatever else is 

attached to that. 

 

But I think that some of the things that we’ve seen that are in 

the health cuts are really going to be coming back to my critic 

area because I think what’s going to be significant in this 

budget and over this budget year is the amazing damage that’s 

going to be done to our health care services by this budget. And 

the districts are going to feel it, and you and I are going to feel 

it in our services. And anybody who tries to colour it over or 

gloss it over by saying this is a balanced budget, that health 

districts got all this money and are going to do so well, it’s not 

going to happen. It’s not true. And we’re all going to suffer 

from it. 

 

And I think the people that see it and when they see it — it’s 

not going to be too long before they notice it — they’re not 

going to put up with it anymore, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

think that the message in two years is going to be, we’re done 

with you. So I simply am not going to . . . I’m going to support 

the amendment, but I will not be supporting the budget. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now 

our government has presented a balanced, forward-looking, 

responsible budget. And this was achieved through a 

combination of reduced spending, caution on revenue 

projections, and a commitment to living within our means. Mr. 

Speaker, people of Saskatchewan want all of us to live within 

our means. Reductions have been realized in 14 ministries, and 

there’ll be a lowering of debt service costs this year. And as a 

result, our government is paying down debt by more than 2.6 

billion in recent years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of the restraint measure, the government 

has embarked on a process to reduce the size and the cost of 

government operation. This is a balanced, forward-looking 

approach. It’s a responsible approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

While this reduction from the record-high levels of 

infrastructure spending in the previous years, it is still the 

third-largest capital spending budget in Saskatchewan’s history. 

And this will bring our government’s total capital investments 

to nearly 3 billion in three years. 

 

Our government’s expense levels are reduced by 1.2 per cent 

while protecting important programs, protecting core services in 

health, social services, education, and other priority areas across 

the government. Government debt will not rise. The growth and 

financial security projection is to have a year-end balance of 

$110 million. We will move Saskatchewan forward by training 

our future workforce through labour force development 

programs and supporting our post-secondary institutions to 

minimize tuition cost increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have shown responsible leadership by 

continuing our effort to improve the daily lives of 

Saskatchewan people, including society’s most vulnerable 

people. The Saskatchewan economy remains strong through the 

worst global recession. And with the recovery now under way, 

there is plenty of reason for optimism. All the independent 

forecasters say Saskatchewan will be one of the economic 

leaders in Canada in 2010 and 2011. 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy is strong, and this budget will give 

our province the solid, fiscal foundation it needs to stay strong. 

Our social services will continue to make significant 

investments on behalf of Saskatchewan people in need with 

commitments to affordable housing and child and family 

services. Mr. Speaker, this is a government that cares. This is a 

government that is balanced, forward-looking, and responsible. 

 

There will be a new Headstart home program implemented to 

help eligible families own their own home. Mr. Speaker, this is 

a commitment to especially young families who maybe need a 

bit of a helping hand to be able to afford their own home here in 

Saskatchewan. Available, affordable housing is key to building 

better lives in Saskatchewan. People will choose to stay in 



4668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2010 

Saskatchewan. We will end up developing stronger, stable 

communities throughout the province of Saskatchewan. The 

Headstart on Home program will help families in need realize 

their dream, their dream of owning their own home. And this 

program is expected to create a minimum of a thousand new, 

affordable home ownership opportunities, and this is for the 

lower to moderate income home buyers over the next five years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, improving the lives of children in care 

remains a priority for our government, and we will continue the 

work that we have already begun to strengthen our child welfare 

system. The Ministry of Social Services is receiving 30.2 

million to offset caseload and cost increase in the Saskatchewan 

assistance program and the Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability program, and transitional employment allowances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is balanced. This is forward and this is 

responsible. This is a part of our government’s resolve to 

maintain core services while ensuring fiscal responsibility. The 

Government of Saskatchewan is committed to ensuring the best 

use of public funds while helping citizens build better lives for 

themselves through economic independence, strong families, 

and active involvement in the labour market and within their 

communities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 2010-2011 provincial budget provides 

556 million in operation funds for Saskatchewan’s 

post-secondary institution. Now this is an overall increase of 5 

per cent over the last year. Now our budget ensures that the 

post-secondary system is innovative, inclusive, and responsive 

to the needs of the learners of the Saskatchewan market. We 

have taken several steps to enhance student support to ensure 

that education remains and is affordable. And the budget 

provides 97.7 million in support for students through student 

loans, grants, bursaries, and provincial training allowances, and 

also the graduate retention program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what does this mean? This means we 

are a responsible government. We have worked hard to help 

students meet their financial challenges. On average almost 

two-thirds of every provincial dollar given to students is 

non-repayable. Now this is helping students through the 

responsible management of our expenditures and strategic 

investment in key services, and our economy will continue to be 

strong. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan will continue to invest in 

pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to 12 education in a balanced, 

sustainable way to ensure the province achieves affordable 

growth, moving forward. And we do realize we have a group of 

young children that are going to be coming into our schools, so 

we do have to take that into consideration. Our government has 

worked very hard to fund education because we understand the 

essential role it plays in our government’s future and the 

province’s future, important in preparing all of our young 

people for success. 

 

And this year the government is investing 17.2 million for 

school capital. And this brings its three-year total to a record of 

328 million invested in the province’s K to 12 infrastructure. 

This budget also provides 2 million for the 235 additional child 

care spaces and 18 new pre-kindergarten programs. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this is a very good indication that we have a growing 

province and that we are listening. We are paying attention. 

This is a responsible government. 

 

In the past two and a half years, the government has advanced 

28 major school capital projects, and this includes six recently 

announced school projects to address the most critical space 

issues in the province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is wonderful 

when we have space issues because that means we have a 

growing population. Now this is also coupled by close to 400 

additional smaller . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until tomorrow 

morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4635 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4635 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4636 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4636 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4636 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4636 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4636 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4637 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4637 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4637 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4638 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4638 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4638 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4639 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4639 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 CJWW Loses Familiar Voice 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4639 

 Saskatchewan Communications Network 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4639 

 Support for Project Hero 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4640 

 Student and Kids Centre 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4640 

 Statistics for Weekly Earnings 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4640 

 Regina Food Bank Opens Village Market Grocery Store 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4640 

 Protecting the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4641 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Film Industry Issues 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4641 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4641 

 Chiropractic Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4643 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4643 

 Health Care Provision 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4644 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4644 

 Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4645 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4645 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4646 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4646 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4646 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4646 



 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4647 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4654 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4660 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4663 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4667 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


