




















































Hansard: March 25, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 37A  THURSDAY, MARCH 25, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4481 

 March 25, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce a group 

of 26 students, a group from the Regina Christian School here 

in Regina. These students are with us here today. Their teacher, 

Tim Irvine, is with us, a number of chaperones and students. 

 

I’ll be unable to meet with the students later, but I know my 

good friend from Regina Elphinstone will be meeting with 

them. I want to welcome you here to the Assembly today and I 

know all members will want to join with me, Mr. Speaker, in 

giving them a warm reception here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

the west gallery I’d like to welcome my papa and grandma, Bud 

and Ora Wooley who made the trip from Vernon, BC [British 

Columbia] to be here today. And papa is a World War II 

veteran, serving on the HMCS Buttercup chasing U-boats in the 

North Atlantic. And also my wife Alaina and my son 

MacGregor who . . . It’s his first question period so he may be 

participating in debate, Mr. Speaker, but it will be in a manner 

similar to the members opposite of random yelling. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you I’d like to welcome to the Legislative 

Assembly a person named Margaret Akan. Margaret Akan’s 

seated in your gallery. She’s here visiting with the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer, but when she’s not doing that 

Margaret works as the executive director for the All Nations 

Hope AIDS Network and has been doing that job for many, 

many years, doing a lot of good work for the community. We 

happen to be neighbours in terms of offices up and down 5th 

Avenue and it’s really good to see Margaret here today in her 

Assembly. Please join me, all members, in welcoming Margaret 

to her Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud today to rise and present a petition on behalf of 

concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 

the safety of the highways in our province. This particular 

petition pertains to the No. 10 Highway and it states in this 

petition that No. 10 Highway is a major traffic artery to 

year-round tourist destinations. Mr. Speaker, I will read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Yorkton; Dauphin, Manitoba; and Langenburg, Saskatchewan. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m pleased to 

present a petition that was organized by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, and the petition is in support of the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund that the 

Saskatchewan Party promised to implement in its 2007 election 

platform. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these signatures today are from Regina and 

Balgonie. I am pleased to submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue that the Government 

of Saskatchewan needs to recognize the integral role of all 

health care providers as valued members of the health care 

team, and that adequate funding needs to be provided and the 

installation of good faith in the provincial collective bargaining 

process. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiate a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

On behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to again present petitions on behalf of people who have now 

had their worst fears realized and have seen the elimination of 

the funding for chiropractic services. There’s 1,400 more 

signatures here today, Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 



4482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan honour the 

agreement negotiated between the Ministry of Health and 

the Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from across the 

province — Colgate, Swift Current, Kyle, Beechy, Admiral, 

Abbey, Hazlet, Davidson, Delisle, Saskatoon, La Ronge, 

Marsden, Blaine Lake, Dalmeny, Martensville, Bruno, Outlook, 

Kindersley, Perdue, Radisson, Osler, Hanley, Langham, 

Waldheim, Clavet, Major, Kenaston, Warman, Nipawin, 

Hudson Bay, Fairy Glen, Choiceland, Radville, Codette, 

Arborfield, Gronlid, White Fox, Carrot River, Prairie River, 

Tisdale, Love, Prince Albert, Melville, Indian Head, Climax, 

Southey, Silton, Regina, Dysart, White City, Kelliher, Vibank, 

Craven, Grenfell, Balgonie, Luseland, Unity, Scott, Wilkie, 

Tramping Lake, Battleford, Vawn, North Battleford, Meota, 

Consul, Shaunavon, Frontier, St-Denis, Laird, Edam, Delmas, 

Spiritwood, Livelong, Medstead, Neilburg, Qu’Appelle, 

Wilcox, Cudworth, Regina Beach, Rose Valley, Lac Vert, 

Spalding, Clair, Watson, Naicam, Carmel, Melfort, Borden, 

Buchanan, Canora, Yarbo, Kamsack, Bredenbury, Sturgis, 

Killaly, Foam Lake, Lipton, Lintlaw, Churchbridge, Fenwood, 

Hyas, Neville, Saltcoats, Redvers, North Portal, Macoun, Glen 

Ewen, Torquay, Bienfait, Frobisher, Whitewood, Usherville, 

Cochin, Stewart Valley, Battleford, Pelly, Rockhaven, 

Wroxton, Imperial, Macrorie, Radisson, Hepburn, Arelee, 

Hanley, Domremy, Alvena, Albertville, Birch Hills, Muskoday, 

Debden, Aberdeen, Parkbeg, Drinkwater, Neidpath, and Birsay. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in support of 

maintaining educational assistants in the province of 

Saskatchewan. As we know, the government has published a 

document that reveals that the government is considering 

changes that would drastically reduce the number of educational 

assistants in the province and replace them with a small number 

of professionals, which according to this petition is no 

substitute for the loss of in-class support. And the prayer reads: 

 

. . . cause the government to provide funding for the 

required number of educational assistants to provide 

special needs students with the support they need and 

maintain a positive learning environment for all 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people from 

Melville, Ituna, Norquay, Yarbo, and Saltcoats. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise today to present a petition calling for protection for renters 

from unreasonable increases. And we know that Saskatchewan 

renters are facing a combination of high rents and low vacancy 

rates in many communities. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view of 

protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatories come from the city of Regina. 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of new long-term care bed facilities in La Ronge with 

a waiting year of almost one full year, with a waiting list of one 

full year. I’d like to read the prayer as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition circulated by the Saskatchewan Student 

Coalition, a petition in support of affordable undergraduate 

tuition cost, and it requests the Sask Party government’s actions 

match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The petition is being signed by many folks from 

around Saskatchewan because the Saskatchewan Party 

government amended the retention program to exclude master’s 

and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduates as well as students 

who graduated from post-secondary institutions from outside 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4483 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by folks from the city 

of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

dealing with another water issue, that a government ministry 

has directed that customers may no longer treat non-potable 

water using methods approved by Sask Health, and that Furdale 

residents dealing in good faith with SaskWater for over 30 

years have paid large amounts for the domestic systems and 

in-home treatment equipment. And the alternative water supply 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the member 

to move to the prayer please. I recognize the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — I’ll go straight to the prayer, Mr. Speaker. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives, to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

we all in this province understand that The Construction 

Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 provides a stable 

environment for labour relations in the construction industry. 

The results of that are stable labour relations and quality of 

work and safe construction sites which benefit the people of our 

province. Not to forget to mention that the contracts, trades 

contracts support an apprenticeship system of training which 

does result in a highly skilled workforce. And the petition reads 

a follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by people in Assiniboia, Regina, 

Annaheim, Melville, Grayson, Edenwold, and Mossbank. And I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are 

motivated by recent rent increases of 40 per cent in the 

community. Mr. Speaker, the prayer calls on the Legislative 

Assembly to ask the Government of Saskatchewan: 

 

To develop an affordable housing program that will result 

in a greater number of quality and affordable rental units 

to be made available to a greater number of people 

throughout The Battlefords and that will implement a 

process of rent revenue or rent control to better protect 

tenants in a non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords, supported by residents of the Lloydminster area. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise with a 

petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan concerned about 

this government’s disregard and disrespect for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that will allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, and 

I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets and the two consecutive 

years of debt growth, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 



4484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens in Weyburn 

and Estevan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a new petition, this time in support of the 

Saskatchewan film and television industry. This petition 

basically deals with how the Sask Party government has 

allowed the film industry to languish over the last couple of 

years, and now has clearly kicked it to the curb with shutting 

down SCN. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

. . . to cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces, to reverse its decision to shut down 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, and to work 

with the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

This petition is signed by the good residents of Regina. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Poverty Costs 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This week 

is Social Work Week and the theme, Poverty Costs, draws 

attention to the many side effects of poverty, including hunger, 

homelessness, disease, malnutrition, drug and alcohol abuse, 

and crime. 

 

The cost of poverty affects us all, Mr. Speaker, but yesterday’s 

budget offered nothing to Saskatchewan families who are living 

in poverty. We saw drastic cuts to employment and literacy 

programs and community-based organizations. We saw 

hundreds of people lose their jobs, and social workers are 

among the casualties of the Premier’s ham-handed cuts. The 

only funding increase we did see was to address the growing 

number of people receiving social assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, poverty’s rising under the Sask Party government 

and the gap between the rich and poor continues to grow. But 

unfortunately this Premier and this minister refuses to work 

with the community to develop a comprehensive poverty 

reduction strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is truly unfortunate that the Premier does not 

recognize the many costs associated with poverty. While he 

ignores those costs and make decisions which forces more and 

more people into poverty, social workers will continue to be on 

the front lines working alongside those individuals, families, 

and communities. I ask all members here to join me in thanking 

social workers for all the work they do, especially at a time 

when the Premier’s forcing Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable to 

pay the price for his government’s incompetence. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Population Trends 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] once declared that it was impossible for Saskatchewan’s 

population to grow by even 1 per cent per year. In fact, 

yesterday the NDP leader predicted that we would soon see 

Saskatchewan’s population starting to drop. Mr. Speaker, Stats 

Canada released its latest population report today, and the NDP 

leader is wrong again. In our government’s first two years in 

office, Saskatchewan grew by 30,511 people. That’s the fastest 

rate of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the fastest rate of 

population growth in any two-year period in nearly 80 years. 

Saskatchewan grew by over 14,700 people in 2008 during the 

so-called boom. And then we grew by over 15,700 people in 

2009 in the middle of a worldwide recession, Mr. Speaker. That 

speaks volumes about the strength of our economy and our 

province. 

 

I would also note that in 2009 Saskatchewan recorded net 

international in-migration of 8,571 people. That’s the highest 

number of new Canadians coming to our province in any year 

since records began to be kept in 1946. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has thrown off the defeatist attitude 

of the NDP that held us back for decades. And today our 

province is growing and moving forward. The balanced, 

forward-looking budget delivered yesterday by the Minister of 

Finance will keep Saskatchewan growing and moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Rural and Northern Health Care 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s budget offered 

absolutely nothing except cuts, clawbacks, IOUs [I owe you] 

for northern and rural Saskatchewan. But in last Thursday’s 

75-minute debate, we can clearly see why. The member from 

Cannington obviously does not understand the needs of 

northern and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When I spoke last week, I mentioned health care in rural and 

northern areas of the province seven times. And each time I was 

trying to convince the members opposite that rural and northern 

areas have special health care needs that don’t exist in urban 

areas. I am talking about basic services that are taken for 

granted in the urban areas but are not easily available in isolated 

locations throughout rural and northern Saskatchewan. Unique 

circumstances deserve unique solutions. 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4485 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am trying, I am saying again, northern and 

rural areas want health care that puts them on the same standing 

as urban areas in the South. The member from Cannington 

disrespected northern people when he said we have to stop 

calling for special treatment. 

 

My point is so simple, even he should be able to understand it. I 

want the member to know that we deserve health care where we 

live. Northerners deserve to be understood and treated with 

dignity and respect. Rural and northern people deserve to have 

access to quality health care just like everyone else. And 

unfortunately the Sask Party offered nothing in yesterday’s 

budget to address the shortfall. Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his 

government ought to be ashamed of their betrayal of northern 

and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Wait-Lists 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the NDP is 

wrong about population numbers, and it also appears that 

Springfield Elementary’s best and brightest had better go back 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the . . . well there’s 

a handful of members on the opposition side to at least give the 

members the opportunity to make their statements without 

undue interference. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — It also appears that Springfield 

Elementary’s best and brightest had better go back to Ms. 

Krabappel’s classroom. Just yesterday the member from P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Northcote rose in the House and made the 

statement that the truth about wait-lists in the province of 

Saskatchewan is that they’ve doubled under this Premier. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, the truth is wait times are shrinking. Our 

government is ensuring that patients receive cataract eye 

surgery, hip fracture repairs, and cancer radiation treatment 

within the benchmark period. The Canadian Institute of Health 

Information says this year’s numbers are an improvement over 

last year’s, which completely contradicts the statement made by 

the member . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members’ statements. We’ll get 

to the point of order as we normally do. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — That this year’s numbers are an 

improvement over last year’s which completely contradicts the 

statement made by the member from P.A. Northcote, who we 

will hereby refer to as angry Bart. Bart is known for not doing 

his homework. This is also true of angry Bart. One of today’s 

headlines says that wait times are decreasing. Ay, caramba, Mr. 

Speaker. Tracy Johnson, manager of special projects at CIHI 

[Canadian Institute of Health Information] says, “the report is 

good news since most Canadians are receiving priority surgery 

within the appropriate time.” This shows yet again the 

disconnect between reality and the NDP. 

The Speaker: — I just want to remind members that if 

members would not interfere, the member making the statement 

would have the appropriate opportunity and that the Speaker 

just gave the opportunity because of the Speaker’s interjection 

to make the statement in the appropriate time period. 

 

I recognize the member from Prince . . . Order. Order. The 

members are asking to stop the clock; stop the clock goes back 

to zero. The member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Oh, she’s quite a ray of sunshine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members are to note that they are not 

to question the rulings of the Speaker. Order. We’ll move to the 

next statement. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

New Democratic Party’s Track Record 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP was wrong about the 

population, the NDP was wrong about wait times, and they 

were wrong about the budget. 

 

Yesterday in his post-budget rant, the Leader of the Opposition 

pointed to the green sheet and said it proved the budget was not 

balanced. He pointed to the summary deficit line and said, how 

could a government claim the budget is not balanced? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s researchers are either 

incompetent or they’re setting him up. 

 

We decided to look if the NDP had ever had a summary deficit 

and said it was a balanced budget. We didn’t have to look very 

far. I have the green sheet from the NDP’s last budget, the 2007 

budget, and guess what it says. It says there was a $701 million 

summary deficit, and at the top of the page the NDP called it a 

surplus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the leader of the NDP doesn’t seem to know what 

his own party was up to while he was in Calgary. It makes you 

wonder why he benched his Finance critic, who would never 

have made such a rookie mistake. Mr. Speaker, as usual the 

NDP was wrong, wrong, wrong — wrong on population, wrong 

on wait times, wrong on budget balance. You really can’t 

believe anything they say. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Magic Show 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we all witnessed an 

attempt at a true magic show by the Premier and his Finance 

minister. 

 

First of all, they magically removed the debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan. How did they do it, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s quite 

simple. They just erased it off the balance sheets. The Sask 

Party has found the trickiest and cheapest way to get rid of their 

total debt — whiteout. Abracadabra, it’s magically gone. 

 

But that wasn’t the only trick they used yesterday. They also 

turned one-year capital expenses into 20- and 30-year projects. 

Poof, spending is magically reduced. The Premier’s also 

privatizing licensing and inspection services, completely 



4486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

making yet another budget item disappear. What a magic show, 

Mr. Speaker. What a spectacle. 

 

But the best hoax the Premier and his Finance minister tried to 

pull off — they redefined public debt, magically making 

government loan guarantees disappear and, in the flash of a red 

pen, understating the provincial debt by hundreds of millions of 

dollars. 

 

This may look flashy, but let me assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that these so-called balanced books are nothing 

more than smoke and mirrors. Magic tricks may be fine for a 

kids’ birthday party but they will certainly not suffice when 

managing the finances of the province. The people of 

Saskatchewan are finding out that there is nothing more painful 

to watch than a brutal magician. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

2010 Budget 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this government clearly got plenty 

of experience with scissors yesterday. They cut $2 million from 

early learning and child care. They cut $3 million for training 

for young people. They cut a half a million dollars to regional 

parks, and the environment, Mr. Speaker, was hit particularly 

hard. They cut more than $3 million from the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority alone. They cut more than $2 million from 

industrial environmental protection. They cut almost $1 million 

from the green initiatives programming. And they cut a quarter 

of a million dollars from the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative or PARC, a program that is finding solutions for 

reducing the impact on climate change. 

 

So what does that mean for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker? 

The environment will not be protected, rural Saskatchewan 

people won’t have access to quality drinking water, students 

will lose their chance for a summer job, parents won’t be able to 

get their kids into child care, Saskatchewan people will struggle 

to make ends meet. In short, Mr. Speaker, people will be asked 

to pay more and get less. 

 

[10:30] 

 

U of S [University of Saskatchewan] economics professor, Eric 

Howe, notes: 

 

The economic costs are straightforward. We are the ones 

who are going to pay. There is no none else. So the costs 

will end up coming out of our standard of living. 

 

And all of this, Mr. Speaker, comes at a time when the 

government has 30 per cent more revenue spent than the last 

NDP government. Never before, Mr. Speaker, has a budget with 

so much hurt so many. 

 

The Speaker: — First of all I’d like to bring to the attention of 

the members, some members have been wondering about the 

mikes and why different lights are on. At times we’ve run into 

problems with the mikes and then the staff then put the closest 

mike on for members to use. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Unparliamentary Language 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to questions, I’d like to 

respond to the point of order raised yesterday. Members are 

well aware that it’s not permissible to accuse or suggest that 

another member is not being truthful. This practice is codified 

in our rule 50(f) and in paragraph 484(3) of Beauchesne’s 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms in the 6th Edition and on page 

618 of The House of Commons Procedure and Practice, 2nd 

Edition, 2009. 

 

After reviewing the record from yesterday’s question period, I 

wish to highlight two matters that affect the ability of members 

to engage in respectful and dignified debates in this Assembly. 

 

First I would like to address the point of order raised by the 

Opposition House Leader. The statement at issue relates to the 

truthfulness of members. It was made by the Premier and 

directed at the member from Prince Albert Northcote. At page 

4472 of Hansard, the Premier states that the member was 

providing information that was “not completely the truth . . .” 

 

In this Assembly, many Speakers have ruled that the integrity of 

members should not be questioned and that the imputations of 

intentional falsehoods are not permissible — November 4th, 

2008; May 15th, 2008; December 20th, 2007; March 26th, 

2001; May 11th, 2000; April 29th, 1999; and May 27th, 1998. 

These rulings are further supported by the House of Commons 

Procedure and Practice, 2nd Edition, 2009 at page 618, which 

states: 

 

The proceedings of the House are based on a 

long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of all 

Members. Thus, the use of offensive, provocative or 

threatening language in the House is strictly forbidden. 

Personal attacks, insults and obscenities are not in order. A 

direct charge or accusation against a Member may be 

made only by way of a substantive motion for which 

notice is required. 

 

In his point of order, the Opposition House Leader suggested 

that the Premier had called into question the character of the 

member and suggested that members of the opposition were not 

being truthful. On this note, I would like to remind members 

that last week on March 17th, the Leader of the Opposition 

apologized to the Assembly for implying that a member was not 

being truthful. In addition on November 16th, 2009, I ruled a 

member out of order who implied that a member was not being 

truthful. 

 

I find that the statement by the Premier questioned the honesty 

of a member of this Assembly and ask the Premier to apologize 

and withdraw his remarks when I’ve completed my statement. 

 

The second point raised by the Opposition House Leader relates 

to allegations that members are under investigation. I have 

some concerns relating to the insinuations made this week by 

members from both sides of the Assembly. Once again, 

previous Speakers have ruled on April the 11th, 2007, and May 

12th, 2000, that members should be cautious in how allegations 

are phrased. Attacks on the integrity of members and the 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4487 

impugning of inappropriate activity are not in order. These 

types of allegations only create disorder. 

 

I appreciate that it is not always possible to prepare in advance 

every remark or intervention that is made in the Assembly. 

Indeed often the most effective and compelling debates occur 

when members passionately and forcefully present their 

positions. 

 

Nevertheless I do wish to caution members on their choice of 

language. I would like to remind members that personal attacks 

only incite others and bring down the level of debate. 

Challenging the position of another member is acceptable; 

questioning their character is not. A personal charge or 

accusation against another member may only be done by way of 

substantive motion. I would ask the Premier to withdraw and 

apologize. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the 

remark and apologize. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question deals with the 

issue of the deficit that was announced yesterday by the 

government’s own documents that show a deficit of $622 

million. And I want to quote from the Leader-Post today, 

individual by the name of Keri McFadden who talked about the 

deficit in the province. And from the article, I quote, “Keri 

McFadden, CEO of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 

Saskatchewan, agreed that the government is running a deficit, 

either way you look at it,” either accounting system that you 

use. 

 

I want to clarify that to read, “Keri McFadden, CEO of the 

Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan, agreed that 

the government is running a deficit, either way you look at it.” 

He says, either way it’s a deficit. My question to the Premier is 

this: how do you stand in the Assembly and claim to the people 

of the province, when the chief of the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of Chartered Accountants says it’s a deficit, your own 

document claims it’s a deficit, why do you not admit today 

you’re running a deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Just remind members to direct their 

comments directly through Chair, not directly at members. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we make that statement that this is a balanced budget because it 

is a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. And you know, and you 

know, in this we look to others who have governed in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We look to others who have some 

experience with respect to bringing down a number of budgets. 

 

We look to the green sheets actually that the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, who just asked the question, was quoting from in 

our budget; the same summary sheet for the last budget of the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. The same sheet where he was saying several 

times yesterday, this is your paper, not mine. Well this is his 

document, not the government’s. It’s from the last NDP budget. 

It highlights the fact that it is a balanced budget, that there’s a 

General Revenue Fund in surplus for the 14th consecutive year, 

and that the summary deficit, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP was 

$700 million. Then though, because GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] was balanced off with the savings account, they said it 

was a balanced budget in ’07 and ’08. It is a balanced budget 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier: the 

rating of the Crown corporations whereby the government is 

taking every penny of profits from the Crowns with the 

exception of SaskPower, stripping away every bit of profits in 

our Crown corporations, how does the Premier explain to the 

people of the province that this isn’t part of a way to pay for his 

deficit? And will he admit today that this money will be used to 

solve the deficit problem and will lead to much higher rates for 

the utilities in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if you take a 

look at roughly the amount of dividends that have been taken by 

governments of all stripes in our first two years and by the New 

Democrats, even when he was the minister of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], you’re going to 

find roughly about a 70 per cent dividend taken from the 

earnings of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you total the earnings from the Crown 

corporations in 2010-2011 forecast budget, the subtotal is 263.9 

million. SaskPower’s earnings are predicted to be 134.2 million. 

Mr. Speaker, we are taking zero dividends from SaskPower, 

making the dividend this year less than that 70 per cent number 

that the previous government used to take. So once again, Mr. 

Speaker, once again — and I’ll carefully word this — the hon. 

member’s information is not true. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can 

say what I’m saying isn’t true all he wants and be allowed to do 

it. But my question to the Premier is this, and I want to have a 

caveat on this to explain to him, the reason there wasn’t as 

much money to take this year is because he took at all last year. 

That’s the problem. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the Premier who asks 

the public to tighten their belt should look at his own office. 

Because the one place that was spared, the one place that was 

spared in this belt-tightening exercise was his own office. I say 

to the Premier, how is it that you ask the public, through their 

utility rates, to pay more while at the same time his own office, 

the Premier’s own office, is getting more money under this 

budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a pattern, 

there’s a pattern developing here, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 



4488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

member for P.A Northcote said wait times were going up. We 

find out today according to CIHI they’re going down. 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition said our population was 

going to decline. Today we found out we broke our own record 

set in December of this past year. Yesterday we found out that 

the member’s characterization of a balanced budget in ’07-08 

somehow doesn’t apply to the same budget this year. 

 

And on this most recent question, Mr. Speaker, again the 

member is wrong. I think he’s just going to continue to stand up 

and say whatever he wants. But I will note for the record that 

the Executive Council budget for the province of Saskatchewan, 

those are the offices of the Premier, are down 3 per cent. 

Ministerial travel down 38 per cent. Government travel down 

15 per cent. Government advertising down 46 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 

He will know if he’s getting advice from his ministers properly, 

the Premier will know this, that in the last year, last year and 

this year, this government has taken $1 billion out of the 

Crowns — $1 billion. This will add a lot to the utility rates of 

every citizen of this province. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: aren’t the rate increases that 

we’re seeing at SaskPower, SaskTel a result of this kind of 

improper management of the fiscal arrangement in this province 

where $1 billion is taken out of the Crowns, transferred to the 

General Revenue Fund, and then that is treated as not an 

increase but as a tax grab through the Crown corporations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 

member is going to stand up and quote erroneous figures, and 

we will stand up every time and correct him. 

 

The dividend that we’re taking from the Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, is $254.9 million without the SOCO 

[Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation] money, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s roughly 70 per cent of the total earnings of 

Crowns because, unlike the NDP, we are going to leave 

SaskPower alone completely. 

 

The NDP, the NDP’s practice with respect to SaskPower was to 

require them to pay a dividend every year to help them with 

their budgeting position, Mr. Speaker. And the net result was an 

infrastructure deficit at SaskPower that we are now dealing with 

on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 

continue to deal with that deficit. We’ll make important 

investments through SaskPower. We know that’s a bulwark to a 

growing economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got lower taxes in the province which help 

with the cost of living issues that certainly are in the growing 

economy. And, Mr. Speaker, all of that wraps up into the final 

point which is that Saskatchewan is leading the country in 

growth, and it’s going to continue to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

Government Spending 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

spins and spins and spins. This gamesmanship does nothing but 

hide the fiscal shell game that we see from that government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. This Sask Party knows that they can’t 

get away with building another budget on faulty revenue 

forecasts; not after last year’s fiasco. So this year they’ve 

replaced those faulty revenue forecasts with dubious spending 

projections. 

 

Let’s start with total spending in the budget. The government 

says they’re spending 10.12 billion in this budget. To the 

minister: is this in fact a cut from what they spent last year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve said when 

we presented the budget is that compared to last year’s budget, 

the spending is reduced by $121 million, 1.2 per cent. And that 

is the actual fact. 

 

In comparison to the forecast expenditures, it is a closer 

relationship, and so we began this process of restraint last year 

when we recognized that revenues were not going to be what 

we had anticipated. We’re carrying it on in this budget, and 

we’re going to have that spirit of restraint existing into the years 

going forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Spirit of restraint, Mr. Speaker. With the 

second consecutive deficit budget from this government, spirit 

of restraint. This issue speaks directly to the fact that this is a 

budget that you can’t trust from a Premier you can’t trust. From 

their own documents, the facts prove that this is a $12 million 

increase year over year. 

 

In his budget spin the Premier pretends that this is a spending 

cut. We know that it’s not. The media knows that it’s not. The 

facts prove that it’s not. To the minister: we all know this is a 

spending increase, why is the Premier pretending otherwise? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, everyone 

understands — I think everyone, but obviously not the 

opposition — that you compare budget over budget. That’s 

what exactly we have done. And in the comparison of budget 

over budget, spending indeed is down $121 million. 

 

And by way of interest, Mr. Speaker, last night I had dinner 

with the banking institutions that provide funding or potential 

loans to the province of Saskatchewan for its needs. And they 

have indicated to me that they’re very, very pleased with the 

action that the government has taken. They have said, clearly, 

that in Canada, federal or provincial, Saskatchewan is likely to 

be the only jurisdiction in the entire country that has actually 

reduced its spending budget for budget, which is a comparison 

that every jurisdiction uses. 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4489 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s trying to 

convince Saskatchewan people that they’ve reduced 

government spending, but it’s simply an accounting trick. 

 

Driven by political self-interest, this government is changing 

the way it finances capital projects and government entities 

such as Treasury Board Crowns. Instead of paying for projects 

as they go, the government will now amortize that spending 

over a number of years. Mortgage it, if you will, Mr. Speaker. 

This artificially lowers spending in this budget and adds debt to 

the bottom line. To the minister: will he admit that all his 

budgeting changes are really just accounting tricks to hide the 

fact that the Sask Party government cannot get a handle on its 

spending? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are not 

the first government in the world that it thought it would make 

more sense if you amortized capital spending over the life of the 

asset. That makes sense in business; that makes sense in 

government. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t the first time it was attempted 

in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I would like to point that back in 

the 2002-2003 budget tabled by former Finance Minister Cline, 

they used an education infrastructure financing model, but 

because they didn’t properly set it up and organize it, they got 

an audit qualification in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition 

members to allow the minister to respond to the question. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the reason that that 

attempt at amortizing the costs for education were dropped was 

because it wasn’t done properly and it wasn’t done 

professionally, and the Provincial Auditor gave an auditory 

qualification in 2004. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new. It’s a common sense 

approach. It’s a businesslike approach. And that’s what this 

government is doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition reminded us just moments ago that this government 

couldn’t muster even a modicum of restraint when it came to 

spending on themselves and their cronies. They can’t tell the 

difference between a spending increase and a spending cut. 

They’ve resorted to accounting tricks to hide and artificially 

lower spending in this year and in future years, making 

accounting changes on the fly in the middle of a budget cycle 

for political self-interest and expediency. 

 

To the minister: does he really expect anyone to believe the 

spending forecasts in this year’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, actually I 

certainly do understand that people believe what is in our 

government’s budget. In fact I’d like to quote from a Globe and 

Mail editorial that came out this morning. And I quote, “Amid 

the ruin that has devastated most governments’ balance sheets, 

Saskatchewan stands out as a beacon of light, tabling another 

balanced budget yesterday.” 

 

This was The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker. So while most 

people in the country, while people in the country understand it, 

the only people that don’t seem to understand the good, 

common sense approach that this government has applied to 

this budget are the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

government announced they will be de-insuring chiropractic 

care. Chiropractic patients will be forced to seek care from 

other areas of the system, going to emergency rooms, general 

practitioners, specialists. Off-loading onto the health system 

will increase wait times and add extra cost. Mr. Speaker, this is 

typical Sask Party math — save a dollar, spend three. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: will he recognize that eliminating 

chiropractic care is short-sighted, won’t save money, and in the 

end will cost the health care system more money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as we go in through the 

budget cycle and the budget process, difficult decisions had to 

be made. Our government made those difficult decisions. One 

of the decisions was to no longer subsidize . . . It wasn’t an 

insured service, so when the member opposite says de-insure, 

that’s incorrect. As we’ve heard from many other statements in 

the last day, some inaccuracies. 

 

It was a subsidized service, Mr. Speaker. It will no longer be 

subsidized for the general population. We are coming into line 

with three other prairie provinces, Mr. Speaker. Alberta, 

Manitoba . . . Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan are 

covering for low-income, Mr. Speaker. There’s only one 

province that now subsidizes for 12 visits, that’s Manitoba. 

Nine other provinces and territories do not cover any sort of 

chiropractic service, Mr. Speaker. It was a tough decision but it 

was a decision our government made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the over 

22,000 people who signed the petitions asking for this not to be 

done really don’t care about the semantics that the minister is 

worried about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the implementation date of April 1st is absurd. 

Chiropractors have contracts for services with SGI 



4490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board], and private insurance companies that 

will now need to be renegotiated. It’s obvious the government 

hasn’t thought this through. In less in a week, in less than a 

week chiropractic care will be de-insured and chiropractors 

don’t know if they will be able to refer patients for X-rays or to 

specialists or even have time enough to notify patients who 

won’t be able to pay when they come. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: after April 1st will chiropractors 

be able to refer patients for X-rays and to specialists? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, chiropractic services are subsidized by the Government 

of Saskatchewan, were subsidized. They still are for 

low-income. It is not an insured service. I’m not sure if the 

member understands insured services and non-insured services. 

This is a non-insured service, Mr. Speaker, that we covered a 

portion of, Mr. Speaker. And if you look over years, for a 

number of years, it has been gradually, the proportion that 

patients had to pay has gradually been increasing. 

 

In fact, under the NDP government at one point, it was 

completely covered by government and then they moved to 

only subsidize a part of it, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen across 

the country and province after province moving away from that 

subsidy. Mr. Speaker, we are no different, but we are covering 

for low-income. In other words, 43,000 people in Saskatchewan 

are eligible for these services and will be covered by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t even answer the 

question, didn’t even come close. The government knew for 

months that they were going to de-insure chiropractic care, but 

instead they chose to leave patients and chiropractors hanging 

out to dry wondering can they refer to X-rays, can they refer to 

specialists, will they have to pay the moment they come next 

week. 

 

For the government to negotiate for months, knowing full well 

they would not sign the agreement, is shameful. Where is the 

honour in bargaining? There is none. Now the government is 

giving chiropractors and their patients less than a week to 

transition into this new system. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 

will the minister at least move the implementation date to July 

1st and give chiropractors and their patients time to adjust to 

this horrific and devastating decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the subsidy 

that was put into patients’ visits for chiropractors was about a 

$12 subsidy per visit and it was unlimited, Mr. Speaker. Now 

we’re covering for low-income up to 12 visits a year, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

It was interesting when the chiropractors were here, and they 

cited two examples of people that were going to be affected by 

this program if we de-insured . . . or didn’t subsidize, we didn’t 

subsidize, Mr. Speaker. Those people are covered under our 

program, Mr. Speaker. The only thing that is changed is the 

subsidy. If chiropractors were referring in the past, as far I 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that has not changed at all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier refused 

to hold a public inquiry into the Sask Party caucus rejection of 

the chosen candidate by a bipartisan committee for the position 

of Chief Electoral Officer. To the Premier: why is he afraid the 

public will find out? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to read from The Election Act section 4(3), “The Chief 

Electoral Officer shall be appointed by resolution of the 

Assembly.” Mr. Speaker, we should have a candidate that will 

pass the resolution of the Assembly when one is brought 

forward. It is not, Mr. Speaker, the choice of the committee. It 

is not the choice of the Board of Internal Economy. It is not the 

choice of the opposition. It is not the choice of the government 

members. It is not the choice of the media. It is the choice of all 

of the members of this Assembly. 

 

The role of that committee, Mr. Speaker, is to do nothing more 

than to try and facilitate a pre-selection process, to bring 

forward some recommendations. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite 

willing to work with the members opposite to try and get that 

process back on track and to try and come up with an acceptable 

resolution. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a process 

in place to hire a Chief Electoral Officer and that process was 

followed. A March 24th StarPhoenix article states, “. . . the 

premier has the duty to either accept the results of that process 

or make it absolutely clear why he would allow his caucus to 

throw it out.” 

 

To the Premier: since the Premier’s refusing to accept the 

choice of a bipartisan committee, will he make it absolutely 

clear to the public and the members of the legislature why he’s 

rejecting the chosen candidate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have answered the 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ. Mr. Speaker, to 

have the Premier throw out the choice of a bipartisan committee 

and appoint someone he wants throws suspicion on the 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4491 

bipartisan nature of the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer. 

The March 24th StarPhoenix article states, “Not only does it 

harm the office of this most critical public servant, it also 

throws into question Saskatchewan’s democratic process.” 

 

To the Premier: is he going to cast suspicions on not only the 

Office of the Chief Electoral Officer but Saskatchewan’s whole 

election process to fulfill his agenda? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have provided answers 

to the question. We stand ready and willing to work with the 

opposition to try and come up with an acceptable candidate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, my learned friend the Attorney 

General endorsed the chosen candidate, calling him “ideal.” To 

have the Premier to use his caucus to reject him without 

providing reasons leaves the impression that, to quote The 

StarPhoenix, “. . . the only reason the Saskatchewan Party 

would refuse his appointment would be an effort to 

gerrymander the electoral boundaries or to subvert the electoral 

process by stacking the office.” 

 

To the Premier: which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is essential that we have 

a fair, impartial and apolitical process in place. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will do everything we 

can to assist in a fair, appropriate, and apolitical selection. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix also said, and 

I quote: 

 

If Mr. Wall and Mr. Morgan believe that the process of 

choosing non-partisan officers of the assembly is flawed, 

they should change the system. That shouldn’t be done in 

midstream, however, after one officer — the one 

responsible to ensure the most fundamental operation of a 

democracy — has already been chosen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister and the Premier trying to 

change this process to suit their own agenda? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a process that 

affects 58 MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. It 

affects the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it says simply in the Act, 

the Chief Electoral Officer shall be appointed by resolution of 

the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, this side of the House will not 

allow itself to be hijacked by that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. We will ensure that we have a fair, appropriate, and 

impartial process that will take place so that we have a Chief 

Electoral Officer in place before the next election that will 

enjoy the confidence of this House and of the public of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the Government House Leader to 

state his point of order. 

 

POINTS OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, after listening to your 

ruling today on points of order, I would like to point out that 

during question period the member from Regina Rosemont 

impugned the honour of the Premier by stating a Premier you 

could not trust. I would ask that that member opposite withdraw 

that remark and apologize. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If you listen 

very carefully to the words from the member from Regina 

Rosemont, he stated that the budget could not be trusted, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I think you need to review the 

words very, very carefully about what the member said and the 

context in which it was said. And I think that you will find that 

it will be a point of order not well taken. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ve heard the point of order and the remarks 

from the Opposition House Leader. And given the nature in 

which the point of order was raised, I would like to review 

Hansard to ensure that I have accurately commented in regards 

to the point of order. 

 

The Opposition House Leader, why is he on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the Opposition House Leader to 

state his point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 



4492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

question period today, when the Premier rose to respond to 

questions from the Opposition Leader, he commented that those 

. . . the answers provided by . . . or pardon me, the questions 

and the statements by the Leader of the Opposition were not the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. You cannot say indirectly what you cannot 

say directly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like you to review the Hansard 

carefully to rule whether or not the Premier, just minutes after 

he rose in this House to apologize for the very same thing, once 

again broke the rules of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the point 

of order, Mr. Speaker, the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

to allow, I would ask the members to allow the Government 

House Leader to respond to the point of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier was not inferring that the Leader of the Official 

Opposition was not being truthful, but that the facts that the 

member was quoting were not the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, members. Order, members. In regards 

to the point of order, I will again do the same thing. I will 

review Hansard to make sure that the ruling is accurate in 

regards to the point of order that was raised.  

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, when the Government House 

Leader rose yesterday in response to a point of order that I 

raised, he once again created a point . . . broke the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, when he maligned the character of the Leader of the 

Opposition by stating that it was common knowledge that he 

was under investigation, Mr. Speaker, a fact that is not the truth, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, in a response to a point of 

order, you cannot, cannot, repeat, Mr. Speaker, maligning a 

member of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On that point 

of order I believe the word was “was” under investigation, not 

“is” under investigation, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 

Official Opposition was investigated both by his own party, Mr. 

Speaker, and by the police, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe members . . . Earlier 

today the Speaker made a statement about comments in regards 

to members and how the members should weigh their 

statements. Here again I will review Hansard and will 

appropriately respond to the points of order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask members to 

come to order. Members are aware of the rules that when the 

. . . Order. Members are aware of the fact that when the Speaker 

is on his feet members are to be quiet. 

 

I recognize the Government Whip, and I would ask members 

for their attention so we can hear the response from the 

Government Whip and appropriately acknowledge written 

questions. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 971 through 1,009. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 971 through 1,009 are ordered. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure and 

an honour to rise in the Assembly to respond to the budget. And 

I want to say to the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find it disheartening 

that when the Leader of the Opposition’s trying to speak we 

have such disorder and mainly from his own benches. I 

recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

helping me out. I appreciate that very much. It is indeed a 

honour and a privilege to be here in the Assembly leading a 

party that is historic in this province and one that has a record of 

financial competence, a record of introduction of medicare right 

in this very Assembly — great leaders like Tommy Douglas, Al 

Blakeney, Woodrow Lloyd, Lorne Calvert, Roy Romanow. And 

to be here leading this party is a great honour for me, and I want 

to say thank you to the party that I represent for giving me this 

exceptional honour. 

 

I want to say as well that leading this group of men and women, 

the 20 MLAs, the 19 besides myself who make up this team of 

New Democratic MLAs, I just want to say thank you to them as 

well for coming together in an amazing way over the last few 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4493 

months to become a very, very enjoyable group of people to 

work with. But more importantly than that, a group of people 

who work tirelessly every day, every day to represent the 

people in their constituencies. But not only that, working all 

over the province, weekends, holidays, to make sure that the 

ideas and the principles that the New Democratic Party stand 

for are well established throughout the province. And I just 

want to say publicly, thank you to each and every one of you. 

 

I want also to recognize my family — my wife Rubiela and my 

children who put up with me and allow me to do this job. 

Because as all members of the Assembly know, this is not a job 

that is great for family life; you have to be away a lot. For 

younger members of my caucus who have children, they have 

to arrange child care. They do amazing things. I know the 

member from Riversdale, who has a small child, has to move 

the family during session and come down to Regina. 

 

This is an exceptional job in many ways. And I just want to say 

thank you to my family for all the tolerance they have in 

allowing me to do this work on behalf of the people of the 

province and also to my extended family, my sisters in 

particular, who have been very instrumental in helping me get 

my political career going initially and then, after a small 

intermission, to allow to re-establish in politics. 

 

And as I approach this budget, as I approach the budget, I also 

want to say thank you to the people in my former constituency 

of Shaunavon where I started my political career and where we 

still farm and have a home and spend our summers. And for my 

younger children, our two at home, spending their summers at 

the farm in Shaunavon is what I know they’ll always remember. 

It’s where they want to go on weekends. Great community. One 

of the best theatres, the Plaza Theatre in Shaunavon. Any of you 

have been there, it’s one of the best and I think one of the oldest 

in Canada. It still gets first-run movies, any of you who are 

interested, because it was established by the Durham family, 

and their contract with the Plaza was that as long as the family 

owns the theatre, they will get first-run movies. And if you’re 

booked up in Regina, coming to Shaunavon for a little break is 

a good place to go. 

 

So it’s an amazing process to be elected from that part of the 

province and then to have had the opportunity to run and win an 

election in Elphinstone. And I know the MLA from that area — 

I think he’s been there for now three terms — is doing a 

wonderful job. I had the privilege of being elected there four 

times. It’s a great constituency. 

 

But there are not many people who get a chance to represent 

two different areas of the province in the budget when it’s 

introduced, to represent the people from that area and now to 

represent the people from Douglas Park. Again, I want to speak 

on their behalf during this budget debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start my remarks on the budget by 

thanking the Minister of Finance because I’ve been in 

government and I’ve been deputy premier. And I know how 

much work goes into it on the physical side by a minister when 

they have to put together a budget document. And while I don’t 

agree with many things in the budget, and I’m going to go into 

those in some detail, I do want to say thank you to him for the 

effort that he has put into the budget process. Because there’s 

no way that this individual hasn’t spent many, many days and 

hours and weekends collaborating with his staff to put the 

budget together, and I want to thank him for that. 

 

Having said that, I think it is a difficult process if you don’t 

have the trust of a certain group of people in the process. You 

have to have trust from every level within your department and 

in the government to make this happen. And I know he does 

have a great staff over in Finance and CIC and the departments 

that bring forward ideas and concepts. Those men and women 

are doing the absolute best job they can do, and there are 

thousands of them involved in this process. I’m not sure what 

the level of the civil service is right now, but it’s something 

over 10,000 I believe. Not everybody’s involved, but it does 

affect every department when a budget is being put together. 

And a lot of work has been done. 

 

But what we fear on this side of the House is in that process, 

and we watched it in the 1980s under the Devine 

administration, is that after the work is done and the plans are 

set in place and the ideas come forward, and I see this in other 

ministers’ portfolios under this government, that the plans come 

forward — and we talked about it earlier, and we were asking 

questions in the House about when recommendations come 

from committees and they come forward — and then there’s 

interference from the centre. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And in this case, I will say there’s interference from the 

Premier’s office and I believe there’s interference in that 

process from the Premier himself. I think there is when it comes 

to the issue we were debating in question period. I don’t think 

these ministers put together bad plans. Some may argue, even in 

my own caucus, that it is the Minister of Finance who is the 

culprit in this bad budget. My view is it is not his responsibility 

as to the parts I want to talk about. I think this comes from 

somewhere else. 

 

I watched it in the Devine government, and this is where I get 

my background because there were two individuals in the 

Devine government who controlled everything in the first years. 

It was Grant Devine and Eric Berntson. And ministers, good 

ministers — Paul Schoenhals, Pat Smith, Gord Currie — I 

watched those people and they were strong ministers. And they 

did the best they could with their staff, and they would put 

together plans. And they would come up, and they would end 

up in the office of the premier of the day, Grant Devine, and 

they would end up in the office of Eric Berntson and they 

would be changed. And bad mistakes were made and the 

backbenchers of the day were told, you clap. No matter what is 

going on, just keep your mouth shut and clap. That’s what they 

were told. 

 

And I watched day after day as the deficits came and the 

members in the backbenches were told, you just clap. Don’t 

think. Just clap and we’ll take care. We’re in the front benches. 

We’ll look after you. You guys, you have a different . . . Yours 

is to hold the bench down so it doesn’t fly around in this room. 

And I remember that rumour coming to me from backbenchers 

who were told that in their caucus meeting. That’s what they 

told me. 

 



4494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

And the decisions were made by two people. And the advice of 

the professional people, the thousands of men and women who 

do the work because those two individuals said, we don’t 

believe in government; government is bad. Where we are is the 

politicians who were elected finally kicking out that socialist 

horde of the Blakeney administration. Eric Berntson and Grant 

Devine will make the decisions from now on. That’s what they 

were told, and some backbenchers told me that. And I see it 

happening again. I see it happening again and I think that we 

shouldn’t let it happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to arranging budgets, it is 

important that every member of the legislature — not the 

leaders — have an opinion and have a say in what happens. 

And when you come to the issue of chiropractic services in this 

province, I know there are many members on that side of the 

House who have been lobbied by individuals and by the 

profession to see that that cut wasn’t made. And those members 

caved when it came to the Minister of Health coming from the 

Premier’s office that it should be cut. 

 

Because the staff . . . I know what the staff would have said in 

the Department of Health. They would have recommended 

against it. Do you know how I know that? Because the 

Department of Health, it is going to cost money. Why? Because 

last year 125,000 people used the services of the chiropractic 

profession in this province, 125,000 people. Many of them now 

will not be able to afford or will not go to that service but will 

go to their family doctor. 

 

What is the subsidy for the chiropractors now, Judy? What is 

the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ten million. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Ten million, but per person? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Twelve dollars. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Twelve dollars. So that’s the cost to the 

taxpayers as a whole, $12. Now if that individual doesn’t go 

there and goes to see the family doctor, the charge is 40 or $50. 

Now it doesn’t take a rocket science, and I know that many of 

the members in the backbenches know this. And they know that 

the 10 million won’t be saved. It will be saved in this column, 

but the health budget will go up by 20 or $30 million. 

 

I know this because in 1991, after the terrible mess of the 

Devine government, we had to look at these kind of tough 

decisions. We had to cut things. And we looked at this very 

issue. And do you know what? We came to the conclusion that 

we would be worse off financially if we cut that $10 million 

out, and the debt would actually grow. 

 

And many of the members in the backbenches know that. But 

they sit quietly because the Premier and the member from 

Kindersley have taken them to these great heights. And they 

claimed that they were the reason that they won the last 

election. And if we listen to you backbenchers, we’re going to 

lose the next election. So just be quiet. We’ll call the shots, and 

we’ll make the decisions. Your job is to pound the desk when 

our ministers get up to speak. 

 

But I, one thing that I’ve noticed in the last little while — and 

this is a true story, and many of us watch from over here — that 

back two rows have gone quiet. They’ve gone quiet. They’re 

rather bored, they say. That could be. They could be bored, 

might be bored. But I don’t think it’s boredom in question 

period. I think you’re listening, and when we talk about issues, 

many of you say, that’s exactly the point I was making in 

caucus. That’s what they say. That’s what they say on some of 

these cuts. I know that. I know that. 

 

And now, I know that what the members will be told, this is 

what the members will be told. I know what they’re going to be 

told at the next caucus meeting: look, you guys back there who 

are sitting quiet — the member from P.A. Carlton, he will be 

told, and the other members in the backbenches — look, you’re 

not cheering enough. And I want you to start cheering again. 

That’s what they’ll be told. And I know that. Because this is the 

cycle that happened, this is the cycle that happened under the 

Devine administration. 

 

But this, Mr. Speaker, my warning to those members of their 

caucus, and my own caucus, never let your standards — when it 

comes to speaking out and arguing and debating in your caucus 

— go silent. Never quit thinking. Never quit putting ideas 

forward and never expect or accept less than what you need for 

your people who you represent. That’s what you need to do. 

Because at the end of the day, you’re responsible to your 

constituents, not to the Premier and certainly not to the member 

from Kindersley, certainly not to the member from Kindersley. 

Remember, he’s the guy that tried to talk you into $3 billion 

from potash last year. That’s what he told you in the 

backbenches when the argument was this: the number from 

Finance was something very different last year. It wasn’t 1.9 

billion and it certainly wasn’t 3 billion. It was something 

different. It may have been higher than what the number ended 

up because I think there was an element of surprise in the 

potash revenue and production. But no one in their right mind 

would have thought about $3 billion from potash. 

 

So the number came from Finance, and the minister from 

Kindersley said, that’s wrong. It’s $3 billion. Forget what those 

professionals over there say, it’s 3 billion. And the Premier said, 

we’ll I’ve got two numbers here — I’ve got the professional 

number and I’ve got one from my political whiz kid, the 

member from Kindersley — and I’ve got to balance somewhere 

between. So he didn’t take the 3 billion. He didn’t take the 

professional number. And he took 1.9 billion. Then they told 

that number to you folks, and you bought it, and you shouldn’t 

have. 

 

Because any of you who can read, if you read The New York 

Times — and all of you have it online — you will know that at 

the very moment during the budget debate last year where that 

number was being used, ships were lined up in Shanghai and 

China, and they couldn’t unload because the financial 

circumstances and the worldwide recession were everywhere. 

And 90 per cent of what we produce in this province — 85, 90 

per cent — is exported. And if you’re exporting it into a world 

ravaged by recession, how does the Premier get up in his place 

and say, we’ll be unaffected by the recession? That doesn’t 

seem to add up. 

 

So come to the point. We are now on a budget that isn’t any 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4495 

more believable, no more believable than the one we heard at 

this time last year. No more believable. And why isn’t it 

believable? Because it’s being crafted in the same way. This is 

not a budget that is coming from the professional people in the 

various departments. They would have had a lot of work to do 

putting numbers together, bringing it to the cabinet planning. 

And then two individuals would have called the shot — the 

Premier and the member from Kindersley. 

 

And the problem is that if you don’t get a handle on that, there 

will be a crash in the government’s ranks. I watched it happen 

when Eric Berntson . . . Finally people started questioning on 

the privatization of SaskEnergy when they quit believing what 

he was saying. And Grant Schmidt came in, and they took over 

that political . . . It was the end of the Conservative Party of 

Saskatchewan. That was the end. And it could have been, it 

could’ve been salvaged if the members of their party had taken 

bigger control and greater control in making the decisions.  

 

And I say this to my own caucus: never give away the power 

you have as an MLA to someone else. That’s a very, very 

important lesson to learn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a number of the substantive 

issues in the budget. This budget, the way it is crafted, is a 

jumble of numbers that are not well thought out. There is no 

need that we as a province are in this predicament. The Globe 

and Mail that was quoted this morning, the editorial that said, 

“Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction to see a cut in their 

spending.” They didn’t look back for the previous two years 

because what they would have seen is that in the first two years 

there was a 32 per cent increase in spending, in the first two 

years, and then a one and a half per cent cut in this year. 

 

And if you would’ve looked at the three-year period for all the 

provinces across Canada, you would see that Saskatchewan was 

the highest spending province of any jurisdiction in Canada 

over that three-year period. Because budgets aren’t done in silos 

one year at a time, and the last one is forgotten about and the 

next one isn’t thought of. And I understand why this 

government would like to forget about the last one. I would like 

to forget about it too and so would the taxpayers of this 

province because it added a lot to the debt, and it led directly to 

what we’re facing today. 

 

Now the question is, are the two people calling the shots about 

budgets experts on doing budgets in their personal life or in 

their business life? And I would question whether or not they 

have the experience and should be given the authority within 

the caucus or within the government to make those kind of 

decisions. 

 

And Al Blakeney taught me one thing about governing. He 

made it very clear. When he saw politicians dabbling in the 

interest and decisions of the work of the deputy, he would say 

to the politician at the cabinet table . . . And I can’t quote 

because I would be releasing secrets. But he made it public in 

speeches he gave that when he saw a minister dabbling and 

acting like a deputy minister, he would tell that minister, look, 

if you don’t want to be the minister and you want to be the 

deputy, resign as minister. Go put your name in and apply for 

the job, and then you can be the deputy minister. That’s what he 

said. 

And I also heard him talk about deputy ministers who pretended 

they were politicians. He would say to his deputy — because of 

course the Premier appoints all the deputies — he would say to 

that deputy, if you want to be a minister, get out of that job, put 

your name on a ballot, and come through that door. But don’t 

try to say, I’m the minister but I want to be the deputy. Because 

quite honestly, when you’re elected as premier, you’re not the 

deputy. You’re not the administrator of the department largely 

because you don’t know how to do it. 

 

And I don’t say this critically of this Premier. I say it of any 

premier or members of this group who will be premier some 

day. That’s the role of your experts. Just as a CEO in a 

company has to believe in and trust your vice-presidents, your 

senior vice-presidents. And when you don’t — get rid of them. 

Put someone in who is professional. But don’t try to do their 

work. Trust them, believe in them. Because when the day 

comes that you don’t trust any of your staff, you’re finished. 

 

[11:30] 

 

I have read a lot about a special president in the United States, 

Ronald Reagan, and I’ve talked about him before. I don’t think 

he was the brightest president in the United States — he was 

Republican, one of the reasons — but the fact is, he was very 

good at one thing. In fact the fact that he understood himself 

and knew he wasn’t the most brilliant person in the world, he 

assembled around him very brilliant people. They were wrong 

politically from my thinking because they were Republican, but 

in terms of a strategy, he knew what he had to do. And I’m not 

saying he wasn’t brilliant; he was in his own way. But he 

understood that his weaknesses he had to make up in another 

way, and that was by putting around him the brightest people 

from all over the United States. And he did it impeccably, and 

he was a very popular president. 

 

My advice is that this government is not listening to the 

brightest people around them. What they are doing is, they 

don’t trust the brightest people. Maybe they think they’re 

politically in the Liberal Party or the Green Party or the NDP, 

but they really believe that government has to be of their ilk. 

And that is just wrong. It’s wrong politically, and it’s wrong 

economically because that is how you get to the point of 

making big mistakes. 

 

And I hear them — the Minister of Health yelling from his seat 

that, what do I know about government? But I understand that I 

know as much as he does, I hope, or I’ve got some big 

problems. 

 

But I want to say that it is very, very important, but I want to 

say that this lesson I learned from Al Blakeney has stuck with 

me. And I know that if I ever get the honour of sitting in the 

premier’s chair, it will be one of the lessons, one of the many 

lessons I’ve learned from one of our leaders. 

 

And the beauty of our movement and party is that we have 

leaders we can hold up on pedestals and understand and be 

very, very proud of. Whether it’s Tommy Douglas or Woodrow 

or Al Blakeney or Roy or Lorne, they are people we believe in 

and trust. Now that is important. And at our convention this 

weekend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at our convention this weekend, 

I think and hope the three former premiers will be there. I don’t 



4496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

know if they’ll be able to make it, but nothing would make me 

more proud than to have our three former premiers come to the 

convention where we’re meeting this weekend in Prince Albert. 

 

Now I think I understand why at the convention of the Sask 

Party a few weeks ago there were no profiling of previous 

leaders. I think I know why. I didn’t hear from Mr. Hermanson. 

Or Dick . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well they laugh about 

Hermanson. I don’t know why. I don’t know why. Elwin 

Hermanson was a credible individual. His mistake was he told 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now they’re laughing at Rick 

Swenson. This is what they do with their former . . . That’s 

what they do with their former members. They laugh at them. I 

don’t understand it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where was Dick Collver? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — And I didn’t see Dick Collver at the 

convention. Dick Collver is down in Arizona. I didn’t see Grant 

Devine. I didn’t see Grant Devine. I didn’t see any of the 

leaders . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you saw Lorne 

Scott. Good. That’s excellent. But none of the leaders of their 

party, of their great party, the Sask Party, no former leaders 

were invited. And I think I know why. But that’s a difference 

between our two parties. It’s a very big difference. Theirs is a 

party with no history, very little at present and I guarantee you 

no future in this province after the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday that you can’t trust this budget. 

And I want to make it clear I’m not talking about the Premier. 

I’m talking about the budget. You can’t trust the budget. You 

can’t trust the budget because it’s brought to you by the same 

people who brought you last year’s budget. That’s why. And 

the people know that. And they know the mistakes that were 

made in last year’s budget. Much of it was intentional. It was a 

sleight of hand, a sleight of hand to try to trick the public. 

 

Now this year they’ve said, okay, now we got the numbers 

right. We’re putting in $78 for oil. We’re putting in $4 for gas. 

Now we got the numbers straight. And I think they’re close. But 

where is the sleight of hand in this year’s budget? 

 

Well we’re going to change the accounting system. That’s what 

we’re going to do this year. We’re going to change the 

accounting system. Now if you’re going to change an 

accounting system, there’s a way to do it. Often in companies, 

from time to time, they change their accounting system, and 

that’s no problem. What you do when you change your 

accounting system, you hire experts. You bring them in. You 

have committees set up. In this case, there should have been a 

committee of the Legislative Assembly. You study it. You 

analyze it. You work on it. And then at the end of the day, if 

there’s a vote on it, then you pass a new accounting system. 

And there’s nothing wrong with that, nothing wrong with it at 

all. 

 

But when you try to slip it in without talking about anybody, 

not talking to the experts, not having a committee of the 

Legislative Assembly, and you balance your budget by 

changing the accounting system, that’s not the right way to do 

that. And many of you know that. Many of you know that. 

 

So the sleight of hand is not the numbers on the resources this 

year. The sleight of hand is in the accounting system. But 

whereas last year it took us six months to understand and to get 

out to the public the sleight of hand, this year it took 20 

minutes, 20 minutes. Everybody’s talking about it. Everybody’s 

talking about it. I had many calls this morning saying, why 

don’t they just admit they have a deficit? Why don’t they just 

say it? They would feel better, and they wouldn’t have to go 

through all this turmoil. 

 

It’s like last year’s budget. Someone said to me that last year’s 

budget, it was like a movie. They said — the Minister of 

Education would know — it’s like a movie. They said it was 

like Dumb and Dumber because the two people who are 

arranging the budget. They said it is like an old movie. Yes, it’s 

an old movie. It’s from back in the Devine era. That’s why they 

made the association. I’m glad the Minister of Education 

understands that because he doesn’t have many friends these 

days. So he’s more comfortable here with us yelling at him than 

he is out there with the teachers. 

 

Another member of my staff said the budget isn’t like Dumb 

and Dumber. It’s like the Trailer Park Boys. And I don’t know 

which of the two it is, but it is a problem budget. It’s problem 

budget for the people of the province because it’s being put 

together . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw 

North is finally speaking, finally giving us a little speech from 

his chair and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The 

conversations are getting quite loud. I’m having trouble hearing 

the speaker that has the floor. I will recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — As I said, the deficit is $622 million. By 

their own document . . . I have it here somewhere. Yes, here it 

is right here. The document is called the financial highlights of 

the 2010-11 budget, dated March 24 — that was yesterday — 

2010. And if you go down the sheet, you go through all the 

numbers — revenue, expenses, GRF surplus, CIC board 

organizations — then you come to a line that says summary 

deficit in brackets, surplus, no brackets. And then a number — 

yes, it’s in brackets — that means it’s a deficit, $622.7 million. 

This is their document, your document. 

 

And then the minister . . . The one thing, I’ll give the minister 

credit; he kept a straight face when he said there was a surplus. 

There’s a shot of the minister in The Globe and Mail today 

wiping the sweat off his brow. And I understand it’s a tough job 

because if I was taking my direction from that Premier, I’d be 

sweating as well. So I don’t think he wants to do it. I don’t 

think he wants to do it. I don’t blame the minister. I don’t think 

this is his budget. I put it squarely on the shoulders of the 

Premier and the member from Kindersley because that’s who’s 

calling the shots in this group. 

 

Now where are the big mistakes and glaring errors in the 

budget? I just want to touch on a few because I know that . . . 

The detail of the budget I’m going to leave up to my members 

of the caucus who are shadowing these items, and they do a 

good job. So I know I don’t have to go through the detail. But 

there are a few places I do want to highlight. 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4497 

One of them is health, and health because . . . I’ll start there 

because it’s the biggest issue in the province. In many 

communities — whether Canora or Nipawin or Shaunavon or 

Leader or Swift Current — it is the biggest issue. And why is it 

the biggest issue? One of the reasons is because of promise 

made — promise made by the Premier — by the now Premier. 

And I’ll use his own example of waiting lists in his own riding 

because he doesn’t know of them. He doesn’t have a clue. 

 

I use those as an example because he will know that he 

promised, he made a big promise about health care in rural 

Saskatchewan. The promise was that he was going to fix 

waiting lists. And then he was going to get doctors into rural 

areas. This is the Premier, the member from Swift Current. He 

said he was going to fix the doctor shortage in the province. 

 

Now how has he done? Let’s do a little report card. And I want 

to use his own area, Swift Current, as an example on waiting 

lists. Now let’s have a look. In December of 2007, on the 

number of patients waiting — this is from one of their 

documents, I believe — the number of people waiting was 861. 

Eight hundred and sixty one. This is in Swift Current. It was in 

the Premier’s riding. Now how much is it up? How much is it 

up . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, not 15. Ninety per cent, 

it’s up 90 per cent, the waiting list, up 90 per cent. That’s what 

it’s up. And he says, this is a promise he made. He made the 

promise that he was going to end the waiting lists, or get them 

down at least. And what he has done is driven, in his own 

riding, in his own area, up 85 to 90 per cent. And that’s a 

shame. 

 

The other area was doctors. He was going to solve the doctor 

shortage. Now how are we doing there? Mr. Speaker, there is an 

increase, an increase of 50 per cent in the number of vacancies 

for doctors in this province. Now this is why people are upset 

with the Premier. And when you go and talk to them in rural 

Saskatchewan . . . It’s not just health care workers. They’re 

upset. I understand why. They’re working harder and longer, 

and the waiting lists keep going up because they can’t get 

enough staff. But they upset people the most who are on 

waiting lists, who can’t get their family into institutions for 

treatment. 

 

And what is the government’s solution? Well let me tell you. 

What they’re going to do is they’re going to cut staff. Their 

solution is to cut staff. The population of the communities are 

growing. Needs are going up. Not enough staff in the hospitals, 

nursing homes, home care. Their solution, what’s their 

solution? Cut staff. 

 

Now how is it that the public of Saskatchewan, who are already 

upset because there’s not enough service, how is it that the 

solution is to cut back on staff? Now if you ask the question — 

where you’re going to cut? — is it in the Department of Health 

where 40 per cent of the employees are? They say oh no, it’s 

not in Health. Well is it in Education? Oh no, it’s not in 

Education. Is it in Highways where snow has to be removed or 

potholes filled? And Lord knows there’s lots of potholes this 

spring on the roads of Saskatchewan. They say no. But the fact 

of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, if you’re cutting staff in 

government, you’re cutting programs. And waiting lists will 

grow even longer, and they will grow quickly. So let’s make no 

mistake about it. The cut that they’re talking about in staff in 

government is cuts to programs. 

 

I was talking to a surgeon one time who told me that one of the 

key shortages in his operation were people to clean the 

operating theatre because you need people to clean up after each 

operation because you have to have it clean so that infection 

and those things . . . And the surgeon said that that person who 

does that kind of work is every bit as important as the surgeon 

because if he does his surgery impeccably well and they get 

infection, it doesn’t help very much. He said we may be in 

different pay scales and we may have different respect even in 

the community, but — the surgeon said to me — make no doubt 

in your mind that the person doing the cleaning in the surgical 

theatre is every bit as important as the surgeon. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And that’s the mistake these people made because they look 

and they make their judgment based on income only or the 

political card that people carry. And that is a big mistake. So in 

the area of health we have a big problem. 

 

The other area that we’re not dealing with properly in this 

budget is cost of living, and I’ll use a few examples. Students 

for example, the students in this province believe that the tuition 

fees shouldn’t go up more than the rate of inflation which is 

probably one and a half or two per cent. And as a result of this 

budget, I would be surprised if tuition doesn’t go up 4 or 5 per 

cent or double the rate of inflation — 100 per cent more than 

what it should be going up. And that is not good for students in 

this province. 

 

The other thing is student housing. No announcement of 

increased student housing directly that will affect the problem 

students have coming into our cities to go to university or to 

technical school. We have the lowest per capita student housing 

in this province, where we have major universities, of any cities 

in Canada. And we need to fix that. Now people will say, well 

there needs to be more emphasis on it by your party as well. 

And I agree with that and we need to do more. 

 

The other area is child care. Waiting lists at both our 

universities are well into the hundreds of people on waiting lists 

for child care, and there is nothing in this budget that deals 

directly with that. There’s words but there’s no direct program 

to deal with child care in our universities or at our technical 

schools, and we need to fix that. 

 

The other issue is bursaries, and we need a much better program 

for bursaries in the province. There was a time when we had 

more students got bursaries than took student loans. That’s now 

reversed. There are many more students having to take the 

student loan than are getting bursaries. And that needs to be 

addressed because one of the reasons that students are having a 

great, difficult time after they graduate . . . those who could 

make it through. Many of them do. They work hard. They get 

the job done. But the problem is their student loan, they simply 

can’t afford it, especially those who start out on relatively low 

pay for their first few years. And we need to do something to 

pitch in and give those graduating students a hand. 

 

I want to say again in the area of cost of living, utilities, what 

can I say? The fact that they’re taking all of the profits out of 



4498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

the major Crowns with the exception of SaskPower will mean 

that rates will increase much faster than the rate of inflation. 

Everything that SaskTel does this year in terms of construction 

or building cell towers will have to be borrowed. The money 

will have to be borrowed because all of the profits went to this 

government’s debt problem — a problem created in last year 

and the year before in those budgets, stripped away. And this 

will only mean utility rates will go up even faster. 

 

So what the people of the province have to know is that every 

increase that’s applied for and granted by this government 

going forward, they can look to this budget and say this was a 

plan that this Premier and these ministers put in place that affect 

their cost of living. 

 

In terms of rent, my colleagues have talked about options we’re 

considering in the New Democratic Party as we do our policy 

renewal around rent. We’re looking at all options, and we’re 

considering everything from rent control to social housing to 

help alleviate that problem, not only in our great cities but in 

our communities across the province. And we’ll fix that. 

 

The other area that I want to talk about for a moment is the 

issue of environment. And if there was a great disappointment 

for members in our caucus, it was that the environment is 

absolutely pushed to the bottom, off the table, is not to be talked 

about. The only thing I ever hear the members talk about in 

terms of environment is a project called sequestration at 

Weyburn. And they go around the world. They talk about and 

give speeches. And I don’t doubt why they’re doing it because 

it is a world-class operation, but the difference is they had 

nothing to do with creating it. 

 

I know why they’re proud of it. But the fact of the matter is it 

was an arrangement done between the Government of North 

Dakota — Beulah, North Dakota where the coal gasification 

plant is — the Alberta Energy Company, which was a Crown 

corporation out of Alberta, and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Three governments got together to create a 

situation to bring the CO2 from Beulah, North Dakota across the 

border. I was there when we did the agreement of the 

interchange because it was a big issue. We had to apply to the 

International Joint Commission to get a permit to bring CO2 

pipeline across the border. 

 

We signed the deal, we did the deal with Alberta Energy into 

the Weyburn oil field, and we started injecting CO2. And it was 

the first one in the world that was done on a commercial basis. 

And the people who were involved from Alberta, North Dakota, 

and Saskatchewan should be proud of that because it’s still held 

out as a world-recognized sequestration program. 

 

But I might add, has nothing to do with the Sask Party or the 

member from Swift Current. The now Premier had nothing to 

do with it. They like it, they like to give speeches about it, but 

like many things, they had nothing to do with it. It’s the same 

on oil royalties. On the energy side when it comes to energy 

policy I was to . . . I was invited by John Lau and his wife 

Heather to come to the sod-turning of the new office building in 

Lloydminster a couple of weeks ago. And while I was there, the 

president and CEO, John Lau said, I want to say one thing 

where I give the Premier credit — that he didn’t change the 

royalties that were put in place by the NDP government. That’s 

what he said. 

 

So on the issue of energy and royalties, I think we have a pretty 

good track record on environment as it relates to sequestration. I 

think we were world leaders. But I think there’s a lot more to 

do, a lot more to do. 

 

The other thing the Premier said while he was . . . The other 

thing the Premier said, the other thing the Premier said about oil 

and oil production, he said about oil and oil production, he’s 

been going around the province saying how we’re going to take 

over from Alberta in oil production. Well he says it differently. 

He twists it in a political way to make it sound like it’s oil 

production. And the fact of the matter is that the oil production 

in Saskatchewan has been virtually flat since 2001. 

 

Do members on the opposition benches know what the oil 

production is in Saskatchewan or what it was in 2001? Well no, 

I have a statistic here that I need to read to you because the oil 

production in Saskatchewan has stayed around 423,000 barrels 

a day, absolutely flat, varying a few thousand barrels a day, for 

the past 10 years — for 10 years. I don’t know if the member 

from Meadow Lake knows that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Oh, so he does know it’s been flat . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . No, it hasn’t. No, it hasn’t. That’s my point. No, no, it 

hasn’t. No, it hasn’t. This is my point, see, because you’re in 

cabinet. You’re in cabinet, and you should know and . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask 

the opposition benches to come to order. Order. I’m having a 

hard time hearing the speaker. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Meadow 

Lake says that it’s been going up, and what I thought was . . . 

This is what I thought when I started my speech, that the 

Premier and the member from Kindersley were spinning the 

backbenchers, but now I find they’re also spinning the cabinet 

ministers. Now this really worries me. This really worries me 

because here are the numbers. Here are the Saskatchewan 

numbers. In 2001 the production per day in Saskatchewan was 

426,000 barrels; in 2009 it was 423,000, a decrease, a decrease 

of 3,000 barrels a day. 

 

Now how is it that the Premier, the Premier wanders the 

province, and how is it The Globe and Mail has a story today 

that oil is greasing the wheels of the Saskatchewan economy? 

Because the Premier’s spinners have spun the eastern press that 

the oil production is going up like crazy. That’s what’s 

happening. That is funny. Now I understand how they can spin 

the press. I understand how they can spin the press, but it 

baffles me how they can spin the ministers of his own 

government. I don’t get it. 

 

Now all of the members of the opposition, I’ll send this across 

to you, because oil production is the same as it was . . . Or the 

government. The members need to know that oil production is 

about the same as it was in 2001 because I think that you’re 

being told something different. I think the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, and I mean this sincerely, we need to know this 

because when the member from Kindersley, when the member 

from Kindersley told you that he was going to get 3 billion from 

potash, and you believed him, okay, you got tricked once. But 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4499 

when he tells you oil’s going up rapidly, and you get tricked 

again — come on, let’s go. Let’s get on with it. We’re getting 

paid. Shut the movies off. 

 

Go to the channels. Google oil production in Saskatchewan. 

Come on, let’s do some work. It’s time to go to work. There’s 

work to do and you’re part of it. You’re not here to watch 

movies all day; you’re to know the statistics on potash and oil 

and exports, not what the boys in the front, the two of them, the 

Premier and the member from Kindersley, tell you. You need to 

know the statistics and we do too. We all need to know because 

the public is depending on us. They’re depending on us to know 

these facts and make the argument. 

 

The one other area that I just want to touch on, and I wish I had 

more time because it’s probably the most important for the 

future economy of Saskatchewan, that is the Aboriginal 

situation in this province. The Aboriginal people in this 

province will someday be the majority of the people in this 

province, and we need to do a better job as legislature in many, 

many ways. One of them is candidates. Both of the major 

political parties in this province have to do a better job of 

engaging First Nations and Métis people, Aboriginal people, in 

our parties. We need to get more nominated. We have to get 

them at our policy conventions. We have to include them in our 

policy renewal forum. 

 

We need to get many, many more Aboriginal people involved. 

And not just, not just in this place but in many other, many 

other areas as well. But when I look at this budget, what is a 

great disappointment? That Aboriginal issues are not on the 

agenda in any meaningful way, any meaningful way, and they 

need to be put in place as soon as possible. And that’s our 

responsibility as well. 

 

The whole area of the North that is under so much stress and 

duress in this period, with the forestry industry in great, great 

demise and partly responsible to this government, partly 

responsible to the world economy and the North American 

economy — we’re not doing enough as a society to deal with 

the issues in northern Saskatchewan. This is leading to some 

very, very drastic situations in families in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know my colleagues, the member from Athabasca and 

Cumberland, will deal with this, but I just want to add my voice 

to that plight in northern Saskatchewan. And again I’m not 

blaming this government, but their problem is, they haven’t 

made it better. In fact they’re making it worse. That’s what I’m 

worried about. 

 

And when I look at the money that’s being taken out of some of 

the programs in northern Saskatchewan, it is not a good thing to 

be doing and it’s not the right thing to be doing. And I think we 

have to have a long debate in this Assembly about what we’re 

doing on Aboriginal issues and issues in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say a few more words and 

then I’m going to take my place, but I do want to say to 

members of the government that — and the legislature and 

people who might be listening to this — that there is an issue of 

trust that is needed to be dealt with in this budget by this 

government as well. 

 

Because before he got elected Premier of the province, the 

member from Swift Current promised many things. He 

promised to fix waiting lists in the province and they have gone 

up in his own area, as I said, by 90 per cent. 

 

He promised to fix the doctor issue, rural doctors especially, 

and the vacancy numbers on doctors in this province has 

increased by 50 per cent in two years. He said no promise to cut 

out chiropractic services. There was no promise made to do 

that, and there’s a trust broken on that because there was a trust 

made that he wouldn’t be doing that, and plus there is no need 

to do it. There’s not an economic reason and he needs to fix 

that. The public deserve that. 

 

[12:00] 

 

In the area of agriculture, there was a trust broken that they 

would look after the interests of agriculture. And we see a cut in 

this budget of $93 million, $93 million. 

 

There was a trust built on not privatizing Crown corporations 

and we’ve seen privatization like never before. Many areas, 

including in this budget — and we will deal with them — are 

being privatized. This one area I will give credit to Grant 

Devine and Elwin Hermanson is at least they had the courage of 

their conviction to state what their intent was on privatization. 

And we had a wonderful debate; we had a very large debate. 

 

This government, by the stroke of a pen, with the power plant at 

North Battleford, a gas-fired generator that SaskPower knows 

how to do in their sleep, was signed by this government and 

privatized with one fell swoop — 8 per cent of SaskPower, 8 

per cent. No debate, no discussion. Broke a promise where he 

promised he would not privatize — 8 per cent of SaskPower. 

 

He’s broken a trust with the workers of this province, with the 

workers. Pardon me, maybe he didn’t. If I remember right, he 

did promise to go to war with the workers of the province. 

That’s the one promise he’s kept. We are at war with the 

working people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The sad part is that the health care workers in this province who 

are without a contract for two years, the people he’s gone to war 

with, are 75 per cent women. Seventy-five per cent of that 

union are women. And the member from Big Muddy laughs. He 

sits in his chair and laughs and figure out who he’s going to 

fire. He sends the signal out he’s going to fire a lot of the civil 

servants. And he sits there in his chair and he laughs like that, 

like a bully he is. 

 

But I’ll tell you this. I’ll tell you this, that you may be able to 

bully us in here. We can handle ourselves. I’m not worried 

about the attempts to bully the NDP. I can handle that. But what 

irritates us to no extent is the bullying of the unions who are 

working in the health care system, 80 per cent who are women. 

When they come to this building, they slam the doors and try to 

lock them out. They don’t give them the respect. 

 

And the home care workers who are being told that they need to 

sign a contract where they will be on standby for 12 hours to get 

paid for 8 — there is no need for that. When they’re told that 



4500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

they have to work at multiple sites in order to earn a living of 

$17 an hour or $18 an hour. That would mean you’re not on the 

job in Shaunavon but you have to go to Eastend when they tell 

you to, and you have to pay your own way. Or you may have to 

go to Gull Lake. That is not fair. It doesn’t show respect. And 

how are you going to get workers in that program with that kind 

of an attitude? As the Saskatchewan Medical Association says, 

rural doctor shortage is at a crisis level and something must be 

done immediately. 

 

These are broken promises and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

we are very much opposed to many of the things that are being 

done in this budget. 

 

And I want to . . . My last word, and I’m going to quote from 

John Ibbitson, one of the many conservative columnists. This is 

a conservative columnist who writes in The Globe and Mail. 

Now he’s referring to the Conservative government in Ottawa 

in this case, but he could have been talking about this 

conservative government, this Sask Party government. And 

here’s what he said, “There’s a lot to be said for open, honest 

and gimmick-free government. The Conservatives should try it 

some time.” 

 

I give the same advice to this government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure and 

honour again to, of course, stand in this House and be able to 

take part in a debate of the budget as we do with throne 

speeches as well. And I’m very proud to be the member who 

seconded this year’s budget, and rightfully so because it’s a 

forward-thinking budget. It moves us into the future. And the 

big part of my future, of course, are my two lovely daughters 

Alyssa and Mackenzie. 

 

And I have to, I want to thank all the ministers and the entire 

caucus who looked at this year’s budget through some very 

tough times, and focused on the future — the future of our 

children, the future of those who are currently in school who 

will be able to form our province’s future, be able to develop 

our strong work ethic. And this budget shapes that going on 

forward, Mr. Speaker. So I’m very proud of that work they’ve 

done. 

 

I’m very proud of the Premier and the Finance minister for 

leadership they’ve shown under these times, that Saskatchewan 

weather that recession, the worldwide recession, quite well. 

We’ve got . . . Numerous independent forecasters are predicting 

that we will do very well in ’10-11. And I want to thank the 

Premier and the Finance minister for their stewardship and 

leadership with this great caucus. 

 

I also want to thank my wife Charlene, of course, for sticking 

by me. It’s very tough, like the Leader of the Opposition said. 

There’s a lot of time we’re away from home and most of us 

have to travel for other reasons as well. So our spouses are the 

ones that have kept the home fires burning and they take care of 

the issues around home — small things like paying the bills, 

taking the kids to practices, to different school functions after 

hours as well. So I want to thank her for that. 

I also want to thank the Premier’s wife because she reaches out 

to all the spouses at different times throughout the year, not just 

at convention. And she asks and checks on how things are 

going back home because, of course, we all know that she does 

the same as they all do. They’ve got three young children who 

are very active in the community and sporting events and 

school, and she has to be home to ensure they get to all the 

functions. And she’s the one that checks homework in the 

evening whenever the Premier’s not home as well. So she 

understands. She gets it. So I want to thank her as well for that. 

 

Today I just want to start off I guess with using the quote that 

the Minister of Finance did during question period from The 

Globe and Mail. And I want to quote, it says: 

 

Amid the ruin that has devastated most governments’ 

balance sheets, Saskatchewan stands as a beacon of light, 

tabling another balanced budget yesterday . . . . what is 

encouraging about this budget is that the government has 

taken a pre-emptive stab at spending cuts, although times 

there are relatively good. Other jurisdictions could stand to 

learn from its example. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of those kind of 

things that happens that . . . removed from Saskatchewan and a 

province that we understand has a massive deficit budget. And 

like other jurisdictions in this country, Manitoba just tabled 

their budget and they’ve had to change their legislation to allow 

for that to happen because it’s a deficit budget moving forward 

for a four-year projection, I understand. 

 

So we’ve done quite well in Saskatchewan. Notwithstanding 

it’s not just because of government, for sure, to be sure in that. 

It’s because of the industry leaders, people in the mining sector, 

the people who’ve put their blood, sweat, and tears into this 

province throughout the years developing small businesses and 

large alike. It’s the men and women on the farm, the family 

farm, who stick with that and they persevere through times 

good and bad, and we have to thank them as well. 

 

My only experience on a farm was when I was about 12 years 

old. I had to go and help my uncle and my cousins herd a bunch 

of cattle for a couple of weeks. So I’m by no means an expert in 

agriculture or the farming economy, but I know that I have 

uncles who’ve farmed and who’ve ranched and they have done 

very well. And they’ve also had to tighten their belts as well 

during the bad times. So they get it as well. 

 

My heart goes out to all farmer families because that’s very 

unpredictable. Mother nature rules as do world economy market 

prices, so they stick to it . . . [inaudible] . . . came and they’re 

doing their thing then, and they’re still doing it now with the 

families who’ve stuck around. The legacy continues. So thanks 

to them. 

 

The issue within this province right now is that we have a base 

of economy that is driven by a number of things. But we also 

have to talk about the fact of what’s happened the last couple of 

years. We’ve paid down $2.6 billion in debt. Now as most of us 

would, I would think, when we have debt in our households, we 

wish to take care of that first because that lowers serving cost. It 

lets us have more money in our pockets in the long run. 

 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4501 

And we’ve done that in this province in recent years. And 

because of that, our debt servicing costs are reduced. And that is 

something that the people of this province have told us, from 

near and far, that they’re very proud of, that a government took 

the step. They had a surplus and, you know, notwithstanding the 

fact that it was there. We recognized there was a surplus left by 

the previous administration. And we used part of that surplus to 

pay down the debt and as well as looked at other means to do 

that. And we’ve put into legislation rules now that govern that. 

So any surpluses will go to the debt. Half goes to debt; half 

goes to the GFSF [Growth and Financial Security Fund]. So 

that’s one of those things that a fiscally prudent, responsible, 

forwarding-looking government will do. And we’ve done that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The era of restraint though. We all recognize what happened in 

the world economies and how that’s driven down market prices 

on lots of commodities. But when other provinces were looking 

at doing things differently, they went to deficit positions. And 

we’ve been quite blessed that we’ve had great officials, to be 

sure, that have supported and helped the ministers, but we’ve 

also had the leadership from the Premier looking at . . . We 

didn’t want to be like anybody else. We want to be doing 

something different to set us apart from other premiers and 

other governments in Canada, and that’s what we’ve done, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ve done that solely looking within, for sure. 

We looked at reducing the size of government — the cost of 

government operations more importantly — to help us balance 

the budget, but also to make it sustainable moving forward. 

 

To be sure we’ve had a great population increase in the last two 

years. That is, for the most part, we have also a great immigrant 

population that’s moved to the province as well. So we’ve new 

citizens so we’ve done very well on that. They need to be 

supported, and government offices and operations will support 

them. And like I said yesterday, like was stated yesterday by the 

Minister of Finance, we have officials that will, and great civil 

servants who will still man the snowplows. They will be there 

during the tough times to ensure that services are rendered and 

provided to our citizens. And they are a very professional civil 

service, so we commend them as well for that. They understand 

this province. They’re seeing the benefit of living in this 

province under a Saskatchewan Party government. People are 

coming. We’re looking at the issue of . . . We have a bigger tax 

base than before. 

 

We have a new . . . Across North America, Saskatchewan is 

being looked at, and even internationally — China, Japan, the 

Asian markets. When our ministers travel abroad, not just in 

North America but out of the country, they are told that their 

people are taking heed. They’re looking at Saskatchewan as 

being a leader on so many different fronts. And part of that, to 

be sure, is a government who looks at removing barriers to 

growth. 

 

We said we’d do that and we’ve started that process now. Over 

the last two and a half years things are going quite well. We’re 

hearing from industry leaders that it’s easier to come to 

Saskatchewan, do business, quicker to get businesses up and 

running, and for expansion as well. So we’re very happy to be 

able to help those drivers of the economy. 

 

It’s not just the large businesses, but mom-and-pop operations, 

those young entrepreneurs who are starting up in our province. 

The ones that hire three or four people at a time and help them 

get a foot up in their cities and buy homes and purchase goods 

and services, start their families and lay down roots. It’s those 

small businesses along with the large that we have to thank as 

well. 

 

The revenue that we forecasted of course, Mr. Speaker, is at 

9.95 billion. The non-renewable revenues are expected to 

generate 2.1 billion, including 1.1 billion from oil and 221 

million from potash. We looked at the leaders in industry. We 

took their word. 

 

Our analysts in Finance comparatively looked at what’s 

happening around the world, as well in the global markets. And 

we have for sure put in caution in this year’s budget. Something 

to be very proud of as well, that we have looked at the chance 

of what could happen globally. 

 

And to be sure there are some opportunities out there for higher 

speculation on the price of potash, price of oil. But a 

government of all political stripes will always take the prudent, 

cautious measures. And that’s what we did this year, which is 

really important to do . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin says, not last year. Well I 

have to wonder what he has to think about the previous, when 

he was here, when they used economic measures and they put at 

risk and lost hundreds of millions of dollars across this province 

in businesses. So we did very well otherwise. Failed businesses, 

I might add. 

 

So the General Revenue Fund surplus is forecast to be $20 

million which includes a transfer of, for sure, 194.2 million 

from the Growth and Financial Security Fund, the GFSF. This 

will still leave a balance of $510.8 million in the GFSF, Mr. 

Speaker. Like all of us should be doing, we should all have 

money in our savings accounts for those things that come up — 

unexpected expenses. We need to have those available. Those 

funds have to be there. 

 

And some of us for sure go to the bank, and we use the equity 

we’ve developed in our homes over the last two years in a great 

province and now we’re getting some money back on those 

investments as well. Members on both sides of the House have 

investments. I understand that. 

 

And everyone’s doing very well because of that. So we sure as 

heck want to keep our savings account available for us, and it’s 

there for unforeseen circumstances that happens. We use that as 

well to balance the budget for the GRF, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

again sound financial practices. 

 

From the past as well, I might add, from the past as well, not 

just something the new Saskatchewan Party government who 

came to govern in 2007 has done. It’s been done in the past. So 

we are still maintaining that focus going forward on a basis that 

we have to have money available, and use the GRF as a means 

to take in revenue and have expenses. That’s why we say it’s a 

balanced budget. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And the public debt will still stay at $4.15 billion, Mr. Speaker. 



4502 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

And that again too goes to the fact that we paid $2.6 billion off 

initially over the recent years, and we have some debt-servicing 

cost reductions now. So it helps the government and the people 

of this province. It isn’t just the government that benefits. 

People of this province benefit from those reductions in 

servicing to the debt. 

 

Moving forward as well, in this year’s budget and as in the 

previous budgets, there’s money for major infrastructure 

capital. $632 million will be done this year, spent this year. 

Now it’s a reduction from the highest levels in the previous two 

years, but it’s still the third largest capital spending budget in 

Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something the people of this province see in the summer, I can 

state, I know that No. 11 Highway is going to be having 30 

more kilometres paved or built this summer by Hague and 

Macdowall. You see operations 24-7. They’re stockpiling the 

aggregate to get that project going. And you know what? We 

see other roadwork that is going to be paved as well with the 

No. 11 Highway, as well as we see in Regina with the Lewvan 

interchange. 

 

We see rural roads are going to be repaved this year and 

developed. We . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you for 

that. The Yorkton truck route . . . I have to say I’ve been in 

Yorkton a couple times now, and not for the best reasons. My 

father’s in the hospital so I do visit him there. But I see the 

development in Yorkton, how it’s expanded, and I see those 

two mills there and . . . [inaudible] . . . the canola crushers and 

it’s growing. And I have to tell you that, like Prince Albert, it’s 

one of those kind of communities that you can see people’s 

optimism. It’s truly different than it was years ago. There’s 

optimism for the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the member from North Battleford talks about a forestry 

centre. I thank him for the opportunity to talk about that 

because it’s interesting that it was built by a previous MLA 

from Prince Albert Northcote. And you know what? He did 

serve the community. Absolutely he did. I will not say bad 

things of Mr. Lautermilch at all. He did a great job on certain 

files. However I will say that that forestry centre, which was 

supposed to be the centre of excellence for forestry, was 

supposed to be populated by all these scientists, researchers 

moving forward. When you looked at what actually was in that 

building, very few people working there, very few — less than 

half I would argue — had anything to do with the forestry 

industry under the NDP government. 

 

It was there for all that time, so in 2007 it didn’t change. It was 

the same numbers. It’s populated now by the fine prosecutors 

from the prosecutor’s section in the provincial Justice 

department ministry. Also some lawyers are in there as well, 

some private sector people as well. So it’s still there to be sure, 

but it became quite the white elephant from when it relates to 

forestry, I’ll tell you that, Mr. Speaker. And that was known in 

Prince Albert. 

 

One they were talking about here is that, in our budget as well, 

we have Health, Social Service, Education budgets — the core 

service budgets — that are still increasing in spending. We’re 

seeing that this year in the budget. The services will be 

provided. School divisions will see an increase of $33 million in 

this year’s budget. 

 

Health spending’s increased as well. And I will say that in 

Prince Albert in the Victoria Hospital, in the regional health 

authority there, for years they put forth budgets asking for 

increases under the previous administration — always had 

money pulled back in the end. They never got their increases 

they asked. They got some to be sure, but never what they 

asked. In our first year of forming government I met with the 

CEO, I met with the health region people and they told me what 

they needed, and this government delivered. We increased their 

budget, their operating budget, by almost $30 million so they 

could have no more deficits. We give them additional money 

for infrastructure, for renovations that they were sorely in need 

of because the hospital is of course the funnelling point for the 

North. And the great women and men who work in the health 

care service and the doctors provide service there tirelessly day 

in, day out, through the good weather and the bad. But people 

recognize that Prince Albert hospital as the point for the first 

acute care facility. 

 

Now my colleagues who have facilities in the North and in rural 

Saskatchewan around Prince Albert, there are doctors and 

nurses and health care professionals out there as well that have 

recognized that Prince Albert is an area where they can send 

patients to and they’ll get the treatment they need. But if not, 

they can get transferred to Saskatoon or Regina. But we do 

know that there’s a shortage of physicians. We’ve talked about 

that, and I’ll be speaking about that in the next little while as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just want to move as well, that the debt in the government will 

not be rising. It’s not going to rise at all. 

 

So the Growth and Financial Security Fund is projected to have 

a year-end balance of what I said, of $510.8 million. So by the 

accounting mechanisms used from both sides, I’d have to say, 

as still a rookie member of this Legislative Assembly, hearing 

both sides of it, it’s good that we’re able to agree on one thing. 

We both use the same mechanisms and we both have balanced 

budgets. And this government will maintain that balanced 

budget forecast thinking going forward as well. So we’re very 

happy with that. 

 

And I’m very proud to be a member of the Legislative 

Assembly that can actually manage that and moving forward. 

Because, like I said before, Mr. Speaker, my daughters, I hope 

they stay in Saskatchewan. I truly hope they will because their 

mother would be very heartbroken. I’m sure she’d have 

something to say to me if they had to move out of 

Saskatchewan to pursue academic careers and maybe 

opportunities in other parts of the country, maybe in North 

America and the world. Now notwithstanding that, I wish them 

all the best. 

 

I have two very smart daughters who made the honours with 

distinction in this year’s first report card. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Must take after their mother. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — So they take after, yes, member from 

Martensville, it’s true — they take after their mother, 

absolutely. Some of their athletic prowess does come from their 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4503 

father; some, albeit not as much probably. They’ve done very 

well on their own there too, by the way. But they’re great role 

models. They’re lovely daughters. 

 

At the recent Premier’s dinner in Prince Albert, I had my 

daughters help out with seating of some guests and other things 

that they helped out with that night. We had a couple of 

members of mine who . . . friends of mine who I worked with 

previous to this job. And you all know I was a police officer. So 

they’re still members of the Prince Albert police service. They 

walked up to me and asked if I still had my chunk, which means 

for us it’s slang for our service revolver, service pistol. And I 

laughed. I said, why would you ask that? Because my daughters 

are so beautiful, I should have it because well, the boyfriend is 

going to come down and beat the door down. And I laughed, 

and I said, you know, I guess for all those young men out there 

right now that could be listening or could want to check this 

out, I may not have it, but I may have it. So they have to watch 

their . . . because their mother, their mother will have more to 

say about the young men coming to the door than me, I think. 

Because, like I said before, with this job we’re here so much. 

 

But I’m very proud of my girls. And again, it goes to the future 

of this province and the opportunities they’ll have for 

academics and for jobs, which I’m very proud to say, as a 

government member, that we’ve done a lot to advance that 

cause for their future. 

 

And we talk about what our commitment is to our universities. 

And what we talk about with that is we’re going to move 

forward on training the future workforce, through labour force 

development programs and supporting our post-secondary 

education institutions to minimize tuition costs. 

 

Well you know, on that note, I want to say that, like most 

members in this House, we went to school many years ago. We 

took student loans. I recall paying back my student loan, and I’ll 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was very expensive. Interest was quite 

high back in those days. And I’m very proud that the Minister 

of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour, a good 

friend of mine, has put forth that we will have the prime rate on 

the student loans now, which is something that for me, looking 

forward as well for my daughters’ education, is important 

because although we’re saving as well for their education, it’s 

going to be quite expensive. I admit that. 

 

We have to understand that the costs rise in universities, 

whether in Saskatchewan or other provinces. And we have to 

pay that share, but if we can’t, there’s the student loan 

repayment program we’re going to put in place. Will make it 

much easier on them, and I’m sure myself because I’m sure my 

wife will make sure that I help them out there too. And we’re, 

as a mother and father, we want to give them a good foot up as 

they get out of university and start their careers as well. So I’m 

very happy for that. 

 

There’s also provisions we made in this year’s budget as well 

that I . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . A conflict of interest. I 

know I never developed the budget, so I guess it’s okay. 

 

The full-time students can also earn as much as they choose 

during their study period and it won’t affect their eligibility for 

financial assistance. And again, hear, hear and kudos to the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour and 

his caucus colleagues and ministerial colleagues that recognized 

that as a means, because students will work. They still want 

money. They still have to, you know, have some sort of fun . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. And it gives them a chance 

to not be ineligible, having those funds ineligible when they get 

their loans. 

 

And of course ownership of vehicles by students is allowed 

without affecting the level of financial assistance. Well I know 

when I did my student loan, I had to sell my vehicle. I was out 

of school for a number of years. My parents couldn’t afford to 

put me through school, so I had to get a student loan. But I had 

to sell my vehicle. I loved that car. It was the first car I ever 

bought, working because it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was it? 

 

Mr. Hickie: — A 1982 Cutlass Calais — beautiful vehicle, 

classic car. It was one of two that were in Prince Albert at the 

time. And you know what, sad to say I had to sell that car 

because I couldn’t hold that vehicle because it was an asset. 

And it was, I was deemed that I had an asset that I wouldn’t 

qualify for a student loan. So sad to say, I had to sell that car. 

And I was able to get a student loan. 

 

That’s fine. I sold it to a fireman friend of mine and he took 

care of it. And today it’s still on his farm. He keeps it covered, 

and he still has it out every once in awhile for show and shines 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Maybe I can. Maybe one day 

when he wants to sell it back to me, I’m sure he’ll sell me it for 

a lot more than I paid for it. And hey, I sold it to him for it as 

well.  

 

The member for Cut Knife-Turtleford there has got an idea. 

Maybe I should get it for my daughters, the member from Sask 

Rivers says. You know, that’s a great car. They’d love that car. 

And it’s a two-door car. It’s a nice little vehicle. It’s a great car; 

it’s perfect. Of course I would love to buy myself a nice 

Mustang, but we’ll have to see if I can afford that when they go 

to university as well, like I’ve already said. 

 

So Advanced Education, Employment and Labour has done 

great things moving our province forward as well. And again to 

the officials there, and to the members of the minister’s office 

who carried that torch and worked very hard on those 

initiatives, I thank them for that. 

 

You know, we’re also taking a responsible leadership role in 

recognizing that there’s still people out there in the province. 

The most vulnerable people in our province still have needs to 

be met, for sure. And you know what, I want to thank the 

Minister of Social Services because there were increases in that 

budget that talk about things that we’ve talked about for a 

number of years like Children First, absolutely. You know 

what, the children we looked at, there is issues out there in the 

welfare system and foster care. And children are the future of 

our province. We have to be there for them, and we are. 

Four-square we’re behind those, behind the Social Services 

minister. We expanded spaces, funded spaces. So we 

understand there are people in our society who need help, for 

sure. They need to have that support service there for them, and 

they are there. 



4504 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

Disabilities as well, we’ve done that as well in this year’s 

budget. I’ll talk about those in a little greater detail I guess, as 

we move forward as I go through my speech. You know what? 

We’ve also talked about how in the past, I sit here, and others 

have as well, that to be sure we knew that there was an 

economic recession. And we had to weather that storm like 

everyone else had to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

responsible government. Absolutely, the member from Yorkton 

says that. 

 

The responsibility lies on those legislators to make sure that 

they don’t do things that put the entire province in jeopardy. 

And we didn’t. We recognized those opportunities. We 

recognized the hurdles as well. And working within industry 

leaders and analysts we take advice, we produce budgets 

moving forward, and we weathered that storm to remain strong. 

In fact I venture a safe guess — I know that it’s in my speech 

here somewhere; I went over it again last night and again this 

morning — analysts say that we’re going to lead the nation in 

’10-11. 

 

Well we’re one of the only provinces that are going to be able 

to do that because of our fiscal stewardship and our sense of 

commitment to this province to see its better days. Its best days 

are still ahead of us. We never say that, ah well, we’ve had 

enough, we’re going to shut the doors and turn the lights off . . . 

[inaudible] . . . should be happy and we’re going to stay the way 

we are. Because heaven forbid, heaven forbid that we should 

not grow . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I tell you, the 

member from Regina, tomorrow’s the better day than it is 

today, for sure. Absolutely. And it goes again to the people in 

our province who see that future. They commit their own blood, 

sweat, and tears and their own capital, their own money to 

develop those costs. They carry the charge forward and like so 

many other people in industry, industry before, they believe in 

this province. 

 

Now, days in the past, we’re talking. For sure, absolutely we 

have a province right now though that is leading the nation. We 

have our Premier who is being asked to speak at numerous 

media outlets when he travels abroad. And we, we send a 

message day in, day out. 

 

Everyone on this side of the House in government talks about 

the future of this province with pride. And we don’t take 

complete ownership to what’s happened. We give it back to the 

people in this province who stuck it out. Absolutely. Far be it 

for us to have any kind of an arrogant attitude to think that we 

are the ones that truly are what they are moving for. They’re 

moving back because of opportunities. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We set the table. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — We set the table. The member from Yorkton 

says we set the table. And we invite them to come back and sit 

down and eat the great dinner that we’re serving in this 

province. And you know what? People stay. Like many of us 

have a good family dinners we want to, we sit back afterwards. 

We talk. We visit with our family and our friends. We talk 

about the future that we want to see for ourselves and our 

province and our families. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The families are coming home. 

Mr. Hickie: — And the families are coming home. The 

member from Lloydminster says, absolutely they’re coming 

home. They’re coming home because of economic 

opportunities. They’re coming back to Saskatchewan because 

they want to be with loved ones. The loved ones are saying, 

why are you somewhere else? Why don’t you come back here? 

This province has got potential. It’s changing. Every day it 

changed . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Great place. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Great place to come back, exactly. You know I 

have a friend of mine who happens to go to Calgary to do some 

investment courses, good friend of mine. And in Calgary, one 

of the individuals that he actually sits on these investment 

courses with happens to be a member of an oil company. I 

won’t go and say which one it is, but I think we all know it. It’s 

been in the media quite a bit. But he happened to be running 

outside in Calgary, downtown Calgary, running around at lunch 

time, as every lunch time he goes and gets in shape. He runs. 

 

He got asked by a roving reporter, man on the street kind of 

idea, what do you think about the next mayor for Calgary? Who 

should that be? Because, you know, there’s a mayoral race there 

going on there I understand, and so he gave his opinion once he 

caught his breath. He said, you know what? I’d like to see Brad 

Wall be the mayor in Calgary. Because you know what? His 

optimism is what we need in our province, in our city, and he 

just exudes it day in, day out with everything he touches, 

everything he attends, everything he does. And that’s the kind 

of person they want. 

 

Now of course the Premier’s not going to go to Calgary. He has 

a great home and not going to abandon Saskatchewan like 

maybe someone else did in the past. I won’t go into that though. 

That’s history. I’ll leave that alone. But now we have people 

coming back to the province who see the rejuvenation, the 

pride, and the sense of ownership in our province. Attitude. 

Positive attitude. Change, absolutely.  

 

So we also know that there’s going to be a great mayor race in 

Calgary, and they’re going to find a person who will be leading 

that city forward. And we wish them all the best. Because, I 

believe, a member from our caucus happened to be out in 

Calgary a while back on a particular Macleans kind of an open 

forum session with a bunch of people, I believe. And a 

comment she made . . . I happen to watch it on CPAC [Cable 

Public Affairs Channel] that night, just happened to turn the TV 

on. You know most of us political junkies, we watch CPAC 

quite a bit. We watch what’s going on in politics. 

 

[12:30] 

 

I caught the moment when she was asked her view on Calgary. 

I can’t quote for sure exactly what she said, but if I’m wrong, 

she’ll remind me. And it was a member from our caucus, the 

Minister of Environment, who was there representing 

Saskatchewan. And she made a comment that Calgary is the 

place that Saskatchewan built because so many people moved 

out of this province and developed that city. 

 

An. Hon. Member: — Under the NDP, Calgary was 

Saskatchewan’s largest city. 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4505 

Mr. Hickie: — That’s right. Under the NDP, Calgary was 

Saskatchewan’s largest city, the member from Wood River 

says. Thank you for that. I appreciate that. 

 

Moving on though, we also would recognize the expertise we 

have there in Calgary, Alberta: developed a lot of those 

corporations; a lot of that potential in the oil and gas sector; 

another again, entrepreneurship. And they’re coming home. We 

have people from Alberta who are investing in Saskatchewan. 

We know that the oil service sector is seeing that. We see the 

oil drilling sector seeing Alberta companies looking at 

Saskatchewan. 

 

China bid for the first time ever on land sales just recently. Of 

course now they weren’t successful, but to be sure, I’m sure 

they’ll be back at next year’s sale. And you know China sees 

that there’s potential in this province — the wee province, I 

believe, is what it was referred to in the previous administration 

a few times. 

 

We are no longer a wee province; we’re a have province. We 

are going to be the kind of province that looks at every 

opportunity available. I’ve had the honour of being able to talk 

to various energy sector leaders from other parts of the world in 

this job. It’s a great job by the way, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you, 

I’ve done things and seen things and talked to people over the 

last two and a half years and never would have had the 

opportunity to do this. So I want to thank the members for 

allowing me to do that. 

 

But the people of Prince Albert Carlton, the people that voted 

for me, I forgot to thank them when I did my introduction. I was 

very remiss in not thanking the people who voted for me. You 

know what? It’s a slim margin, mind you, Mr. Speaker, of 61 

votes. And I recognize that, I don’t take that for granted 

whatsoever. It was a very tough night, hard-fought campaign. 

And I’m happy to have been elected. 

 

Moving forward, the work’s already started in Prince Albert 

Carlton again. So we’ll see what happens. It’ll be another tough 

race, and I admit that. I take nothing for granted. And the 

democracy will rule. And I wish the people in Prince Albert 

Carlton all the best who go to mark that ballot box. 

 

But they’re not marking it for Darryl Hickie. They’re not going 

to mark it for the NDP candidate who, I understand, will be 

nominated this weekend. They’re going to mark it for Brad 

Wall or Dwain Lingenfelter. I truly believe that when that day 

comes, November 7th, 2011 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, 

I stand corrected. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I can’t use names 

and I apologize for that. Sorry, the Leader of the Opposition or 

the Premier of Saskatchewan. I recognize that. Still a rookie; 

sorry, I’m still learning. 

 

That’s what the people are going to decide for. They’re going to 

decide on the two leaders. I’ll be very happy and I’ll be blessed 

to be carrying the banner with a Premier who’s got vision, who 

doesn’t look backwards. He’s looking forward all the time, as 

all of us are on this side of the House. We don’t hear anyone 

talking in this caucus about the good old days. We talk about 

the days still yet to be challenged and hard-fought and to make 

things different in the province, to make it the best place in the 

world to live. And we’re very proud to do that moving forward, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that day, democracy will reign, in so much as that I’m 

hopeful that I will be back. And I will work very hard to spread 

the message of a government and a party that is always 

forward-looking, responsible, using the balanced budgets like 

we have in the last three now, and developing a future for our 

children. Like I’ve said many times already, it’s very important. 

 

And you know it’s not just Sask Party government children. No. 

It’s the children of opposition members and grandkids that are 

still in the province, and the opportunities that’ll be around for 

them as well, moving forward because of the work, the 

stewardship of various ministries who are looking at protecting 

what’s already here for the future as well, but also ensuring that 

our province is safe, a place to come to, move into. We have 

programs and supports available. 

 

And, you know, I’ll be talking about some of the initiatives 

under Social Services in this budget that are very exciting. The 

new home program. Over 1,000 new homes can be bought by 

low- and moderate-income people. That’s ingenuity. That’s the 

way of doing business. That’s the way you get things done. 

We’re not giving people handouts; we’re giving them a hand 

up. And that’s critical. We recognize that. 

 

So you know what, Mr. Speaker? It’s one of those things that 

make me wake up every morning to feel very proud that I’m a 

member of the government and under a Saskatchewan Party 

government. Because the colleagues I work with every day, and 

every night because we’re working some nights, to be sure . . . 

We have a vision; we have a plan. And although others in this 

province, other people for sure, will actually look at, you know, 

what we’ve done and ridicule and mock us and say we’re not 

doing our job right. 

 

To be sure, Mr. Speaker, the people in this province that I talk 

to . . . And I’ll tell you a story about last night. After the budget, 

I was in my office. I got a text from a good friend of mine who 

did not vote for me in the last election. I know he didn’t. He 

told me that. We’re very open and honest about our politics. But 

he said to me in the text that he will be voting for me now 

because of what we’ve done in this province for three 

consecutive years. 

 

The budget again this year is strong. He has daughters. He has a 

wife in the service industry that needs to have a strong 

government, a strong province to do well, as does his sector. 

And we support his sector as well. I’m not going to tell you 

what sector that is because it will give it away. 

 

But very proud to say that. And it took . . . I don’t talk about 

politics with him a lot. We do talk politics because it’s 

something we both are really excited about. But he, unsolicited, 

unsolicited he sent me the text last night. So I’m very proud of 

that friend of mine now who’s seen the way for the future. Yes, 

he’s seen the light. Exactly. 

 

Getting back to the economy, of course, we did recognize that it 

was a global recession. A world downturn in the economy 

caused numerous financial institutions to close, to send many 

people out on the street in the United States. Record numbers of 

receiverships, home . . . and bankruptcies as well. Canada did 



4506 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

much better of course, and Saskatchewan did much better than 

some other places in Canada. 

 

So the optimism for renewal, I’ve talked about it a few times. 

The optimism for the resurgence of a province that’s led the 

way in the nation through recession, who itself to be sure had to 

recognize that we were not immune to that. I’ve heard that 

many times in the past. Yes, better to be here than someplace 

else. That we were also told by other people who told us that. 

So you know what? There’s a sense of optimism that sees us 

moving forward. 

 

And I see the analysts see the same thing going down the road, 

so that’s great. Economic leaders in Canada, we’ve been told by 

independent analysts. So the forecasters have said that. RBC 

[Royal Bank of Canada], one of the biggest financial 

institutions in our country, if not the biggest based on profit 

margins for sure, they said that we are going to lead the nation. 

GDP [gross domestic product] growth is going to be up this 

year and then up again next year. So that tells you something, 

Mr. Speaker, that that particular institution truly believes in our 

province. They see the future moving forward right. 

 

So we’re having lots of fun with this, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

moving on with the whole purpose going forward of make sure 

we have, we do renewal within this caucus. We don’t sit back 

and get told to do anything. Backbenchers, we are always at the 

table, always able to contribute our thoughts. And this year’s 

budget was one time that I will tell you that we had a very great 

day, that we were able to sit as a caucus — and it was a long 

day to be sure — but each one of us had the opportunity to say, 

speak our mind on issues moving forward. Represent our 

constituents, what we heard back home over the last number of 

months when we weren’t in session . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Absolutely. We’re not told to do anything in this caucus, 

Mr. Speaker, and the people watching this, they should know 

that. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government caucus is not directed and 

told by any one member what to do or not to do. We have an 

open, open communication lines. The Premier is available for 

us to speak at any time with him as well. He wants to hear from 

his caucus. He wants to because, to be sure, we all have busy 

lives and sometimes to get connected back in our communities 

is something that a leader of an opposition party or a Premier 

should do, and not be talking about himself. In a person that 

shows a little bit of arrogance. To be able to say that, you know 

what, I listen to the people, I’m a man of the people, and that’s 

exactly what our Premier is. 

 

We talked about some good, some good stories coming out of 

this budget and you know what, Mr. Speaker, it was a person by 

the name of . . . from MNP [Meyers Norris Penny]. I can’t say 

the names I guess . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . MNP, Meyers 

Norris Penny. You bet. I guess I use the corporate name, that’s 

good. So, you know, it says here that: 

 

While the government is in maintenance mode all right 

having to deal with the serious drop in potash revenue and 

at the same time living up to its previous commitments, 

it’s a delicate balancing act and I think they’ve done a 

pretty decent job under trying circumstances. So on a scale 

of 1 to 10, I’m going to give them an 8 on this budget and 

I think that’s fair. 

 

From an accounting firm, Mr. Speaker, that is world renowned, 

has offices all around the world, and takes a leadership position 

— and not just to single them out to be sure; there’s accounting 

firms that do great work as well and who are internationally 

recognized — but to have that kind of independent third party 

financial institution saying that, that bodes well for the 

stewardship and the work that was done by these ministers and 

our Finance minister and the Premier and the people who 

helped to direct this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the 

caucus members — thank you — the caucus members who also 

took an active role and developed this budget. 

 

We can all be very proud of that day because what we had our 

input in came to fruition. And as of yesterday’s budget speech 

and some of the stories in the local media as well, we hear that 

we’re doing very well that way. So the forward-looking part of 

this budget of course we talk about still maintaining 

infrastructure programs — I’ve talked about the highways in 

one — but we still have, for municipalities we see an increase 

in their municipal funding for infrastructure programs. We see 

the maintenance of our revenue sharing unlike any other time. 

In my city it rose I want to say well north of 50 per cent, closer 

up to 60, closer to 70 I think, monies received from a provincial 

government in the past. 

 

So we recognize that the government, as members of Prince 

Albert, have done very well. I hear that every day in my office. 

I don’t get one person complaining in my office at all about the 

revenue sharing didn’t increase this year. We talked about 

increasing to one point of PST [provincial sales tax] within the 

term of our government and we will get there next year, Mr. 

Speaker, to be sure. And the people of Prince Albert will see 

additional money because of the government’s, you know, 

commitment to that. 

 

We also gave money under the MEEP [municipal economic 

enhancement program] program last year that was never looked 

at, never even knew it was coming. Municipalities across 

Saskatchewan got the extra money for economic expansion and 

they used it for their own needs. And Prince Albert benefited to 

the tune of $3.7 million. That was a huge contribution from a 

government to the city, one time, that let them take on projects 

and plans that they had wanted to do for years. 

 

And I’m very proud as the government MLA to be able to do 

that for them — argue on their behalf for what they needed — 

and to attend a couple of different openings and projects that 

actually that money funded. So again it’s one of those kind of 

things that as a member of government I take a lot of pride 

every day and when I wake up, what I’ve done. 

 

We talked about the leverage that we have of investment dollars 

from the Conservative government, the federal government in 

Canada, and that partnership is moving forward. We still see 

increase in those dollars coming to Saskatchewan and we can 

actually say that — I can use these numbers here, actually — 

that the federal-provincial-municipal infrastructure programs 

increased to $115.8 million. That’s a 71.7 per cent increase over 

last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, over last year’s budget. 

 

So we have a strong relationship in Ottawa, absolutely, to be 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4507 

sure. They recognize Saskatchewan as becoming a leader 

moving forward. But we also recognize, as they do, that there 

was a deficit in so many different levels. And infrastructure is 

one that we had to make sure we had a partnership working 

forward because this government is seeing a population growth. 

We’re seeing industry come to Saskatchewan. Infrastructure, to 

be sure, had to be developed and we need to have the help of 

the federal government, which they did. And moving forward 

on that file, the numbers speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker, 

quite nicely. 

 

There’s also the issue that there’s actually, you know, 

investments of 551 million to build, operate, and maintain the 

provincial highway system, including 250 million on new 

highway construction, repaving. Those are good numbers, Mr. 

Speaker. This is the second largest highways capital program in 

the province’s history. Again, that spans north, south, east, 

west, rural, municipal — on all different levels, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s one thing that the Minister of Highways and his staff did 

a great job on. 

 

Seeing that future, recognizing that we had to have those 

developments, you know, the previous minister as well saw that 

and I give him credit as well. He needs to be told that him and 

his staff took the direction, did a great job moving forward, 

looking at roads that need to be looked at to support our 

economic development, absolutely. It’s hard to believe that 

roads were being chewed up and put into gravel. They weren’t 

being repaved and fixed. 

 

Now they have trouble with the trucks on those roads. So for 16 

years that happened. In deficit position . . . [inaudible] . . . 

planning for decline, not for the future. We now are, with the 

great partnership with the federal government, moving forward 

for infrastructure dollars. We have to repave those roads. And 

one road, by the way, has to be repaved is a very small road for 

sure, 8 kilometres up in the Emma Lake area. It’s a road that 

goes from the 263 . . . not 263. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Murray Point access road. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Murray Point access road. — the member from 

Sask Rivers, thank you very much for that — Murray Point 

access road. Now it goes to the Murray Point campground, but 

it also goes to various beaches where there are people who have 

some very beautiful lakefront property, absolutely. 

 

And under the NDP government, they chewed up that road, put 

it back to gravel. Now not just gravel that, you know, you see 

on some other roads. Big boulders were still chopped up in 

there. I had people complaining they had rocks go through the 

floorboards of their truck. And these people are pulling big 

trailers, to be sure. They’re pulling some nice, beautiful boats as 

well. So you know what? They’ve endured that. 

 

And the dust that comes off that road now . . . because it’s still 

gravel. That’ll be fixed this year. The Minister of Highways has 

assured me it’s going to be done this year. It’s 8 kilometres. It’s 

a small chunk of road, but the people up there would be very 

happy, Mr. Speaker. And those people aren’t just from Prince 

Albert. They’re from all over Saskatchewan and Alberta that 

come to that area, with cabins and property. So those people are 

going to see that road worked on this summer and completed, 

and barring any major problems with weather, to be sure, 

absolutely. We have to recognize mother nature has that upper 

hand on us. 

 

But the men and women in the Highways crews are going to be 

working that road. We want to say thanks to them as well 

because they do work tirelessly under some of the hottest days 

and some of the coldest days as well. So thanks to them, we can 

see those projects go forward. So very happy with that. 

 

[12:45] 

 

I mentioned the Lewvan interchange and west bypass in 

Regina. The Yorkton truck pass has been talked about, along 

with the No. 11 Highway as well, for infrastructure. So we’re 

seeing those kind of initiatives. 

 

We will also have money now to fund projects that, when 

completed, will see 600 kilometres of highway resurfaced, 600 

kilometres of highways resurfaced. That’s an amazing number, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many? How many numbers? 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Six hundred kilometres. That’s huge. That is 

huge. That’s like for me to drive from Prince Albert to Regina 

and then halfway back again. That’s a lot of roadwork. There’s 

a lot of roadwork has to get done, but left outstanding by the 

NDP government, in deficit position. Now we’re fixing that, so 

we’re doing quite well. 

 

I want to talk about Social Services. Now I see I’ve still got 

some time, so I want to work on this, that the . . . And I hope 

the members on my side are okay with me standing on my feet 

still talking because I’m having a lot of fun here. 

 

I tell you, when you’re talking about good things, Mr. Speaker, 

it just flows. You don’t have to think about a lot of stuff. All 

these good messages come out to you. You’re just having fun, 

which is great. You’re not struggling to find words to belittle or 

to, you know, be negative — negative, negative, negative. No, 

no. When you’re in a province that you’re in a government that 

has good messaging, we have good supporters that tell us we’re 

going a good job, it’s a positive attitude — it’s great, easily, to 

do this, kind of talk fast. Or I sure should because I’ve only got 

15 more minutes, shouldn’t I? I hear you now. 

 

I want to talk about Social Services now. We have a great 

minister who has dealt with many, many things. We have a 

challenge. We had a challenge when we formed government, 

for sure, from the various agencies that oversee what Social 

Services does. And there was deficits there as well left for our 

government to inherit. 

 

But we have 2.9 million for transit allowance, assistance for the 

disabled now, 12 point million for grants in lieu of taxes, and 

9.6 million for the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency. So that is a group that helps out from Municipal 

Affairs to all of us because of the fact that they have to do the 

assessments. And we’re seeing property values rise. We’re 

doing quite well. 

 

I am happy to say that I turn the real estate channel on in 



4508 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

Regina occasionally as I’m going through the channels at 

nighttime. And I see that their prices are pretty high, to be sure, 

but people in this province are paying for those homes, so they 

have money. They’re making good money at good jobs, and 

they see a future. So it’s an investment. It isn’t a hindrance; it’s 

an investment. So it’s actually very positive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know what? We’re actually seeing that — I’ve talked 

about it a bit; I want to just go through this one more time — 

that on our transportation priorities and with the federal 

government recognizing that, we’re going to see the largest 

contribution in the history of this province from a premier and 

cabinet that talked about, you know, equalization’s happening 

everywhere else. We’re a have province, Mr. Speaker, but the 

federal government still provided $113 million, the largest 

contribution in the history of this province, to support us in 

transportation. 

 

It bodes well to have a man or a woman who’s the premier of 

the province who can actually work with, work with and not get 

upset and walk out of the meeting with the Prime Minister, and 

quite frankly, forgets his briefcase, has to send his official 

group to go back and get it. So we have a premier, we have 

members . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I don’t know. I think it 

was Mr. Calvert. Very good man, though. 

 

I want to give credit to Mr. Calvert. He was an honourable 

member of this Legislative Assembly, to be sure. He worked as 

the leader of the opposition and the premier with honour and 

pride and dignity. And every time I can talk about a man of his 

status, I will give him all the recognition and all his due course 

for sure. 

 

I also talk about the MLA, the former member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, Mr. Myron Kowalsky, who I tell you did great 

service for Prince Albert Carlton and for Prince Albert as a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly. I’ve been to a couple of 

events. One was a funeral of a good friend of mine, but I’ve 

been to other events as well that Mr. Kowalsky attended. And 

every chance I get, I will always say to him face to face, eye to 

eye, that he was an honourable man as well who served the 

community of Prince Albert very well. And I will always say 

that about him. And he did a great job for the citizens, and I’ve 

got to tell you, it’s good to be able to talk to him sometimes and 

see how he’s doing very well. 

 

He had a health setback after leaving government, for sure after 

retiring, but he’s rebounding quite well. He’s looking well as 

well. So I give him credit for that — strong man . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Absolutely I’m talking . . . yes, Myron 

Kowalsky, absolutely I’m talking about Mr. Kowalsky, good 

man, good man, Myron Kowalsky, a good man, yes. 

 

The next thing is health care. We want to talk about what’s 

happening in health care. For sure we know we need more 

physicians in this province. And I’ll touch on the wait list that 

was brought today by some members of the opposition, surgical 

wait lists. To be sure, it’s hard when there are people in the 

province who need to see a physician, a specialist for surgery, 

and there aren’t enough physicians in the province. 

 

Now that equates back to poor planning on the part of the 

previous government that could have funded, that could have 

funded additional training seats at our university, who could 

have looked at talking and taking the advice . . . I would 

probably think years ago . . . that we got advice after forming 

government to assure that we had training seats expanded for 

physicians. Plus we have the recruitment strategy we funded as 

well, so 3.5 million to continue the physician recruitment 

strategy and agency, 6.6 million to continue medical education 

systems enhancements. This also includes physicians’ training 

seat expansions and postgraduate and internal residency seats. 

Those are the kind of things we’ve got to have. And again, 

Minister of Health and the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour, they work together on these files. We 

don’t just have our own little silo mentality. We take care of 

ourselves, but we work together as a team on this side, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again it goes to the point that we don’t have someone 

telling us what to do and not to do. We are able to approach any 

minister, any given day of the week. We can approach the 

Premier and talk, and we’re allowed to speak our mind on this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker. We will not have that kind of 

tactic ever . . . If it did happen . . . I must say it did in the past. 

But this government, this caucus respect each other to the point 

. . . We have disagreements, to be sure, but we talk to each other 

with dignity, and we do things with the highest ethical standards 

on this side when it comes to working with other people in 

caucus. So very proud that we can maintain that, and we will. 

That’s how you govern. That’s how you work as a team. Been 

quite lucky as members on this side as well. 

 

Other members as well in the House who’ve been on sports 

teams . . . some of them higher level than I’ve been at, for sure. 

But you recognize that team ethic, the work ethic that goes with 

the team efforts. The being able to see when a member of your 

team is having a tough day, you bring that person’s spirit up. I 

see that my daughters’ volleyball teams now. They’re excellent 

volleyball players, and the teammates they play with, all help 

each other out. Some kid doesn’t block a spike, maybe doesn’t 

make the set properly, they all walk up to her and they say, 

listen, next time; don’t worry about it. And they’re all a team, 

right? That’s good to see that. And not just the six girls on the 

court, but the six girls who are sitting on the bench as well are 

always there for their teammates. So that’s one of those things 

that . . . Teamwork leads to positive results, always working 

together, and that’s important. 

 

So the health care budget is for sure a large amount, $4.2 

billion. But regional health authorities have to be commended 

because they provide the core services for their communities 

and for their areas, Mr. Speaker. Now the Minister of Health 

has an official that is a deputy minister, who is an amazing man 

who worked around internationally through health care. And 

he’s led his leadership ability and stewardship under . . . 

[inaudible] . . . with advice, of course, from the minister, to 

ensure that the health system delivery in this province remains 

of highest priority for us to fund and to provide services that are 

long overdue in some cases as well. Looking at things like 

reducing the wait list times. We’ve contributed — what was it? 

— $10 million this year for a long-term study to, in the next 

five years, to reduce the wait times. It takes money. It takes 

perseverance. It takes leadership, and that’s what this 

government has, as do the officials at the highest level in this 

government, Mr. Speaker. It’s important. 



March 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4509 

There’s a $123 million increase to regional health authorities to 

provide base funding of 2.6 billion to maintain the delivery of 

health care services to the Saskatchewan people. Now that is 

something that I was told before — I mentioned it early on in 

my speech — that we had the CEO of the Parkland Regional 

Health Authority, needed to have some more money to remove 

the deficit position she was in to support the services, 

recognizing that the great facility in Prince Albert is the 

funnelling point for acute care from the North, to be sure. And 

as a government we listened, and I was able to take her 

concerns to the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance, 

and we were able to additional funding. 

 

Last year, year before, and this year, we see it rising again. So 

it’s good to know that not just Prince Albert, but the regional 

health authorities will see an increase. And that’s an important 

part of our health care delivery in this province because there 

are innovative ways of doing business for sure, Mr. Speaker, 

but the people who are doing that, the hard and heavy lifting, 

are the regional health authorities. They’re executive 

administration people, the staff that work in the hospitals day 

in, day out, and they’re valued members of our province. And 

each of them is valued members of the delivery model, and we 

want to thank them for their commitment to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one more thing I think is important that we had a funding 

increase this year of 109.3 million to Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency funding for drugs and medical supplies and operating 

costs. Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? There are people in 

this province who for sure told us when we were in opposition 

. . . not me personally of course because I wasn’t here. I was a 

member of the Prince Albert Police Service at that time, but I 

heard the stories, read the stories and that there was 

requirements for certain expansion of drug coverage for cancer 

patients. The Cancer Agency is a workhorse and the delivery of 

health care to those people who are battling a disease, various 

diseases involving cancer, that they need the support of the 

people. And there are great people working there, to be sure. 

But when we listened to their needs, I’m proud to say our 

government listened and we responded, responded with things 

that they tell us they need, and that’s what a good government 

does. And we recognize that people have that battle and to have 

that support from a government and that agency will help those 

people see success and have a brighter future for sure. 

 

The 6.6 million I talked about for the continuing medical 

education system enhancements and training physician seats is 

something in this province that is long overdue, needed that, 

Mr. Speaker. And again, it will bode well for the future of this 

province, to be sure. As our population continues to increase, 

families are being born; kids are coming into this world. Prince 

Albert has the highest rate per capita of births, Prince Albert 

health region, at that hospital. The great doctors and nurses that 

work there tell me every year it gets more. And that’s people 

who are having children. That’s the future of this province. 

 

So we have to make sure that we have a health care system that 

can deliver that. And those physicians have to be trained and 

retained in this province. So the Minister of Health and his 

officials, along with the people from the University of 

Saskatchewan in the college, are doing a great job and moving 

that file forward because those children will need physicians, to 

be sure, in the future. And that’s where we’re going to be 

looking at having that strong presence, strong presence there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We — in Health as well — took on this challenge with this 

tobacco legislation, Mr. Speaker. We need to make sure that we 

have a healthier population in this province. And we also know 

that — you know what? — there are populations within our 

demographics within our province that tend to be heavier 

smokers, start smoking at a younger age as well. And by doing 

the work that the ministry has on this file when it comes to 

tobacco, the tobacco tax and the legislation, the control strategy, 

again, leaders again, Mr. Speaker, looking for the future. 

 

I talked about the Head Start program on a home that the 

Ministry of Social Services has. As you can tell, there’s a 

common theme I have, Mr. Speaker. It’s about the future. It’s 

about the positive nature of the people in this province who are 

having families, who are putting up, setting down roots. And 

they’re working hard day in, day out, to be sure. Some people 

work two jobs. Some people work the one job. They’re doing 

very well because they see a future in this province. But a 

home, a home provides security, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what 

these people will have now. Over a thousand of these homes 

will be built for low- and moderate-income families. 

 

Again, ownership, pride, safety, and security. I was able to 

attend a couple of ribbon-cutting ceremonies for low-income 

housing units in Prince Albert just a few weeks back. And the 

common theme that surrounded that was the safety and security 

that these families will now feel by having a place to call home, 

and the security, being able to have a place that’s there for them 

all the time. So they’re going to be very much entrenched in the 

economy in Prince Albert because they’ll have a place to start 

off. It’s a good starting point for them. And they can go and 

seek employment and advances and other opportunities that 

may not have been available to them because they lacked that 

stability, that safety and security of the home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next thing that’s actually one of those great initiatives our 

government took on . . . and to be sure, it was started in the 

previous administration; I will give credit where it’s due, 

absolutely. Child care spaces, we talked about childcare spaces. 

But we have a pre-K [pre-kindergarten] program in this 

province as well that we’re implementing. And this year’s 

budget, we will continue to invest in those two very, very, very 

important initiatives at different levels. 

 

I just said this week in my member statement, I was able to talk 

about the seats that we opened up in Prince Albert, working 

with the different school divisions and Ministry of Education 

and the community groups — Family Futures and Children’s 

Choice. So great leadership on those two levels, I want to give 

them a big thank you as well for what they do day in, day out. 

Great people work there. 

 

So we also see that families need those child care spaces. And 

you know what? By putting these child care spaces in schools 

like we have in other institutions, like some of the churches and 

such, people can take their kids there. They know it’s a safe 

environment for them. And they can actually move forward, 

and they can actually see themselves getting education 

opportunities and job opportunities because there’s stability for 

their children there, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great thing there in 



4510 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2010 

Prince Albert. 

 

They’re very happy in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. You know 

the member from Cumberland wants to talk about people in 

Prince Albert aren’t happy. That bodes well for the way their 

attitude is, Mr. Speaker. They always talk about doom and 

gloom. That’s their new mantra over there. The member for 

Cumberland wants to talk about being not happy in Prince 

Albert. Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. Many people in 

Prince Albert are very happy. And they go ahead with that 

doom and gloom story, Mr. Speaker. And I tell them, maintain 

that mantra and we’ll see what happens in the times ahead, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The one other thing that we want to talk about for sure, Mr. 

Speaker, before the time comes to conclusion here, is that I 

want to support this budget, Mr. Speaker, happily, proudly. And 

I will not listen to doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. People in 

Prince Albert want to see a government move forward. They 

want to see us maintain our positive . . . best days are still 

ahead, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time being 1 o’clock, this House 

now stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4481 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4481 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4481 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4481 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4481 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4481 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4481 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4482 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4482 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4482 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4482 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4482 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4483 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4483 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4483 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4483 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4483 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4484 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Poverty Costs 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4484 

 Population Trends 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4484 

 Rural and Northern Health Care 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4484 

 Wait-Lists 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4485 

 New Democratic Party’s Track Record 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4485 

 Magic Show 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4485 

 2010 Budget 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4486 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Unparliamentary Language 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4486 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4487 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4487 

 Government Spending 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4488 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4488 

 Chiropractic Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4489 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4489 

 Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4490 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4490 

POINTS OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4491 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4491 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4491 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Mr. Weekes .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4492 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 



 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4492 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4500 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


