




















































Hansard: April 01, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 41A  THURSDAY, APRIL 1, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4669 

 April 1, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to inform members that Mr. Speaker will not 

be present this morning to open today‟s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First 

Nations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, it‟s my great pleasure to introduce representatives of 

the 10th Field Regiment of the Royal Canadian Artillery who 

are seated in your gallery here today. 

 

The delegation includes Mr. Larry Schneider, honorary colonel, 

who members will recall had a distinguished career in public 

life, serving as both the mayor of Regina and also as a Member 

of Parliament for our city and a cabinet minister in the 

Government of Canada. With Mr. Schneider today are 

Lieutenant Colonel Henry Sobchyshyn; Lieutenant Colonel 

Gerry Carline; and Major Dave Black, past commanding 

officers of the regiment; Mr. Keith Inches, Major Keith Inches, 

curator of the military museum located at the Regina Armoury; 

and two currently active members, one of whom has served in 

Afghanistan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a few moments we will have an opportunity to 

more properly recognize the 100th anniversary of the 10th Field 

Regiment, and we warmly encourage all members of this 

Assembly to welcome these distinguished soldiers to their 

legislature today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the member from Regina South in welcoming these special 

guests to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and 

through you, I‟d like to introduce a special guest to the 

Assembly today, two special guests. Seated in the west gallery 

is a local business leader in the great city of Regina, Reg 

Howard, and joining him is, I believe, the three-time offensive 

lineman of the year, maybe four-time offensive lineman of the 

year for the CFL [Canadian Football League], and our own 

protector of the blind side here in Saskatchewan, the left tackle 

for the Saskatchewan Roughriders, no. 60, Gene Makowsky. I‟d 

ask all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s 

truly an honour for me to stand today and introduce to you and 

to the members of this House some very special people from 

Habitat for Humanity. And with us in your gallery today we 

have Barb Cox Lloyd, executive director of Saskatoon; Morris 

Sawchuk, board Chair of Prince Albert; Dennis Elko, executive 

director of Lloydminster; Dennis Coutts, CEO [chief executive 

officer] of Regina; Brian Martynook, Chair of Moose Jaw; 

Laurie Renton, Chair of Yorkton; Bob Linner, board Chair of 

Regina; as well as there are other Habitat members. 

 

But most importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have with us a 

very special couple and their family who are recipients of a 

Habitat home. And that is Fergus and Beatrice Littlechief are 

proud owners of a Habitat for Humanity home, and with them is 

their children, Dalreesha, Kasheena, Desirae, Victoria, Shanice, 

Terrence, and Nathan. And it‟s truly . . . This is their first time 

in their Legislative Assembly. Give us a wave, family, and 

thank you for coming. I hope you enjoy the proceedings. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Too, on behalf of your loyal opposition, I too would like to join 

in the minister welcoming the folks to their legislature, the 

Littlechief family there, and also the folks from Habitat for 

Humanity right across the province. And I know there‟s some 

other housing folks up there. 

 

You know, we have a proud history in this province of working 

with the groups in civil society, particularly Habitat for 

Humanity. I understand that we first started buying lots for 

them back in ‟94. And I know in my own riding in Saskatoon 

Centre, we‟re very proud of the ReStore facility where they 

reused an old curling rink and made really good use of that. 

And so we‟re very glad that they‟re here today. 

 

You know, civil society operators like them are very efficient, 

but they can also mobilize small armies to get the work done 

that needs to be done in this province. So I ask all members to 

join in welcoming the good folks here today. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister from 

Tourism and Parks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, it‟s my 

pleasure to introduce a couple of guests seated in your gallery. 

Joining us today is Mark Shriver. He‟s the Optimist 

International president and resides in Woodstock, Georgia, and 

he‟s accompanied by his wife, Patricia McKay. 

 

They are guests in Regina this week for the Optimist 

International world under 18 curling championships. This 

championship is taking place between March 30th and April 4th 

at the Callie Curling Club here in Regina. Twenty-four teams 

from three different countries, including two teams from Japan, 

are competing, Mr. Speaker. As you can imagine, there‟s not 

very many curling rinks in the state of Georgia. In fact I‟ve 

been told that there are none, Mr. Speaker. So Mark is looking 

forward to getting into the hack for the first time and throwing a 

curling rock. 

 

And I would invite all members not only to join me welcoming 



4670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

them, but I would invite all members and the public to attend 

part of the curling championship at the Callie Curling Club this 

week. And I‟d ask all members to join me in welcoming them 

to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I too would like to extend a hello and 

welcome to Saskatchewan and to Regina, to Mark and Patricia. 

I hope you enjoy your stay here in Regina and enjoy our 

beautiful province. And on behalf of the opposition, welcome. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I‟d like to join the minister and the member from Saskatoon 

Centre in welcoming our guests from Habitat for Humanity. 

Certainly, especially being a Regina person, especially Dennis 

Coutts and Bob Linner, but I‟d like to wish a special welcome 

to Beatrice and Fergus Littlechief, the premier family of 

seven-block Athol. They do a lot for the community, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s really good to see them here today in their 

legislature. So please join me in welcoming all these important 

guests, but especially Beatrice and Fergus Littlechief and their 

family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m pleased to introduce special guests of mine here today. And 

I‟d like to introduce — seated in your gallery — my father, 

Craik Wotherspoon, and his grandson, Eli Lahaye, my nephew. 

So welcome them. I think there‟s a day off work for the old guy 

here today. He‟s the principal up at Raymore School, and it‟s a 

pleasure to have him in the Assembly, and he keeps a keen eye 

to the proceedings. And we welcome them to the Assembly 

here today, thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the conditions of our 

highway. This particular petition pertains to Highway 123, Mr. 

Speaker, which is the only link to the outside world for the 

community of Cumberland House. And like many communities 

in the North, Mr. Speaker, there‟s only one road in and one road 

out to this community as well as many others. So, Mr. Speaker, 

this particular . . . and I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing of 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the 

good folks from Cumberland House. I so submit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This old guy is pleased 

to present a petition that was originated from the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. This petition deals with the implementation 

of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund. That would be the 

scholarship fund promised by the Sask Party in the 2007 general 

election. The prayer of the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today‟s signators are all from the great city of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of people in support of autism. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum strategy that is 

based on proven best practice, evidence-based research 

treatments, and programming; and given the complexity of 

the disorder and its treatments, that individualized funding 

concept be adapted for parents and guardians of autistic 

individuals. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by people from Regina, Qu‟Appelle, 

Balgonie, Moose Jaw, Rosetown, and Emerald Park. I so 

present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. I‟m presenting a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants. As the Assembly 

will know, in November of 2009 the Ministry of Education 

published a document where the government is considering 

changes that would drastically reduce the number of educational 

assistants in the province. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4671 

I so present on behalf of citizens from the city of Saskatoon. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition calling for the reinstatement of 

the domestic abuse outreach program. And we know that it 

provided a number of valuable services to women victims of 

domestic violence and their children and was a model program 

that probably should have been extended right throughout the 

province. I‟d like to read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: to cause the provincial government 

to reinstate the domestic abuse outreach program as a 

provincial government service and make it available in all 

parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is signed by the people of 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable tuition and 

a call on the Sask Party government to have their actions match 

their rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is being circulated by citizens 

of Saskatchewan because the Sask Party government amended 

the retention program to specifically exclude master‟s and 

Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduates and graduates from 

post-secondary institutions outside Saskatchewan. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good folks from 

Lumsden and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on Sask Party‟s lack of action with respect to 

climate change: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the government to undertake 

immediate actions to mitigate climate change by reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions, actions which will serve to 

protect Saskatchewan people from the significant costs to 

our economy, global security, and the quality of life which 

climate change threatens to bring about, and to also protect 

Saskatchewan people from longer and more frequent 

droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers which feed 

our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more frequent and 

more serious flooding, and loss of at least the southern part 

of Saskatchewan‟s valuable boreal forest which is 

treasured by so many in our province; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

a meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation and substantial and meaningful regulations to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made this serious and significant commitment, 

was serving as the leader of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition, to reduce our province‟s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent from the levels of greenhouse gas 

emissions which our province produced in the year 2007 

to meet said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions by the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from 

now or one short decade away; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring the 

Premier‟s solemnly pledged commitment and to set about 

the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province‟s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions, rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties to actually address 

this critically important issue which will directly affect our 

province‟s economy and the quality of life for all of our 

residents; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 



4672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

reduction targets which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that it generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan adapt to current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptation; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Muenster, Prince Albert, and Esterhazy. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition in support of maintaining quality 

health care services. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all recognize here 

that the utilization and value and full range of professional 

skills offered by health care providers is promoted to the 

address and retention and recruitment issues, and thereby 

ensuring safe staffing levels. We all hope that the Government 

of Saskatchewan pay heed to that. And also, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the government‟s essential services legislation is 

making a mockery out of the collective bargaining process in 

this province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective agreement with health care providers in this 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

again today signed by residents of Saskatchewan concerned 

about this government‟s disregard for constitutional, legal, and 

human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 

Muenster, Regina, and Vanscoy. And I so submit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive billion dollar deficits and the billion 

dollars of debt growth under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Maple 

Creek, Sedley, and Moosomin. I so submit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise again 

today to present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film 

and television industry. This petition deals with this 

government‟s failure to address critical issues to the film 

industry, which has driven jobs out of this province, and 

investments, and particularly in light of the closure of SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so submit. 

 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4673 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview 

 

Autism Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Autism 

Awareness Month and it kicks off with World Autism 

Awareness Day, April 2nd. This is the third United Nations 

sanctioned Autism Awareness Day, and it serves to raise the 

complex issues that families and individuals face when dealing 

with autism. Mr. Speaker, it‟s estimated that 1 in 110 children 

have autism spectrum disorder. Parents with autistic children 

have had to become educators, advocates, caregivers, and 

financiers. 

 

Last year I commented on the fact that parents want early 

diagnosis, appropriate scientifically validated treatment, and 

support for families both financial and emotional. This year 

nothing has changed. Parents and families are still asking for 

the same things. Petitions are being presented asking for a 

comprehensive autism spectrum disorder strategy that includes 

all of the above-mentioned pieces. The strategy should also 

address the need for parents of autistic children to have 

individualized funding as an option for accessing treatment and 

therapies for their children. 

 

Parents and families came to this legislature to ask for help. Mr. 

Speaker, hopefully the new money announced in this budget, 

added together with the three million from last year‟s, will 

actually help provide that help. My speech next year then, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, could be a celebration of real progress in 

diagnosis, treatment, and support of autistic individuals. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Although 

April 1st is best known as a day of fun and jokes, more notably 

it is the first day of Cancer Awareness Month. 

 

I know all in this Assembly and throughout this great province 

recognize that cancer is no April Fool‟s joke, nor is it a 

laughing matter. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would guess that every 

person in attendance or listening has been touched by this 

devastating disease. Many of these same people have witnessed 

the heroism of the victims and their families fighting cancer. 

Many of us have felt the pain as we watched loved ones fight or 

lose their battle. During this month of awareness, we recognize 

the many volunteers and organizations that work to fundraise, 

support families and patients affected by cancer, carry out 

research and cancer care. 

 

I am proud to be part of a government that takes cancer 

prevention, care, and treatment so seriously, but admittedly we 

have more to do. But our recently introduced tobacco 

legislation is a huge step in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken before in this Assembly about the 

choices we all make. And although victims and families 

fighting cancer could be bitter, often they rise to the challenge 

and choose to make things better. In the words chosen by 

Yorkton Terrier and leukemia patient Luke Boechler, you will 

not win because I will not lose. Mr. Speaker, I now wear an 

orange band on my wrist to recognize and support one such 

individual and family. Their struggle renews the memory of my 

family‟s own in the past. The colour is in recognition of those 

affected by leukemia. Luke, Jeannine, Brian, Paul, and Brittany 

— I wear this band for you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Coyote and Gopher Populations 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well today marks the 

end of the Saskatchewan Party‟s wily coyote killing program. 

After only five months, more than 30,000 coyotes have been 

killed. Taxpayers have been stuck with the bill for a half million 

dollars. 

 

Just last week, the Premier cut neighbourhood development 

programs to save $400,000. He cut the Aboriginal employment 

development program to save $700,000. Once again the right 

hand doesn‟t know what the other right hand is doing. 

 

Take the Minister of Agriculture. After paying people to kill 

coyotes, he proudly declares that gophers in Saskatchewan are 

now pests. Well perhaps some members opposite missed 

science class in high school or can‟t quite grasp the complicated 

nature of a simple food chain. But basic biology will tell you 

that if you kill thousands of predators, the populations that they 

prey on is likely to grow. Perhaps they should‟ve done some 

research before dropping hundreds of thousands of dollars into 

a program because then he would have found that both research 

and experience have proven time and again that bounty 

programs like this actually serve to increase the coyote 

population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating the Minister of Agriculture on seeing the light, 

cancelling this program, and wish him the best of luck in 

creating a new program to fix the increase in the gopher 

population. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of First 

Nations. 

 

100th Anniversary Salute 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

salute the 100th anniversary of the 18th Battery of the 10th 

Field Regiment of the Royal Canadian Artillery whose roots 

date back to April 1st, 1910 — 100 years ago today. 

 

In 1939 the 10th Field Brigade as it was then known, including 

the 18th Battery, was mobilized. It became part of the 2nd 

Anti-Tank Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery, Canadian 

Active Service Force and provided personnel for duty overseas 

in World War II. Today 18th Battery, 10th Field Regiment is 

still active, with gunners having served in Afghanistan and 

other countries with our Canadian forces. This makes it the 



4674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

longest continuously serving Canadian artillery unit in 

Saskatchewan and as such represents 100 years of gunner 

presence in the province and in the world. 

 

Our hats are off to the men and women of today who serve on 

our behalf. These are dedicated regular forces personnel and 

reserve volunteers who place themselves in harm‟s way to 

preserve our nation‟s freedom and bring peace to other nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is all too easy to think that war is a tragedy that 

happens someplace else without affecting us here in Canada. 

And the fact that our Canadian forces personnel willingly leave 

their families, their friends, and their communities to fight 

distant wars to protect others as well as ourselves is good reason 

to stop, to ponder, and to give thanks for their sacrifice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Taxes, Debt, and Interest Payments 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, a Regina and District Chamber of 

Commerce plan to eliminate education property taxes is 

generating a lot of interest. According to the Leader-Post, the 

chamber‟s big idea is to dedicate the savings from reduced 

payments on debt to reductions in education property tax. It‟s 

an intriguing idea, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier reportedly 

likes the concept. 

 

One small problem though, Mr. Speaker. Under this 

government, public debt is set to go up, not down. According to 

their own budget documents, Mr. Speaker, public debt is 

forecast to increase $695.1 million this year. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has no plans to decrease debt and in 

fact plans to increase public debt by a whopping $3.8 billion by 

2014, according to their own documents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With plans like that, the chamber‟s proposal won‟t be the only 

thing generating a lot of interest. As borrowing rates rise from 

historic lows, this government‟s growing debt problem will be 

generating larger and larger interest too — Mr. Speaker, larger 

and larger interest payments. Far from seeing that kind of tax 

cuts the chamber‟s suggesting, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

families will see instead tax increases. 

 

In fact you‟re starting to see it already, Mr. Speaker, as utility 

rate hikes go up, tuition fees go up, and other back door 

increases add to their daily costs. They don‟t like this Premier‟s 

concept of increasing public debt, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s why 

they‟re asking him, hey, what‟s the big idea? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Easter Celebrations 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

All around the world, people are preparing to celebrate one of 

the most important religious holidays of the Christian calendar 

year. This is not a single day celebration. It is an entire season 

in the Christian calendar year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, today is Holy Thursday. This day 

recognizes the last supper that Jesus shared with the Apostles 

when he broke bread and shared wine. This act is the basis for 

communion celebrations of Christians to this day. 

 

While spending time with your family and loved ones this 

weekend — whether it be over a family supper or sitting down 

to colour Easter eggs — be sure that you don‟t forget the reason 

for this holiday. Many people attend church on this special 

holiday to celebrate the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. 

And for others, this holiday is the season of Easter egg hunts, 

chocolate bunnies, and turkey suppers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it‟s very important that we 

remember that, by giving His life, Jesus Christ paid the price for 

our sins. I urge all members of this Assembly to keep the true 

meaning of Easter in mind while spending well-deserved time 

with their families during this first long weekend of spring. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Poisson D’Avril 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s April 1st, the feast of all fools 

or, as the French call it, poisson d‟avril. In centuries past, Mr. 

Speaker, people observe the day by tricking one another into 

going on ridiculous errands or seeking non-existent objects such 

as pigeon‟s milk or a biography of Eve‟s mother. It‟s a day rich 

in tradition, Mr. Speaker, and the Conservatives love tradition. 

So, we‟re not surprised to see the customs of old living on in 

the government ranks. 

 

One enterprising minister is on an errand to get millions from 

Ottawa for a domed stadium, but he may have to give up in 

sheer frustration. Not to be outdone, the SaskPower minister has 

gone fission for federal dollars to land a nuclear reactor or three, 

only to find that on the eve of poisson d‟avril that the special 

relationship was one that got away. 

 

So much for foolish errands, Mr. Speaker, how about 

non-existent objects? Well judging by how the Minister of 

Finance is balancing the province‟s books, the rainy day fund 

may soon fall into that category joining honest accounting, 

realistic spending predictions, and the minister‟s own reputation 

for fiscal prudence. 

 

And then there‟s the Premier, Mr. Speaker, the feast day‟s 

patron saint. From business successes to balanced budgets to 

political promises kept, when it comes to non-existent objects, 

no one tops him for tricks played on Saskatchewan‟s people. 

That‟s why they brought in the old saying, they brought the old 

saying back, Mr. Speaker: fool me once in 2007, shame on you; 

fool me twice in 2011, shame on me. Mr. Speaker, they won‟t 

be fooled again. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Opposition. 

 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4675 

Health Care Provision 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is 

to the Premier. In reading The Battlefords Daily News this 

morning, there‟s an interesting but shocking comment that is 

included in the newspaper. And I quote from the newspaper. It 

says: 

 

“I think there‟s going to have to be a discussion in this 

country (on that question) in a non-political way,” 

Gantefoer said. “There isn‟t a magic bullet. User fees have 

a role.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in another quote from the newspaper, it says, 

“User fees have to be part of the solution to cut health care 

costs, Finance Minister Rod Gantefoer said in North Battleford 

Wednesday.” 

 

My question to the Premier is this. We all know that user fees 

are the most insidious form of taxes. To the Premier: why are 

we considering that today? And why is his minister urging the 

public and this legislature to move to deterrent fees at this time? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I was indeed in North Battleford meeting with the 

citizens there in regard to the budget discussion, and one of the 

topics that came up was the issue of the cost of health care. I 

pointed to the fact that in Quebec that they were increasing or 

putting in user fees in that province. 

 

And I said that that was a problem and it‟s going to be a 

tremendous challenge in that province, and that is something 

that we are very fortunate that we don‟t have to put our 

attention to here in Saskatchewan. So that‟s what I said, Mr. 

Speaker, and I stand by those comments. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question to the minister is this. In the 

same newspaper story, and I quote, “Chamber First 

Vice-President Scott Campbell asked Gantefoer what can be 

done to curb „abuses in health care.‟” 

 

The answer, in quotes: “„I think there‟s going to have to be a 

discussion in this country (on that question) in a non-political 

way,‟ Gantefoer said.” 

 

Another quote, quoting you: “There isn‟t a magic bullet. User 

fees have a role.” Now I challenge the minister. Is he saying 

that the vice-president of the chamber, Scott Campbell, is not 

being accurate, or is it this minister? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 

recollection of the issue was somewhat different than what has 

been quoted, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I clearly articulated the 

fact that there‟s concern right across Canada about the rising 

costs of health care. At Whitehorse, the Finance ministers of 

Saskatchewan and all the other provinces, as well as the federal 

Finance minister, had comments in regard to the issue of the 

affordability of health care and the sustainability of it going 

forward. There certainly was a consensus, among all those 

present of every political stripe, that it had to be done, and the 

discussion should be done on a non-political basis because this 

is an issue right across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s true. I think we‟re going to have to 

cope with the issues of the affordability of health care, and 

we‟re going to have to face it sooner rather than later, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let‟s get it clear. Now the minister‟s 

saying he wants the discussion. That‟s where we started this. 

Why are we discussing the issue of deterrent fees when it 

wasn‟t mentioned in the budget? Why are we doing that now? 

 

My question to the minister is this. In 1984, the federal 

government, under the Canada Health Act, conducted research 

into deterrent fees, the very thing he‟s talking about, to make 

the system more efficient. And here‟s the result and I quote, 

“That deterrent fees, that they [referring to deterrent fees] are 

ineffective in controlling health costs.” If they are inefficient 

and it‟s not effective and by definition is a tax grab, that‟s what 

it is on the sick, why are you considering and why are you 

encouraging the debate? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the broad debate about 

the affordability for health care is an important issue in Canada. 

That‟s important, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to Quebec where 

user fees have been implemented by that government. In 

Saskatchewan, unequivocally, we‟re not interested in that 

scenario. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question 

to the Premier is this. Within one week of the budget being 

read, before the vote takes place today, we have discussion on 

harmonization of the taxes. We now have deterrent fees being 

discussed and promoted by that minister. We know that the 

Premier is not up on many of these topics. 

 

But I want to ask him this question: why, before the ink has 

dried on the budget, are we in discussion around two new taxes 

in this province? How does that happen? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, part of the 

process of going out and listening to the people of the province 

is to have a dialogue with them as we‟re going through this 

whole process. We‟ve done it before. We‟ve met with any 

number of organizations and entities. 

 

[Interjections] 

 



4676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

The Deputy Speaker: — Two points. I am having trouble 

hearing the Minister of Finance. And I‟d also like the Minister 

of Finance to direct his response through the Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when we went out across this province to talk about 

the budget, we wanted to make sure that we were in a position 

to listen to what the people were saying. Mr. Speaker, it is clear 

that there are issues that have to be addressed in the budgets of 

the future of this province and we have to build for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re not afraid to listen to what people are 

thinking and saying. And in terms of user fees, we are not 

interested. We‟re grateful we‟re not in the province of Quebec 

where that‟s been implemented by that government. In this 

government and in this administration, user fees are not on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Municipal Revenue Sharing 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a simple 

question to the minister: will he guarantee today that the 

government will deliver on their promise to provide 

municipalities with one full per cent of the PST [provincial 

sales tax] next year? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Yes. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister may 

beg to differ. When asked about municipal revenue sharing 

yesterday, and the Battleford news reports that he said, 

“Gantefoer hinted that might occur, but said everything depends 

on revenues.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know how well they do with their 

revenue projections. People in Saskatchewan ought to be 

awfully afraid. To the minister: how much can the people of 

Saskatchewan expect their taxes to go up next year because of 

this government‟s incompetence and their latest broken 

promise? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As we‟ve indicated repeatedly, we will be going to the 

full 1 per cent of PST next year, which is going to be a very 

significant increase for municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, we‟ve increased revenue 

sharing by 43 per cent over the last two years. And I would note 

for the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that his leader and 

members sitting on that side of the aisle voted to claw back $20 

million from North Battleford in revenue sharing over the 

course of their government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — They also indicated repeatedly, before they 

broke the latest promise, that they were going to do it. So why 

would anybody trust them at this point? And maybe the 

Minister of Finance is the honest one over there because this 

week he‟s introducing deterrent fees in health care. Last week 

he mused about the HST [harmonized sales tax], then the 

Premier shot him down. Now he‟s talking about municipal 

revenue sharing, only to get shot down again today. 

 

My question‟s to the minister: can he tell us today when he 

plans on implementing the HST? Can he tell us when 

municipalities can expect to receive their promised full 

percentage of PST? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And it is a pleasure to have the chance to confirm once 

again for the members opposite that next year we will going to 

the full one point of PST, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a commitment that 

we‟ve made and that frankly, Mr. Speaker, we had made a 

commitment that over the four years of our mandate we would 

get to that point, which is precisely what we‟re going to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Big River Saw Mill 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: 

will the government provide the new owners of the Big River 

mill with the timber rights they need to reopen the mill and get 

people back to work? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister from Energy 

and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, through the FMA [forest management 

agreement] reallocation process, we consulted with the industry 

widely. We made allocations to various companies. After that, 

there was a new entrant to that. We have preserved 200 000 

cubic metres for that entity if they‟re interested. We‟ve also 

shown a path towards more, with co-operation with First 

Nations, and potentially using pulp wood as well. So there is 

certainly a pathway to what the company in question is looking 

for, and we would be happy to talk with them about it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a media report 

indicated that Eacom Timber CEO Rick Doman says they‟ve 

been shut out of the process of allocating timber and treated 

poorly by this government. The report goes on to indicate that, 

“A letter is on its way to the Premier‟s office, asking them to 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4677 

deal with the issue or they‟ll be forced to move out of our 

province.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the owners move out of the province and the 

equipment in the Big River mill is sold off, this mill will never 

reopen. To the Premier: this is his last chance. Will he step in 

and force the minister to work with Eacom and find a solution 

that will reopen this mill? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 

and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

continue to have discussions with Eacom with respect to the 

potential reopening of the mill. 

 

But I would remind members opposite that in the MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] that they signed on the eve of 

the last election that would‟ve committed $100 million of 

taxpayers‟ money to a P.A. [Prince Albert] restart that would 

never have happened, within that MOU also it contained the 

fact that the Big River facility would never open under the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. They would make sure that that mill 

remained closed forever. Well the people on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, don‟t . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would . . . Order. Order. I‟m having 

trouble hearing the Minister of Energy and Resources. Would 

you like to finish your statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — It‟s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people on 

this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, the people in the 

Government of Saskatchewan certainly are supportive of 

initiatives to reopen that facility. We‟re in discussions with 

Eacom with respect to that. We‟ve shown them a pathway 

towards the amount of allocation that is necessary to do that, 

and we‟ll be happy to discuss it with them further. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well I don‟t think too many people buy that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The minister once described the CEO of 

Eacom Timber as a shady character, but others apparently do 

not agree. Eacom Timber was able to get finances to buy 

Domtar assets in Eastern Canada. The Government of Ontario 

and the Quebec government both support the deal. But thanks to 

this government‟s incompetence of handling this issue, the Big 

River mill is near the point of no return. If the Premier doesn‟t 

step in, the mill will stay closed forever. 

 

Again, to the Premier: is this his idea of building an economy 

and managing the finances of our province? How does keeping 

hundreds of people out of work, unable to pay taxes, help our 

provincial economy and our finances in this province? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 

and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, through the reallocation 

process, we widely consulted with the industry. We have 

industry players, First Nations entities that are very, very happy 

and very, very supportive of the changes that have been made. 

In addition to that, there has been 200 000 cubic metres that 

have been reserved should there be an opportunity for a restart 

of that facility. There‟s also opportunity for any company or 

any entity that is interested in restarting that facility to work 

with First Nations and Métis companies that are interested in 

this as well. So there is clearly a path available to Eacom or 

anyone else to restart that facility. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Autism Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today is 

World Autism Day, so my question is about the autism strategy 

that has been left in limbo. It‟s a year and a half ago that the 

government had an autism strategy on paper. Now, people 

working with children and living with children with autism 

have seen nothing from this government. The new 

announcement of 2.5 million into the autism strategy, what is 

that going to do and when is it going to start? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to 

stand and compare our record regarding autism services in the 

province compared to the members opposite when they were in 

government. Let‟s review. When they were in government, they 

put only $500,000 into autism in the last couple years of their 

government, Mr. Speaker. In the first two years we put in 3 

million; we‟ve topped it up by another 2.5. That‟s $5.5 million 

going into autism services in Saskatchewan as compared to the 

500,000 under their government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let‟s review what one person had to say after the budget. 

Theresa Savaria said, “It‟s the most exciting day of my life,” 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s what the people of Saskatchewan are 

saying about our strategy on autism. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We‟ve had 

parents here in the gallery living with children with autism, 

trying to deal with the lack of services for autism and their 

children and families, and they don‟t see any of this happening. 

They participated in getting the strategy. Nothing has come out 

of that strategy. Nobody trusts that the 2.5 will change anything. 

So we‟re asking the minister, what will change? There‟s health 

districts, to deal with their budget deficits, that have already 

said, we‟re not going to fill those autism positions. They‟ve said 

that. So how will this strategy move anything forward? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have moved in 

the last two and a half years. Unfortunately under the previous 

government, they had done virtually nothing in the autism front. 

We have increased the number of people that will offer services 



4678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

for children that suffer from autism. There is more work to do. 

We‟ve put in an extra two and a half million. That‟s $5.5 

million, Mr. Speaker. And I will tell you that parents with 

children of autism are very pleased with the movement that we 

have made. 

 

I haven‟t heard from the member opposite. Does she support the 

$5.5 million? I guess we‟ll find out later today when we vote on 

the budget and she stands in her place and votes against parents 

with kids of autism and the 5.5 million we put in the budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Financial Reporting Practices and State of 

the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week we saw the Sask 

Party substantially change the government‟s accounting 

practices. This is in part why we call this a budget that can‟t be 

trusted from a government that can‟t be trusted with the 

finances of this province. 

 

To the minister: why is he changing the accounting and 

reporting rules halfway through this government‟s term? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we 

continue to report to the people of Saskatchewan on the same 

basis as people have generally reported in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I suspect that the member 

opposite is speaking about is the fact that we have changed the 

way entities can amortize their capital purchases. And if that‟s 

what you‟re talking about, that‟s an important change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a change because it simply makes sense. If 

Crown entities can go out and borrow money for projects that 

they entertain, it makes sense for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to make sure that the amortization of those costs 

are properly covered. And that is a standard accounting 

procedure, not only in governments, but across the business 

community and it makes common sense to everyone that sees it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister highlights just one of the 

accounting changes. Certainly that‟s one of them that we‟re 

highlighting. There‟s a few others as well as the capital 

amortization; it‟s the off-loading of expenditures out of the 

operational fund. It‟s the removal of debt reporting. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party didn‟t make these abrupt 

changes because the changes are consistent with some level of 

public sector accounting. The reality is that they made these 

changes out of political self-interest because they failed 

miserably at managing the province‟s finances. These changes 

were made for one reason: to conceal the true state of the 

province‟s finances from Saskatchewan people. Why doesn‟t 

the minister simply come clean? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — This budget has been presented in 

terms of the accountability that has traditionally been in this 

legislature, and we‟ll continue to do so and are pleased and 

proud of the budget as we presented it and the solid accounting 

procedures that are embedded in it, Mr. Speaker. The 

consultation process is something that‟s important and make 

sure that it‟s done in an open and transparent way, Mr. Speaker, 

and we continue to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can compare the green sheets from our budget 

with the green sheets from the 2007-08 budget and, Mr. 

Speaker, the methodology is entirely consistent over that period 

of time. And we‟re very proud of the budget that we‟ve tabled 

and are going to vote on today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that this 

government‟s consistent with is going in the wrong direction 

and becoming less transparent and less accountable to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Here‟s what the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants 

has to say about changes to public sector accounting. And I 

quote: 

 

For each change in accounting policy in the current period, 

the following information should be disclosed: 

 

(a) a description of the change; 

(b) the effect of the change on the financial statements of 

the current period; and 

(c) the reason for the change. 

 

None of these, Mr. Speaker, not a single one of them has been 

included in this budget or provided to Saskatchewan people. To 

the minister: if the government‟s aim wasn‟t to conceal the true 

state of the province‟s finances, why didn‟t he follow the 

standards of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, our government has 

consistently improved upon the reporting methodology that is in 

place to the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, the former government when they tabled their last 

budget only made a one-year projection of estimate of expenses 

and revenues. Mr. Speaker, we‟re doing a four-year projection 

and trying to be even more forward-looking and planning more 

effectively and efficiently as we go forward. Mr. Speaker, we‟ll 

have our budget stand with any in terms of the methodologies 

and accountability. The openness and transparency of our 

budget is beyond repair . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Right, Mr. Speaker. Don‟t listen to the 

chartered accountants. Listen to this minister, Mr. Speaker. 

Listen to this minister who, on a weekly basis, is introducing 

new taxation, tax grabs, new policies, and broken promises, Mr. 

Speaker. Listen to this minister. Don‟t listen to the chartered 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4679 

accountants. 

 

Listen, Mr. Speaker, when you make a change in public 

accounting, you need to explain what the change is, what effect 

it will have on your books, and why you made the change. But 

the minister refuses to do that. Mr. Speaker, they‟re using 

accounting trickery. What effect will it have? It‟ll hide the true 

state of our finances and the true level of deficit and our debt, 

understating one and hiding the other. 

 

And why did they make the change? Because they‟re 

completely incompetent as it relates to the management of our 

finances. To the minister: why did he table a budget that he 

knew was full of accounting tricks and he knew that 

Saskatchewan people can‟t trust? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, since the election in 

2007, this government has made a number of improvements to 

the province of Saskatchewan‟s fiscal position. Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, we reduced the government General Revenue 

Fund debt by 40 per cent, reducing it over $2 billion. Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s resulting in saving of interest rates of some $67 

million this year, and that certainly is an important 

improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did the largest personal income tax reduction 

in the history of Saskatchewan — $300 million — removing 

80,000 people from the income tax rolls. 

 

We‟ve done all of those things, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve invested 

almost $3 billion in infrastructure of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that certainly is something that‟s important 

to recognize. We‟ve got the best job creation in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker — all important initiatives as a result of the budget, 

Mr. Speaker, that we tabled last week. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re very, very proud of that budget and 

will continue to move it forward. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

spins supposed tax cuts at the same time as he‟s introducing 

insidious deterrent fees for health care, at the same time as he‟s 

putting a tax grab across families with HST, inviting this 

discussion for Saskatchewan people. This member has no 

credibility on these fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here‟s what we have today: a massive deficit for the second 

year in a row, rising debt by the billion, Mr. Speaker, and a 

budget full of accounting tricks intended to hide the true state of 

Saskatchewan‟s finances. 

 

It‟s funny, Mr. Speaker, how history has a funny way of 

repeating itself. It would appear that the Don Gass Commission 

of 1992 — in my hand right here — has new relevance once 

again, Mr. Speaker, as we see a government retreat to the same 

kind of accounting tricks that the Devine government did, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister, to the minister: why is he returning to Grant 

Devine‟s style of accounting? Hasn‟t his party learned any error 

in their ways? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in just a few 

hours the members opposite, members opposite are going to 

have their chance for redemption. They‟re going to have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the opposition to 

give the same respect that was given to the member when he 

was asking questions, so we could hear the answer. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The members opposite are going to have 

the chance for some redemption because while they were the 

Government of Saskatchewan, they left behind a massive 

infrastructure deficit: crumbling highways, crumbling health 

care facilities, crumbling education, no revenue sharing deals 

for municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They left behind high taxes for families. They left behind 

80,000 more low-income people on the tax rolls than exist now. 

They left behind more debt, Mr. Speaker — debt that we‟ve 

paid off to the tune of $2.6 billion. They left behind a have-not 

Saskatchewan that they presided over for years. They left 

behind their record of out-migration of our young people. They 

left behind a terrible job creation record, Mr. Speaker.  

 

In a few hours they‟ve got a chance to vote for a budget, the 

third budget of this government . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

opposition not to all be yelling from their seats. I can‟t hear the 

person that has the floor. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think they 

want to hear this, but in a few minutes they‟ve got the chance 

for that redemption, the chance to vote for a third in a string of 

three budgets that fixes the NDP [New Democratic Party] mess 

that‟s left behind and has made this province a leader in the 

nation. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 

order the answers to questions 1,137 through 1,201. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered 

questions from 1,037 to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Pardon? 

I had trouble hearing; I apologize. Can you repeat? 

 

Mr. Weekes: — 1137 through 1201. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Through 1201. 

 

 



4680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Yates.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

budget lays out our government‟s plan to move the province 

forward. Today I had the honour and the opportunity to attend a 

government announcement, and I‟m going to read some of the 

information that was presented this morning. Government of 

Saskatchewan helps build 20 homes for families in need: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is providing $1 million 

to help Habitat for Humanity Saskatchewan affiliates build 

safe, affordable . . . [housing] for 20 lower-income 

families . . . This funding is in addition to $1 million for 

Habitat that was committed to build 20 homes on March 

30 . . . 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 40 homes for families so much 

in need. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I‟ve had the opportunity to attend the key ceremonies for 

Habitat for Humanity in Regina and it‟s a wonderful 

opportunity to see the joy and the expectation on the families‟ 

faces as they receive the keys to their new homes. Those 

families have had the opportunity to participate by contributing 

sweat equity to their homes and also making a commitment to 

help in further Habitat projects. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 

what our government is all about. It‟s about presenting and 

helping families with a hand up, not a handout. Habitat for 

Humanity is a wonderful opportunity for us to partner with 

people within the community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has spent a considerable 

effort in the past year maintaining and enhancing 

Saskatchewan‟s economic advantage through lowered property 

taxes, income tax, and a massive reduction in the provincial 

debt, plus a record investment in infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the one area I would like to discuss is our 

seniors. While the previous government talked about a plan for 

seniors, our government is actually developing a plan for 

seniors. And one of those priorities is the creation of the senior 

care strategy. The senior care strategy will identify and address 

gaps in the current continuum of care provided through home 

care, community care, and long-term care. And this strategy 

will focus on developing an immediate and long-term care plan 

that addresses the care needs of our aging population. 

 

Now improving the coordination of long-term care beds to 

allow our senior couples to stay together, supporting non-profit 

agencies that provide long-term care, and working with the 

federal government to increase long-term care capacity on First 

Nation reserves, we have undertaken a pilot project to provide 

government funding for level 3 and level 4 beds in personal 

care homes to reduce wait times for long-term care beds. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, our government is working with the regional 

health authorities, community-based agencies, and senior 

organizations to create this senior care strategy for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now as part of the government‟s strategy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I was appointed the Legislative Secretary for long-term care 

initiatives and have been working on the development of this 

initiative to form the development of the province‟s senior care 

strategy. This strategy will ensure that Saskatchewan seniors 

have the necessary access to health care programs and services 

today and in the years to come. Now our mothers and our 

fathers and our grandmothers and our grandfathers deserve the 

best care that we are able to provide. 

 

Now my work relates to the long-term care initiative, and it 

includes research and consultations to identify the needs of our 

seniors. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to be able to meet 

and listen to as many seniors and other interested individuals 

and organizations, we conducted consultations across the 

province. Now last fall these consultations were held within 13 

communities, and I‟ve also had ongoing consultations with 

individuals up until last week. These consultations also were 

conducted with health care providers and other individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of 

Health, I‟ve had the privilege of travelling across this wonderful 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, over 49 per cent 

of our seniors live outside of an urban setting, so it was 

imperative that I went out. And I had the opportunity to meet 

and listen to seniors, individuals, and organizations. They 

needed to share with me their concerns and some of their ideas 

of how we could provide adequate care and proper care for 

seniors within their communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seniors travelled a fair distance to be able to come 

and talk to us. They travelled, you know, up to one and a half to 

two hours to be able to share with their concerns. Now our 

government is listening to seniors through these consultations. 

Seniors‟ voices are being heard and this is the first time. 

 

They shared with me that. They said, do you know what? 

We‟ve never had anyone come and ask us what we think. This 

is the first government that has ever gone out to the community 

and asked people what they think. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

this is great strides because our government is looking forward 

to building a better life for everyone in Saskatchewan. We are 

working to reduce wait times, recruit more health care 

providers, and retain more graduates, and improve our 

long-term care facilities. 

 

As our province moves forward, Mr. Speaker, our seniors are 

going to begin to enjoy a better life. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

so proud that our government has put together a balanced, 

forward-looking, and responsible budget. Our government is 

ensuring that no one is being left behind. 

 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4681 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am so proud and so pleased to be able to 

support the budget that our Saskatchewan government has 

presented. I will be voting in favour of the 2010-2011 

provincial budget. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed my pleasure to rise today and join in the discussion on 

the budget today. I‟d like to first take this opportunity to thank 

my wife, Michelle, who‟s a tremendous support for me. And 

she works hard and owns her own business in Saskatchewan 

here, and she always allows me to do the things that I need to 

do, travelling around Saskatchewan, and is very forgiving on 

that. So I thank her for that. 

 

And additionally I‟d like to thank Rose Rothenburger who‟s 

worked in the constituency office in Prince Albert Northcote for 

a number of years. She does an absolutely tremendous job. 

She‟s a tremendous asset to the community as a whole and 

certainly to me in particular, so I‟d like to thank her for that. 

 

Now I‟d like to speak to what the government‟s doing with this 

budget, with this budget document because, if you look at the 

document itself, it is entirely dishonest. And why is it 

dishonest? Why is this a dishonest budget? Why is this a 

dishonest document? 

 

Well for a couple of reasons. One, they come out and say that 

somehow it‟s balanced, which everybody in Saskatchewan now 

knows it‟s not, and they continue to say it. But that they 

actually use taxpayer dollars to put up billboards to tell the 

people that they‟re reducing the debt in the province of 

Saskatchewan is absolutely terrible. But one thing that gets 

better over time is that fewer and fewer people believe it. 

 

Now if you look at the billboards, they say they‟ve reduced the 

debt for the Government of Saskatchewan by 42 or whatever 

per cent. Now I wonder if they‟re going to use the same bottle 

of whiteout that they‟ve used in their budget document to 

whiteout those billboards now because I still see them up. And 

the billboards are dishonest as well, and they‟re dishonest for a 

couple of reasons. 

 

If you look at page 62 in their own budget document, it says 

that in 2009 the total debt of the province of Saskatchewan, the 

General Revenue Fund is $7.7 billion. Next year, it‟s $8.1 

billion. The year after that, it‟s $8.8 billion. It gains another 

billion dollars and goes to $9.8 billion in 2012. Another $1.2 

billion is added to that in 2013, and another point nine billion 

dollars or $900 million added to that total in 2014. So you‟ve 

got, on an almost annual basis for the next four years, an 

increase in the public debt, the province of Saskatchewan, by $1 

billion a year. 

 

And the Premier has the nerve to take out billboards all over 

Saskatchewan saying that they‟ve paid down debt and that 

they‟ve reduced the debt in Saskatchewan. Those billboards are 

false, completely untrue. Now that‟s one reason why this budget 

document is an absolute falsehood. 

 

Another reason is because they‟ve taken $30 million from forest 

fire suppression. They‟ve taken it out. Now why would they do 

that? Why would they take out $30 million from a program 

when it‟s been budgeted the same way for years? Why would 

they do it? Is it because they know full well what the fire 

season‟s going to be like? Or should they have budgeted a 

reasonable amount for fire suppression? 

 

What have they done? They‟ve cut $12 million for staff in the 

North. Now I don‟t know how this fits into their grand scheme 

in terms of forestry, but it seems to me like they‟ve got a policy 

here for harvesting the forest, and that is to allow it to burn to 

the ground because if you don‟t budget for fire suppression, 

that‟s what happens. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Will the member state his point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, during the debate over the last few 

minutes, the member for Saskatoon Northwest very openly gave 

the finger to the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. That is 

a very offensive action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I‟ll ask 

the members to come to order. I will ask the member for Regina 

Rosemont to come to order. There‟s a point of order being 

stated; I would like to be able to hear it. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The action 

was very, very offensive and totally unacceptable in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the member assures me that there was no such gesture given to 

the House . . .  

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I will ask the 

member from Regina Rosemont to come to order. This will be 

the last warning. We‟re dealing with a point of order. Order. I 

will ask the member from Athabasca to come to order. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

member assures me that he did not do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Having not witnessed it, what 

happens in this Chamber . . . I would ask all members that it is a 

place to be treated with respect on both sides. And since I never 

seen it, this will have to be an issue between the members. I will 

ask the member from Prince Albert Northcote to continue on 

with the debate. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 



4682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, during the immediate proceedings that were 

taking place in the House with the heckling back and forth, the 

member from Regina Rosemont clearly said in the House that 

. . . and he accused the member from Saskatoon Northwest of 

lying, Mr. Speaker. I ask that he withdraw that remark and 

apologize unequivocally to the Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d just like to say that the member 

from Regina Rosemont had just seen a very vile act in this 

Assembly. The member failed to own up to it. There were 

comments back and forth from both sides, Mr. Speaker, all of 

which would have been out of line. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — As Speaker, I never witnessed or 

could hear, because of the yelling going on, of what happened. I 

would be very careful of members making accusations on both 

sides, going back and forth. And since I could not hear or did 

not see anything of that, of either nature, I would ask that we 

resume debate, the Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will certainly 

continue to enlighten further the folks of Saskatchewan about 

why this budget document is a falsehood, why it‟s untrue for a 

number of reasons. 

 

And I‟d just gotten into . . . With the forestry suppression, what 

they‟ve done is they‟ve taken money that they should be 

budgeting for, in forest fire suppression, and hidden it from the 

people of Saskatchewan. They‟ve taken it off the books when 

they know full well they should be budgeting for it. So there‟s 

$30 million right there. 

 

Additionally what they‟ve done is gone out to different school 

boards and the School Boards Association of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and they‟ve said, you know, we‟ll hope that you 

bargain with the teachers and come to some resolution before 

the end of the budget year, but we‟re not going to provide any 

money — wink-wink, nudge-nudge. You‟ll get it at some point, 

but we don‟t want to have to budget for it because it‟s going to 

turn this budget into a $1 billion deficit budget. They don‟t 

want to have to do it. And so how can you trust a government 

who will not budget for expenditures that they know will take 

place in the coming year? 

 

If you look at health care workers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], 

SEIU-West [Service Employees International Union], doctors, 

their contract has all been due for a number of years. And what 

has the government done to budget for the increase in 

expenditures that will be required to pay for the salary 

increases, the back pay for the contract? 

 

[11:15] 

 

What‟s that going to cost the tax payers of the province of 

Saskatchewan? That number should be included in the budget. 

You should budget for expenditures you know you‟re going to 

have to pay. And so again, the reason they‟ve pulled these 

numbers out of their budget and not put them in their document 

is because they‟re trying to hide what is going to end up being a 

$1 billion deficit budget again. 

 

So this document is totally dishonest. They‟re trying to pull the 

wool over the people of Saskatchewan‟s eyes, but it doesn‟t 

work. It doesn‟t work because if you do a little bit of research, it 

takes about three seconds to turn to page 62. And on page 62, it 

says that the government debt is going to go, from 2009 to 

2014, from $7.7 billion to $11.9 billion — an enormous 

increase for the debt in the province of Saskatchewan. And so it 

is with great frustration that we talk about what they‟re doing 

here today in the budget document to hide the debt in the 

province of Saskatchewan and the deficit in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if I could, I‟d like to spend some portion of my speech 

talking about constituency of Prince Albert Northcote, city of 

Prince Albert and area, because it‟s the job of the opposition to 

hold the government to account for the promises that they 

make. And I‟m going to speak to my particular region and the 

promises that were made there because if you look back at the 

election that was won by some 61 seats by the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton, you‟ll note that he made a very specific 

promise. He took out an ad in the Daily Herald and the ad said 

that, “A vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and people 

working.” 

 

And so I‟m wondering : we‟ve seen three budgets now. And 

I‟m wondering where in this document — if he could point to it, 

I‟d appreciate it — where in this document he says he‟s going 

to fulfill that promise because it doesn‟t exist in here. They 

provide no funding, no ability for the forestry sector to move 

forward. And certainly it turns out that a vote for the minister or 

the member from . . . the former minister, the member from 

Carlton is not a vote for the mill open and people working at all. 

In fact it was a vote to close the mill and move it from 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That‟s true also with the way they‟ve handled the file on 

forestry in the town of Big River, the Wapawekka saw mill, the 

list goes on and on. Now if that one very large broken promise, 

where you have 700 direct employees in a city of 35,000 isn‟t 

enough, they broke two other very big promises now. 

 

Another promise that was broken was the Premier flew into the 

province or into the city of Prince Albert unannounced, again 

without any consultation with the city, and said that they would 

provide airport improvements if they were elected because they 

think that Prince Albert is the gateway to the North. It‟s had that 

moniker for 50 years, but they think it‟s the gateway to the 

North, and it‟s news to them, and so it should have an airport 

that‟s improved, a better terminal, longer runway, etc. So they 

made that promise. 

 

And once again I see nowhere in this document, the third 

budget document that they‟ve released, that would indicate that 

they‟re going to provide any funding whatsoever to make 

airport improvements in the city of Prince Albert. It‟s 

exceedingly frustrating for the people there to have voted for 

the Saskatchewan Party and then have it turn out to be for 

reasons that are not true, because they absolutely refuse to keep 

their promise. 

 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4683 

Now additionally the Premier again flew into Prince Albert and 

stood on the bridge with the then mayor Stiglitz and declared 

that Prince Albert should have a second bridge because it‟s the 

size of the community and the growth that‟s going to happen 

and it should have a second bridge. And he thought it‟d be a 

good opportunity for a photo op and to win some votes, and so 

he made that promise. And so what has happened to that 

promise? If you look in this document, their own document, 

there is absolutely no mention of a second bridge for Prince 

Albert. And when you ask the minister responsible he says, well 

they‟ll have to fit it in with all the other expenditures they‟re 

making. 

 

And so once again it turns that the Premier comes into the city 

of Prince Albert and says something that they had no intention 

of keeping. Because after record revenue years, two of them in 

a row for the province of Saskatchewan, they can‟t afford it. 

And it‟s because of their absolute inability to manage the 

finances in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now one thing that they did provide for Prince Albert in this 

budget document was a cut, a cut of $165,000 to the P.A. River 

Bank Development Authority. Now the authority does many 

things for people on the ground in Prince Albert. And that 

money could be used to help many, many families with a hand 

up so that they can own their own home, so that they can 

become gainfully employed, so that they can improve their own 

lives. And so the Premier‟s got $7 million to spend on a tent in 

Vancouver that‟s taken down now, and he races home and cuts 

$165,000 from programs for people on the ground in Prince 

Albert to benefit them. It‟s absolutely shocking. 

 

And if the $7 million tent isn‟t shocking enough, the Premier of 

the province of Saskatchewan has an image consultant in the 

United States that they pay over $500,000 a year to — $46,000 

a month. Now if he would just take a break from the image 

consultant for four months, it would pay for this program that 

helps dozens and dozens of families in Prince Albert on a daily 

basis. And so you wonder why the people in Prince Albert 

agree that this budget document is absolutely untrue. 

 

Now if you look at the career of the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Carlton, he made that promise and turned out to not 

keep it. In fact they did the exactly the opposite after the 

election. I think after the Premier made the decision to remove 

him from cabinet, leaving no cabinet representation from the 

third-largest city in the province of Saskatchewan or anywhere 

around there. Same holds true for the fourth-largest city in 

Saskatchewan; they don‟t have cabinet representation either. 

 

But if you look at what‟s gone on with the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, they, I think, forced him to second the motion 

on this budget. And why do I say that? Because they knew that 

this budget was false. It‟s a false document. It‟s absolutely 

untrue. And so they thought that he would be a good martyr 

because they‟ve already sold him down the river. They don‟t 

think he can win. And so why would you jeopardize anybody‟s 

career in seconding this document? The Finance minister‟s got 

to do it; that‟s his job. But who you pick to second it, I think, is 

a pretty interesting choice. 

 

And so that‟s where they‟ve . . . that‟s the respect they have for 

the member from Prince Albert Carlton. And unfortunately for 

him, I think that‟s going to be borne out in the next election in 

Prince Albert. We‟ve got a great candidate there in Ted 

Zurakowski, who‟s a city councillor. Certainly going to win that 

riding if he puts in the work, which I know he will. 

 

Now if you look at some of the other things they‟ve done and 

look at the budget cuts that they‟ve made, they‟ve increased the 

budget to the Premier‟s office. But the Aboriginal employment 

development program which would cost, you know, a little bit 

over the price of an image consultant in the United States, that 

program gets cut. And what that program does is it helps 

Aboriginal people again with their employment. And we have 

an economy that requires — because of the policies of the NDP, 

we have a growing economy — that requires additional 

workers. 

 

And what they‟re saying in Prince Albert Northcote very 

specifically is that the Premier can spend $50,000 and go to 

Toronto to try to recruit workers there and ends up spending 

about $10,000 a worker or $20,000 a worker to recruit them, 

but he can‟t come to P.A. He can‟t come to P.A. He won‟t put 

any money into programs like the Aboriginal employment 

development program, like the River Bank Development 

Authority, that helps people gain gainful employment right here 

in Saskatchewan. So you‟ve got a great, tremendous pool of 

talented people who are being overlooked by this Premier in 

Prince Albert Northcote. And it‟s shameful. And it‟s 

unfortunate. And it‟s a frustration that I hear on a near daily 

basis in the city of Prince Albert. 

 

Now what else have they cut? They cut early learning and care, 

$2 million, $2 million out of early learning and care, when if 

you do any research at all on early learning and care, you‟ll 

learn this: that investments by government in early learning and 

care pay back the jurisdiction at a rate of 6 to 1. So if you invest 

the $2 million that they pull out, you get back $12 million in 

benefit. Seems like a no-brainer. 

 

But unfortunately Sask Party math doesn‟t allow for them to 

take part in that initiative. In fact they cut it. They cut literacy 

initiatives. Again it speaks to people in Prince Albert Northcote 

and their ability to gain gainful employment and better their 

lives by learning to read, getting their Grade 12, and getting a 

job. He‟s got all kinds of money to fly to Toronto to recruit 

workers, and nothing for the city of Prince Albert for literacy 

initiatives. 

 

They cut employment development, work readiness programs 

by 2.8 million. They cut the Valley View Centre by 1.5 million. 

And they cut $8 million from CBOs [community-based 

organizations] for people with disabilities. 

 

So if you look at that, the list of folks that I just mentioned 

where they found that it was important to make budgetary cuts: 

it‟s Aboriginal employment development; it‟s the P.A. River 

Bank Development authority; it‟s early learning and care; it‟s 

literacy initiatives; it‟s seniors‟ income plan; it‟s employment 

development; it‟s the Valley View Centre; and it‟s CBOs 

programs for people with disabilities. 

 

What kind of mean-spirited government balances or it attempts 

to balance — it‟s a $623 million deficit that we‟ll find is a $1 

billion deficit by the end of the year — what government 



4684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

decides that it‟s okay to try to balance the budget on the backs 

of the disadvantaged people in the province of Saskatchewan? 

Who would do that? It‟s sad that that‟s where they chose to 

make their budget cuts. But I think it speaks volumes of who 

they are and what they are. 

 

Now I think it‟s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 

know a number of things. Now it‟s unfortunate that we‟ve got a 

situation where you‟ve got now a budget document that can‟t be 

trusted brought to you by a government that can‟t be trusted. 

And it speaks of the leadership of that government. 

 

But if you look at the reasons why they can‟t balance the 

budget, you have to look at what the history of the leadership is 

in that party. And so you look at the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan whose history is this: when he worked in this 

building as a ministerial assistant, signed for $19,000 worth of 

alcohol that was taken from the liquor stores in Saskatchewan. 

And what we‟ve asked him to do is pay it back. 

 

Simply, the headline in The StarPhoenix was simply “Cause for 

jailing” and so that anybody that was associated with the theft 

of that alcohol in the province of Saskatchewan should be 

jailed. And so when you‟ve got a Premier who was caught with 

his hand in the cookie jar, I think he should pay it back. I think 

it‟s very simple. I think he ought to pay it back, and I think he 

owes it to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

His next venture . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s a well-known tradition in the House that you can‟t do 

indirectly what you can‟t do directly. The member from P.A. 

Northcote just stated that it‟s a well-known fact that the Premier 

had his hand in the cookie jar. Mr. Speaker, that‟s trying to do 

indirectly what you cannot do directly. I ask that the member 

withdraw that comment and apologize unequivocally. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member was simply using a well-known analogy that‟s used for 

many, many things. Doesn‟t necessarily have to have a negative 

connotation, Mr. Speaker. If the member opposite is putting a 

negative connotation on something said by the member, that‟s 

his own interpretation of a metaphor or a phrase used for many, 

many years. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is simply a 

comment being used by the member that‟s been used for many, 

many years by many, many people. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — On the point of order, I‟ve listened to 

both sides and I‟ve also listened to what the member was 

saying. And I will state that the person in question, the Premier, 

has never been charged, and I feel that the member . . . The 

point of order is well taken, that you can‟t do indirectly what 

you won‟t do directly. So I would ask the member to withdraw 

that remark. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Which other remark, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The one with the hand in the cookie 

jar. I would ask him, and apologize. 

 

Mr. Furber: — When I said that the Premier had his hand in 

the cookie jar, with respect to the booze, I withdraw that remark 

and apologize. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Thank you, member from Prince 

Albert Northcote, and I recognize him for the budget debate. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Now that‟s a part of the history of the Premier 

of Saskatchewan. We‟ll move on to his next position after he 

left the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And that‟s to get a golden parachute and to start . . . $150,000 

of taxpayers‟ money that was used to fund the guitar museum in 

Swift Current. And it‟s been well documented that he had stated 

in his claim that there would be 40,000 visitors to the guitar 

museum in his first year. And he is about as accurate with that 

forecast as the member from Kindersley was on his $3 billion 

potash forecast because there are about . . . less than 3,000 

people attended the museum, and it closed down and moved out 

of Saskatchewan. And so that‟s sort of the second of his most 

recent jobs. He went from that to starting an outdoor adventure 

company which, within a couple of short years, failed as well. 

 

And so to get to the budget and why it affects the people of 

Saskatchewan in a negative way is quite simple. He failed as a 

ministerial assistant. He failed in his guitar museum . . . can‟t 

sell country music to Swift Current. And he failed in an 

adventure company. And then he became elected. And so that‟s 

his history. 

 

And so whose fault is it that we have a budget document that‟s 

false? You can hardly blame him. That‟s all he knows in his 

history, is a series of failures. Now it‟s unfortunate, but that‟s 

the effects that it has on the people of Saskatchewan. And I 

think they deserve to know. And they‟re asking the question of 

me is . . . in terms of when he‟s going to pay the money back. 

He‟s got $150,000 of taxpayers‟ money to kill a guitar museum 

and $19,000 in booze. And people are asking me when he‟s 

going to pay it back. So I‟m hopeful that we see some initiative 

very soon where the Premier is going to volunteer to pay the 

money back. 

 

Now if you look at the province of Saskatchewan and what 

they‟ve done with the forestry industry in Saskatchewan, you‟ll 

see clearly . . . we already went over the ad that was taken out: 

“A vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and people 

working.” But the member from Carlton didn‟t stop there. His 

first job was to rip up the MOU that was signed that would have 

seen a vibrant industry in Saskatchewan. And when you see the 

price of lumber increasing on a daily basis, the price of pulp 

nearly double what it was when the mill closed, you would 

understand that if they‟d provided the bridge financing and 

supported the industry, it would now be again an industry that‟s 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4685 

moving forward and that has thousands of people employed. 

Instead what you‟ve got is Wapawekka saw mill that moves out 

of the province, the paper mill that moves out of the province, a 

pulp mill, etc. The list goes on and on. 

 

And what is unfathomable to me is the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton stands in this legislature seconding this budget, 

this false document, and says that because the forestry centre is 

now — two and a half years after they‟ve become government 

— half empty, that it‟s a white elephant. But the interesting 

thing is that you have to ask yourself, what happened to create 

that situation? What have they done in the forestry industry? 

 

They‟ve absolutely killed it. And they wonder why you can‟t 

get a research park to employ people. It‟s because there‟s 

absolutely no support from this government. And even if they 

don‟t provide financial support, all they have to do is find a way 

to divide the FMA appropriately so that assets that still remain 

in the province of Saskatchewan can be utilized. They can 

employ Saskatchewan people. The Big River saw mill is an 

example of that. And so to me, it‟s extremely frustrating. 

 

Now I‟ll speak very briefly to what they‟ve done in energy and 

resources. And I‟m going to speak briefly for this reason. When 

they took office, the minister responsible said that they would 

keep all the NDP policies that were in place because it was the 

best royalty regime structure in the world for oil and gas and 

minerals. And so as long as they keep NDP policy with respect 

to those items, we‟ll go easy on them because we agree with 

them. 

 

Now I could speak at length about what they‟ve done with 

long-term care. They promised a long-term care facility 

renovation in the city of Prince Albert. They‟ve backed away 

from that. People in Prince Albert are asking when they‟re 

going to fund it. They said, well it‟ll be in this budget; don‟t 

you worry. Don‟t you worry. It‟ll be in this budget. And what 

happened? 

 

You look at this budget document and they‟re deferring it again. 

Now how do they defer renovations to seniors‟ care homes, and 

they keep promising that the money‟s there? Sooner or later, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to catch up with them. People are going 

to figure out that they‟re not being told the truth. 

 

If you look at what they‟ve done with doctors, vacancies are up 

50 per cent under this administration. If you look specifically at 

Prince Albert, surgery wait-lists have nearly doubled. And I 

mentioned that on budget day, and I hit a nerve with the 

Premier. And I hit a nerve with the Premier because the surgical 

wait-list in Prince Albert has gone, from December 2007 — a 

month after the election — to 2009 in December, from 861 to 

1,573, nearly double. 

 

And so I raised this in the legislature on budget day and the 

Premier freaks out. He freaks out and is forced to apologize the 

next day. First time in 105 years, the Premier speaks to the 

budget in Saskatchewan and is forced to apologize. But it shows 

his true colour. And you know why I hit a nerve, Mr. Speaker? I 

hit a nerve because it‟s in his own city, the health region in that 

city, where wait-lists have also nearly doubled. And so I assume 

he‟s getting a lot of heat from home about the wait-lists for 

surgeries. 

And so they‟ve abandoned health care. They don‟t have any 

idea what they‟re doing on economic development. The 

Premier‟s record is abysmal. The document is absolutely untrue 

right from the start, and they know it. And so for those reasons 

and many others, I‟ll not be supporting the motion, and I‟ll 

support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Crowns. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

truly my pleasure to rise in the House today and enter into this 

budget debate. Putting this budget together is really a team 

effort, and I‟d like to take a moment to thank all the people that 

were involved in this process. 

 

First of all I‟d like to thank and to congratulate our Finance 

minister. He‟s one of the most focused — with a broad view of 

the big picture — persons I have ever met. He led the process 

through a maze that was definitely difficult, and I congratulate 

him for his work. I‟d also like to acknowledge the ministries 

and the stakeholders. I‟d like to acknowledge my colleagues 

and the staff for the countless hours they put into the creation of 

this budget. The time it took was well spent because it is a 

balanced, it is forward-looking, and it‟s a responsible budget, 

and it‟s something we‟re all proud of. 

 

I‟d also like to thank my constituents, as our constituencies are 

a core to our government. They play a key role in defining 

goals, and they give us direction. I‟d like to recognize my 

constituency assistant. I‟ve had Linda working with me since I 

started in June of 1995. She‟s been with me and helping me all 

this time, and I can‟t thank her enough. And last year, Rhonda 

started working with me. She has a real understanding of the 

issues and a knowledge that we are there to be the voice of the 

people from the Kelvington-Wadena constituency. I thank them 

very much. 

 

And before I delve into this budget, I‟d like to spend a little bit 

of the time talking about my family. The family is the most 

important part of my life, as it is to all of us in this legislature. I 

know, without the support of family, I couldn‟t sit here and do 

what I do. My family keeps me grounded, and they keep me 

focused. When I look at my children and I look at my 

grandchildren, I see hope for the future. I take pride in this 

budget, knowing that we as government are securing their 

future here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re moving this province forward by providing a budget that 

facilitates growth. It‟s fiscally responsible, and it maintains an 

eye on the future. Mr. Speaker, in maintaining fiscal 

responsibility and tightening our belts as described by my 

colleague, the Minister of Finance, this budget is the first one in 

a decade that will actually reduce government spending. 

Expenditures will drop 1.2 per cent from the budget delivered 

last year. That‟s $123 million savings. 

 

Most importantly, it sends a message. It sends a signal that our 

government will operate differently. We‟re thinking outside the 

box, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We‟re thinking about efficiencies and 

productivity. We‟re thinking about the value of the taxpayers‟ 

dollars that have been trusted to us to spend wisely on their 

behalf. 



4686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

However I think it‟s important to note and to put on record that 

a reduction in spending does not mean a reduction in quality of 

service. It‟s about finding efficiencies. It‟s about streamlining 

process. And it looks at the distribution of assets. We are 

creating a more effective government by reducing government‟s 

footprint, and we are doing so in the least destructive fashion 

possible. 

 

In Saskatchewan and around the world, we are witnessing 

transformation and change as government looks at which 

services they could provide and how they should provide them. 

Here in Saskatchewan, under the Sask Party government, we 

have challenged the public service to become smaller while still 

offering excellent services, offering leadership and public 

policy. We want to do better. We want to be more effective and 

more efficient, and we know it can be done. 

 

We also know that to achieve this we need good people. We 

need high performing, motivated professional people. The 

people in the public service are the key to change. We are 

challenging all ministries, all leaders, all employees to be more 

effective and efficient, and ministries have accepted this 

challenge. To help them renew and refocus to meet citizens‟ 

needs and to provide good value for taxpayers‟ dollars, we‟ll be 

providing central supports. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for five days I‟ve listened to the 

opposition rant about the budget. I understand that the 

opposition‟s job is to challenge and to dissect the government‟s 

budget. I can even appreciate their place in the parliamentary 

process. However I‟m left wondering if perhaps their 

determination to find fault has left them with a clouded 

perception of reality. 

 

Members opposite have been saying that our budget is not 

balanced. But if you compare the green sheets from the NDP 

budget and the 2010 green sheet that the Minister of Finance 

has presented, it highlights the fact that we have a balanced 

budget using the NDP‟s criteria. There‟s a General Revenue 

Fund process. The summary deficit, Mr. Speaker, under the 

NDP was $700 million, but because the GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] was balanced off with a savings account, they said it was 

a balanced budget. It was a balanced budget then. It‟s a 

balanced budget today. 

 

The members opposite say that we‟re stripping the Crowns. But 

if you look at the amount of dividends that have been taken out 

— from governments of all stripes — from the Crowns into the 

General Revenue Fund, even when the Leader of the 

Opposition was the minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan], you‟re going to find that 

roughly about 70 per cent dividend was taken from the earnings 

of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you total the earnings from the Crown 

corporations in the 2010-11 budget forecast, the subtotal is 

$260 million. SaskPower‟s earnings is predicted to be $135 

million, Mr. Speaker, but we are taking zero dollars from 

SaskPower, making the dividends this year less than the 70 per 

cent number the previous government used. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposites say we‟re privatizing health 

care. The change we‟re bringing to reduce wait times in the 

province are part of a universally, a publicly funded health care 

system with a single payer. This party made a commitment in 

the last election campaign that — under a single-payer, 

universal public health care system — this government would 

take the necessary steps to reduce the NDP wait times for health 

care. We‟re doing that in the province today. 

 

In 1996 the minister of Health at the time in the NDP 

government said they were open to private sector playing a 

larger role. And there‟s a quote in the article that goes 

something like this, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m quoting: “Both ideas 

were endorsed by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses President 

Judy Junor.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite note that we discontinued 

the Aboriginal employment development program. They failed 

to note that this budget has new initiatives designed specifically 

to increase the participation of our province‟s First Nations and 

Métis people in the economy, initiatives like the creation of 

three northern enterprise regions that will increase economic 

development dramatically in northern Saskatchewan, initiatives 

like the 70 per cent increase in funding to the Clarence 

Campeau Development Fund that provides loans and mentoring 

and business planning to Métis entrepreneurs all over our 

province. 

 

And they also fail to recognize the new initiative, a very 

important initiative that creates, that gives an opportunity for 

people to apply for a $3 million economic development fund to 

ensure that Saskatchewan‟s First Nations entrepreneurs can 

count on assistance to grow their business enterprises. 

 

What the members opposite don‟t seem to understand or fail to 

admit is that to keep the province moving forward, we need to 

evaluate programs and really determine what programs fit the 

needs as we need to keep the momentum moving. The AEDP 

[Aboriginal employment development program] 20-year-old 

program with no measurable outcomes was not progress, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Members opposite claim that we are privatizing Crowns like 

SaskPower. We are not. We‟re spending billions of dollars on 

infrastructure to fill the hole that the NDP created when they 

spent so little money on our Crowns that they were not ready to 

grow with us to help the province grow. We are investing 

money into our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. We‟re working with the 

private sector to ensure that we can supply power. And when 

the people of the province go to turn on their lights, there will 

be power. 

 

They also seem to forget that under this government, or under 

their government and when the Leader of the Opposition was 

the minister for the Crowns, they struck a private purchase deal 

with SunBridge, a private Alberta-based partnership. Atco was 

another cogeneration deal with a Calgary-based company, a 

partnership between SaskPower and a private sector company 

to supply electricity. And then there was also their Husky oil 

deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take some time to highlight some 

positive changes within this budget, the things that I think are 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4687 

getting lost in the opposition‟s clouded perception of gloom and 

doom. The opposition would see some of these changes as scary 

and as negative. And I understand how they might be 

misviewing them as opportunities because they are stuck in the 

past. The members opposite are not only stuck in the past, 

they‟re scared of the future. We are not. Innovation and 

creativity are really not for everyone, I guess. 

 

On budget day, this government announced a four-year plan to 

reduce the size of the public service. The goal for the first year 

was 4 per cent and 15 per cent at the end of four years. We can 

do this largely through attrition. Many of those who retire or 

move on to other opportunities will not be replaced. We can 

control this by establishing a centralized review process to 

ensure that only critical positions will be staffed. It‟ll be 

supported by a new $2.5 million productivity fund which will 

be used for process improvement, for training, and for 

succession planning. People may need new skills to prepare for 

new roles, and the fund will be there to help them. 

 

We‟re not alone. Other jurisdictions right across the world are 

working on this type of program. We know it can be done, and 

it will be done. 

 

My past year as Minister Responsible for the Public Service 

Commission has been a very rewarding one. I had the honour of 

attending long-service recognition events and the Premier‟s 

Award for Excellence in the Public Service. I‟ve met with new 

employees and employees with many years of experience. I am 

truly impressed by the people in the public service. I‟m 

impressed by the quality of their work, their commitment, and 

their pride. They will help us drive this change forward. 

Together they will transform the public service. We know that it 

must be smaller, more effective, and more efficient, and it will 

be. 

 

My ministry, the Public Service Commission, will support this 

challenge and this change. It‟s going to play a key role in 

coordinating the workforce adjustment strategy, working with 

Executive Council and with other ministries. We will ensure 

critical areas are staffed, areas where social services and 

highways and other areas where we know there must be 

attention paid, to identify flexibility and process improvement 

and to manage the productivity fund. 

 

The Public Service Commission is also committed to 

transforming itself. It has consolidated all of government‟s 

human resource administrative functions including payroll. 

Earlier, all professional advisory human service staff were 

clustered into client teams to provide improved responsiveness 

to each ministry. The Public Service Commission has 

conducted a process review and a comprehensive client survey 

to help identify areas for improvement. Work is already under 

way to dramatically reduce the time it takes to staff and to 

classify positions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re proud of the fact that within the 

ministries there‟s an enormous excitement and work under way 

to help us undertake this work. And we‟re proud of them. 

 

In the year ahead, the Public Service Commission will continue 

to support government by working as a business partner with 

ministries. They‟ll be providing strategies to address organized 

human resources need. They‟re going to be coaching and 

supporting managers. They‟re going to be providing direction 

on human resource impacts on policies and for emerging issues 

like pandemic planning that we had last year. They‟re going to 

be making sure that the basic work is well done. 

 

And by working with our public service unions — as you know, 

our ratification of the tentative agreement is now under way — 

the Public Service Commission will also focus on the 

importance of youth, the importance of the First Nations and 

Métis people and other diverse groups in growing our economy. 

 

The Public Service Commission is committed to providing the 

best human resource management services possible to support 

ministries carrying out the mandates of our government. The 

government recognizes and fully acknowledges the need 

amongst ministries to increase staffing levels, and those needs 

will be addressed as the process continues. 

 

The public service has also accepted the challenge to be part of 

the new public service to work with us during this exciting time 

of transformation and to help the public service be the best, the 

strongest, and the smartest, and the leanest it could be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have stood in the House for 

weeks, talking about the goal of our government to reduce the 

size of the public service, and they used the terms “firing” 

repeatedly to generate fear and discomfort. The member from 

Regina Coronation Park stood in his place and spoke of 1,700 

pink slips that were going to be handed out over the next four 

years. And this could not be further from a true fact. The 

government has been carefully . . . a thought-out plan by using 

attrition to accomplish our goals. This is different from how the 

members opposite chose to reach their goals in the past. They 

chose to provide little explanation to the reductions. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe the members opposite should 

remember that in 1996, when 544 government workers received 

layoff notices, the then minister of the Public Service 

Commission said, “Reductions . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres not to be yelling from her seat. I recognize the 

Minister of the Crowns. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in 1996, when 544 

government workers received layoff notices, the former 

minister of the Public Service Commission, Lorne Calvert said, 

and I quote: “Reductions have been necessary to achieve the . . . 

[objections] of providing affordable and effective government.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2002-2003, the budget speech, after 

announcing the government would be reducing full-time 

equivalents by 350, the former Finance minister, Eric Cline 

said, we‟re going to change how government does business, 

making it more effective and more efficient. And what did the 

former NDP Environment minister say in 2004 in response to 

200 job cuts and the closure of nine rural and northern SERM 

[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management] 

offices and six northern fire bases? He said, and I quote: “We 

have our priorities and we have to support those priorities.” 



4688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

This was laying people off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the member from Regina Rosemont 

understands that this review is important because he said in the 

media a week or so ago, and I quote, “Well I think efficiencies 

certainly can be found. A mindful eye certainly has to be there. 

It should be part of the plan of government in any given budget 

year.”  

 

And even the head of SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 

General Employees‟ Union], Bob Bymoen said, and I quote, 

“We‟re always looking for efficiencies in government and 

there‟s always room for a little bit of that.” Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that everyone is in agreement with our goal, and I don‟t 

know why the members opposite don‟t just admit it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the responsibilities I‟ve been given 

is being the voice for the Information Technology Office. It 

continues to update information systems in our government. 

The recently announced RFQ [request for quotation] for 

network upgrades shows a determination to integrate private 

sector skills into the management of our IT [information 

technology] systems. ITO [Information Technology Office] 

plays an absolutely crucial role in ensuring our government 

industries can deliver needed services to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of a single eight-hour day without ITO 

services is estimated to be $2.4 million. Mr. Speaker, this need 

for upgrades in this infrastructure didn‟t come overnight. It was 

part of the infrastructure deficit left to us by the previous 

government and we are working to fill that deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance], we‟re pleased to be in a position to provide value to 

the shareholders in the form of an increased dividend for 2010. 

This is one important way the corporation can give the people 

of Saskatchewan a return on the money they have invested in 

SGI Canada. We‟re able to do this because excellent financial 

results in the past couple of years. 

 

With the introduction of a one-part, five-year driver‟s licence 

which will be implemented in January of 2011, SGI is making it 

more convenient and less expensive for the people of 

Saskatchewan to hold a driver‟s licence. The project will create 

efficiencies. It‟ll decrease the cost of administration and it will 

lead to the end of a 1.3 million annual subsidy that has been 

provided in the past year to offset the cost of photo ID 

[identification]. 

 

Government‟s commitment to more funding for highways and 

construction and resurfacing is an important part to maintain an 

infrastructure that contributes to safer roads. In addition to 

preventing deaths and injuries, fewer vehicle collisions also 

help the bottom line at SGI, helping maintain the lowest auto 

insurance rates in Canada. 

 

The government‟s commitment to providing funding for 

additional police officers will help the crime prevention and 

traffic enforcement issues. This benefits all of SGI‟s operations, 

as reduced property crime lowers the overall costs for property 

claims, and increased traffic enforcement improves road safety 

which will lead to fewer collisions and fewer claims. 

 

There‟s another traffic initiative taking place that SGI has had a 

hand in developing. The report impaired drivers program or our 

RID program is a pilot project that‟s taking place in the city of 

Saskatoon. The RID program is spearheaded by SGI, the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, and the Saskatoon 

Police Service, with support from the Mothers Against Drunk 

Driving, Students Against Drinking and Driving, and Rawlco 

Radio. The program encouraged Saskatoon residents to call 911 

and report suspected impaired drivers to police. This is an 

initiative that I hope to see grow and flourish in the future and 

that it will be expanded to other cities and towns within our 

province. 

 

The government‟s commitment to funding for post-secondary 

education will help ensure SGI has a solid pool of potential new 

employees for many years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have had much to say about 

CIC, the Crown Investments Corporation. This government 

takes great pride in the success of the Crown Investments 

Corporation and our Crown sector as a whole. The vision of the 

Crown sector in 2010-2011 has not changed. It is to provide 

Saskatchewan people with the best possible service at the 

lowest possible cost to our citizens, and at the same time 

contributing to the growth of our province. Meeting this goal 

was a challenge as Saskatchewan is among the leaders in 

Canada in both population and job growth, but the Crown 

sector‟s keeping pace, providing increased infrastructure and 

service needs for the whole of our province. 

 

The Crowns are providing increased support to the provincial 

Treasury this year, but they‟re well positioned to so. For 

example, SaskTel has the strongest balance sheet of any 

telecommunication company in Canada. At SaskPower, where 

capital needs to be retained to replace aging infrastructures with 

cleaner, more expensive technologies, no dividend is going to 

be given to the GRF this year. 

 

The past 10 years under the NDP, the average capital spend in 

SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy was $500 million. This 

government and the same three Crowns in our first three years 

invested $2.8 billion. Even with the increased dividend, the 

Crown corporations are spending an unprecedented 1.3 billion 

on capital programs in 2010 to upgrade infrastructure and help 

with the growing demands. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Led by SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy, the capital 

program is also helping to stimulate the Saskatchewan 

economy. SaskEnergy is investing $103 million; SaskPower, 

$832 million; and SaskTel, $389 million, including the rural 

infrastructure program. The Crowns are focused on finding 

efficiencies in their operations, the same as within executive 

government. The Crown sector will build on the three major 

productivity reviews as SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy, 

and they‟ll continue to manage FTE [full-time equivalent] 

growth and reduce staffing levels through attrition. 

 

The Crown sector also continues to sell out-of-province assets 

that aren‟t core to the Crowns‟ businesses as outlined in our 

Sask-first policy. I know the members opposite have had a 

number of comments about this, but our government believes 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4689 

that taxpayers‟ money should be spent here in Saskatchewan. 

That enables us to reinvest money right here in our province. 

The divesting of these assets continues to be done in a 

thoughtful and reasonable and prudent manner. 

 

We‟re retaining operations outside the province in cases where 

it supports the Crowns‟ core businesses. For example SGI 

Canada continues to operate in five other provinces which 

provides a geographical spread of risk. There are many exciting 

projects and initiatives under way this year in the Crown sector 

to support government policies and enhance our services. And I 

thank the hard-working people over there for being involved. 

 

SaskEnergy is partnering with the private sector to recover 

natural gas that is usually flared off, which is good news for 

SaskEnergy customers and good news for our environment. 

SGI‟s Auto Fund redevelopment is utilizing technology and 

Internet to become more user-friendly, increase its capacity for 

re-commerce or business online. This also helps SGI and its 

customers to go green. 

 

SaskWater‟s providing the infrastructure for major 

developments in the potash industry at projects like the one in 

Belle Plaine. 

 

SaskPower is making another significant investment in its 

capital program to help with transmission and system 

reliabilities — key priorities for our customers. SaskPower has 

already partnered with the private sector on two natural gas 

power plants and is working on partnerships that will generate 

200 megawatts of wind power by 2013. In real terms, 200 

megawatts will supply power for approximately 200,000 homes 

for a year. SaskPower is leading in the development of one of 

the world‟s first and largest integrated carbon capture and 

storage commercial projects at the Boundary dam power station 

at Estevan. 

 

Sask Gaming Corporation has revitalized both of its casino 

properties to ensure that it continues to provide a high-quality 

entertainment experience for customers. And SGC 

[Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation] also continues to be an 

industry leader in responsible gaming practices. 

 

SaskTel will complete the rural infrastructure program this year, 

bringing cellular or wireless coverage to 98 per cent of the 

province and high-speed Internet to 100 per cent of the 

province. SaskTel is also working with First Nations 

communities as part of this program. And SaskTel is also 

adapting new technology standards that result in the availability 

of an increased variety of cellphones as well. 

 

CIC continues to administer the Gradworks programs. It 

provides 12-month internships in the Crowns to recent 

post-secondary graduates with little or no experience. Nearly 85 

per cent of the Gradworks interns stay in the province, and over 

half of them continue to work in the Crowns. 

 

The CIC Aboriginal bursary program provides financial 

assistance to qualifying students and was expanded in 2009 to 

include the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], and SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 

as well as the University of Regina. In 2010 CIC will receive $3 

million for a program to support economic development for our 

First Nations people. 

 

Investment in infrastructure, increasing employment 

opportunities in the sector for youth and First Nations people, 

adopting environmentally sustainable business practices, and 

investing in Saskatchewan‟s businesses and increasing 

efficiencies are key priorities for CIC within the Crown sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Provincial Secretary has been 

and will continue to be very busy in the future. With support 

from the protocol office, we‟ll encourage diplomatic 

engagement and strengthen relationships with national and 

international partners. 

 

We will continue to invest in the French-language service 

centre which provides services to citizens province-wide as well 

as increases the capacity to support recruitment, settlement, and 

retention of French-speaking people in our province. We look 

forward to continued partnerships and collaboration with the 

francophone community to identify and undertake key 

initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Information Services Corporation will focus 

on securing a strong future while exploring exciting new 

opportunities. With the upcoming transfer of the corporations 

branch from the Ministry of Justice to ISC [Information 

Services Corporation] in October, it will leverage ISC‟s 

significant registry expertise, its core competency, and 

infrastructure to enhance and evolve service delivery to our 

business community. The corporations branch is the first step in 

future development of an online portal to provide convenient 

and cost-effective means to deliver government services to 

business. 

 

The first phase of the project, an online business registry, will 

be developed and implemented early in 2011. The business 

registry service will allow new businesses to complete the steps 

required to register a business using an online application. This 

phase is going to be offered in three registration services. We 

can register a business through the corporations branch. You 

can register as an employer for workers‟ compensation and 

register for provincial sales tax with the Ministry of Finance. 

 

By the end of 2012, Information Services Corp will begin to 

expand the services offered beyond registration and will 

provide business owners with a single point of entry for most 

other government services. Business owners will self-manage 

their online profiles and work with online environment to get 

the necessary permits and licences and remit taxes and comply 

with other government requirements. Our goal is to make sure 

it‟s easy to do business in our province, to streamline processes, 

and to ultimately reduce the cost for business and government. 

As a former business owner, I understand the impact these 

changes will have for the entrepreneurs of our province, and I 

know that these changes will be beneficial and most welcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to discuss the budget 

with some of my constituents last weekend at various events 

around my constituency. And I know that there is tremendous 

support for this budget. My constituents are pleased with the 

direction this government is taking. Even our province‟s 

toughest critics, those that sit on coffee row, had a positive 



4690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

thing to say about our province‟s budget. They share our vision 

of a balanced, forward-looking, responsible budget. They 

appreciate our approach to the budget, appreciate that we have a 

commitment to health care, highways, and schools. They 

appreciate the fact that we have not increased the debt. They 

appreciate the fact that we‟ve invested money in infrastructure, 

that we‟ve cut the number of people that are paying tax. They 

appreciate the fact that rural Saskatchewan is the front of our 

minds when we make our decisions. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I thank them and my colleagues for the 

opportunity to share with you many of the great things I see 

coming out of this budget. And it gives me great pleasure to put 

forward my confidence and my support for our budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed my pleasure to be able to rise and speak to the budget 

today. We have a budget here, Mr. Speaker, that is anything but 

accountable, transparent, and open — which are all the things 

that the members opposite profess. I am going to be, obviously, 

not supporting the budget and will be supporting the 

amendment put forward by the opposition, Mr. Speaker. So I 

want to state that at the outset of my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that tells a story, and it tells a story 

of a Premier who likes to talk differently in different circles, 

depending on who he‟s talking to. Now you know, I started 

making notes just quickly, and I‟m going to digress from the 

speech that I had originally written because I think this is a 

story that has to be told about this particular budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is, that depending on who the Premier is 

speaking to, or any one of his ministers, they seem to want to 

conform the story to the audience at hand. 

 

So for instance, Mr. Speaker, they talk about how concerned 

they are for the First Nations and Métis population of 

Saskatchewan. They talk about how concerned they are for the 

duty to consult and how they want to engage the Aboriginal 

population of the province in the economy of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see quite the opposite happen in this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, quite the opposite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about some of those cuts that were 

made that the First Nations and Métis people of this province 

were not even consulted on, Mr. Speaker, were not even 

consulted on until they heard them on the floor of the legislature 

on the day of the budget. Let‟s talk for instance about the 

Aboriginal employment development program, a program that‟s 

been in place, a program that has an agreement signed, a 

program that was given glowing reports by the former minister 

for First Nations and Métis Relations which is the minister for, I 

mean the member from . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, the 

previous speaker, unfortunately I can‟t recall the constituency 

that she represents . . . anyway, giving glowing reports. And 

then all of a sudden in this budget, Mr. Speaker, it‟s cut. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So Kelvington-Wadena, thank you, member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. And all of a sudden in this budget, it‟s cut, 

Mr. Speaker. Why? Well we‟re not really sure why because 

previously she would love to do the photo ops and everything, 

talking about what a great program it was. But then all of a 

sudden one day in the legislature, on the day of the budget, it‟s 

cut because, well, they don‟t believe it‟s meeting the outcomes 

that it should. So it‟s funny how that changed very quickly. 

 

Let‟s also talk for instance about the disrespect, the absolute 

disrespect that was shown to the First Nations University of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this again is an institution 

that is one of the most amazing sources of pride and joy for us 

as a Saskatchewan province. This is an internationally 

renowned institution. It has amazingly glowing reports from 

individuals from other universities, from other countries that 

have the privilege of attending here or doing some apprenticing 

here and such. 

 

And yet, and yet, Mr. Speaker, without being able to engage the 

provincial government or the Minister for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour in meaningful discussions as to what 

needs to occur to be able to move that institution forward and 

deal with some of the issues that were at hand, it simply slashed 

the funding which in turn slashed the funding from the Harper 

Tories. And no one can tell me, Mr. Speaker, no one can tell me 

that that discussion didn‟t take place to those cuts being made 

because they did. Those cuts went hand in hand. And now we 

see that the Harper Tories are simply going to provide bridge 

funding to tie over the school year, but there‟s no commitment 

of going forward into the future. So those students and those 

professors still have great uncertainty with respect to that 

institution. 

 

Let‟s talk about, for instance . . . Oh I just mis-swallowed. 

Excuse me. I swallowed the wrong way. Let‟s talk about, for 

instance, the Premier talking to the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce at TCU Place — excuse me; I mis-swallowed — a 

few days prior to delivering the provincial budget speech. In his 

state of the province address to the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce . . . And I‟m quoting from The StarPhoenix, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

In his “state of the province” address to the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce at TCU Place, Wall said the 

province needs to take steps to reduce tobacco use and 

cited a report saying one of the biggest obstacles has been 

the lack of taxation on tobacco products sold on First 

Nations. 

 

“Smoking remains one of the most harmful and costly 

heath issues. The financial cost is great, the human cost is 

greater,” said Wall. “And the problem continues to be 

greatest among our First Nations people.” 

 

I‟m still struggling with that sip I took, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, this is what the Premier told the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce a few days prior to the budget. So what 

happens in the budget, Mr. Speaker? In the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, they decide that they are going to make this 

announcement. And I just want to quote from the Premier‟s 

speech to the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce on that day 

because I happen to have a copy of it as well: 

 

Smoking remains one of the most harmful and costly 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4691 

health-challenges. The financial cost is great . . . the 

human cost is greater. 

 

He goes on to quote and says, “And the problem continues to be 

greatest amongst our First Nations population.” Then he tells 

the chamber of commerce that: 

 

Our government takes this issue very seriously. I have 

asked my Minister of First Nations and Métis Affairs, Bill 

Hutchinson, to begin discussions on this important matter 

with the FSIN . . . 

 

And while I can‟t give you the exact details today, this 

issue will be addressed in the upcoming budget. 

 

[12:15] 

 

So Mr. Speaker, when speaking to the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce a few days prior to the budget, he already knew 

full well what was going to be in the budget but only talked 

then about his Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

talking to the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations], at that point going forward to begin important 

discussions on this matter. 

 

Decision was already made, but there was no consultations with 

the people it would most directly affect who, quite frankly, in 

their statements afterwards said, you know what? You‟re right. 

We have an issue with smoking. But we also have bigger issues 

with diabetes for instance, Mr. Speaker, or other health-related 

issues that they‟ve been asking for help on for a long, long time 

that are falling on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s also talk about one other aspect of the Premier‟s speech to 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. He talks about, for 

instance, property taxes and he says, “. . . we‟ve taken steps to 

reduce education property tax.” Now listen carefully to the next 

part of his quote, Mr. Speaker: “And when we can afford more 

we will do more,” Mr. Speaker. So I want to repeat what the 

Premier said a few days before the provincial budget to the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce: “And when we can 

afford more we will do more,” with respect to property taxes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now isn‟t that interesting, because today in question period 

when we talked about it they say, the Minister for 

Intergovernmental Affairs stood up and said, yes they‟re doing 

it. Well isn‟t that interesting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . For 

Municipal Affairs, thank you. Stood up and said, yes we‟re 

doing it. Well what‟s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

Premier says, when we can do more on property taxes, we will 

do more. The Finance minister says, when we can do more, we 

will do more. But it seems that the Minister for Municipal 

Affairs knows something that both the Premier and the Minister 

of Finance don‟t know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s look at this quote. This is from . . . Oh, it‟s very recent, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s called yesterday. And this is from The 

Battlefords Daily News. And this is when: 

 

Battleford Mayor Chris Odishaw asked if the municipal 

revenue sharing formula, held at nine-tenths of one per 

cent of the Provincial Sales Tax this year as part of the 

government‟s cost-cutting, will go up to one per cent next 

year, as the government promised earlier. 

 

So he wanted to know if they‟re going to keep their promise on 

municipal revenue sharing. “Gantefoer hinted that might occur, 

but said everything depends on revenues.” 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we see the Minister for Municipal 

Affairs saying one thing and the Minister of Finance and the 

Premier saying something quite different when it comes to the 

revenue sharing formula, when it comes to dealing with 

property taxes going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s also look at, for instance, what the Premier said about 

Ralph Waldo Emerson. And it looks like I might be digressing, 

but it‟s really not. He quoted Ralph Waldo Emerson in his 

speech to the chamber about the budget and said a quote. And 

then he said: 

 

My mom used to say it a little differently. She said, “If all 

your friends jumped off a cliff, would you jump off a cliff 

too?” I remember on one occasion I said, “Mom, this is 

Saskatchewan. There are no cliffs.” I spent time in my 

room thinking about that. She was right, of course. 

 

I‟m of course thinking, well his mom was right about cliffs as 

well, but the Premier was talking about quite something 

different. 

 

He says, “You can‟t do something just because everyone else is 

doing it.” 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, very interesting, very interesting that the 

Premier says this because he‟s bringing forward Bills and 

agreements with others that are not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan residents, but forging ahead because of favours 

that were made to others and simple and pure ideology, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let‟s look, for instance, at the issue of chiropractic services in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. Instead of being a leader on this 

issue, what is the Premier doing? The Premier has decided to be 

a follower. He is going to follow other provinces in creating a 

user fee for chiropractic services and delisting the service, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s what he‟s doing. Instead of being a leader on 

the issue of medicare, he has decided to be a follower, and not 

to the advantage of the people of Saskatchewan by any means. 

 

Let‟s also talk about something, another quote that he said, 

which is, “It‟s about spending smarter instead of spending 

more.” Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about a program which 

doesn‟t cost the provincial government a lot of money, but will 

have far-reaching impacts when it is out of control. And that‟s 

called the Dutch elm disease program, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

program that prevents Dutch elm disease from spreading, 

especially into our larger centres like Regina and Saskatoon, as 

well as Moose Jaw and Yorkton and the other smaller centres as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟ve cut the spending to this program. When 

Dutch elm disease comes into the city, because they‟re not 

being able to deal with the trees around the municipalities that 

make sure that it doesn‟t enter into the cities, once it hits the 



4692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

cities, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be catastrophic. It is going to 

be too late to deal with the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they‟re off-loading this onto the municipal governments to 

deal with. Problem with that is, Mr. Speaker, the municipal 

governments can‟t deal with what they‟ve already got on their 

plate because they broke their promise, the Sask Party broke 

their promise, on revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. So the 

municipal governments already have to pick up the tab with 

respect to the revenue sharing portion of the Sask Party broken 

promise, which means that the municipalities are dealing with 

infrastructure costs that they didn‟t know that they would have 

to deal with. Mill rates are going to have to be increased. The 

tax burden is going to be shifted onto those municipalities. 

 

So when they say, the Sask Party says, that they are saving 

money for individuals in Saskatchewan, it‟s a shell game, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a shell game because they‟re raising costs 

elsewhere. That is going to be the tax burden for the people of 

Saskatchewan, whether it‟s increased utility costs, whether it‟s 

increases through municipalities that aren‟t seeing the funding 

that they need or elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now he also talks about, and I found this one quite 

disconcerting, this is also from his speech to the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce. And he says, “We will make some 

difficult but needed decisions to refocus on the front lines of 

heath care, on our classrooms and on our lecture theatres.” 

 

Here‟s the part that‟s disconcerting. A few paragraphs later, he 

says, “It is true that in a democracy, the citizenry give up, if 

only temporarily, some of its freedoms to the government it has 

chosen.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what‟s especially disconcerting about this is that 

there is serious, serious problems with this budget when it 

comes to health, education, and post-secondary education. Mr. 

Speaker, serious concerns.  

 

And it‟s based purely on ideology, Mr. Speaker. Purely on 

ideology. The Sask Party seems to think that people should be 

able to pay their own way, pay their own way regarding 

everything that they do, and that they should simply be able to 

go on their own means and not have any sort of involvement 

from the government, Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s not dealing 

with the issue of high cost of affordability for students to access 

post-secondary education, whether it‟s dealing with the high 

cost of health care in terms of for instance having to now pay 

for chiropractic services, or whether it‟s dealing with the $275 

per student inequity between the students in the Regina separate 

school system versus the students in the public school system, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They seem to think that it‟s ok to have their ideology, have its 

footprint all over everything regardless of how it affects the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve heard also that there‟s been some beans spilled. Some 

more beans spilled, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s with respect to the 

harmonized sales tax. 

 

Now they‟re obviously — as I‟ve heard one expression which I 

like the best — trying to stuff the toothpaste back into the tube, 

Mr. Speaker. But guess what? The cat‟s out of the bag. They are 

definitely going to look at harmonizing the sales taxes in this 

province to be able to balance off, or to not even balance off, to 

be able to cover off some of the debt that they are going to be 

incurring as a government going forward into the future. That‟s 

what this government is planning on doing. Make no mistake 

about it. Make no mistake about it. The only good thing is that 

we‟ve had some forewarning and foreshadowing on what this 

Sask Party government intends on doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other revelation that we heard, Mr. Speaker, is one that 

we heard yesterday, and this again is from the Finance Minister. 

This comes from the Battlefords Daily News, and unfortunately 

it‟s not good news again for the people of Saskatchewan in 

terms of dealing with their health, Mr. Speaker. And the quote 

from the Battlefords Daily News is this, “User fees have to be 

part of the solution to cut health care costs, Finance Minister 

Rod Gantefoer said in North Battleford Wednesday.” 

 

Now this is very disconcerting, Mr. Speaker. Very 

disconcerting. Because nowhere in their election platform, 

nowhere did I see any notion of user fees going to be 

implemented or that it was even on the radar. Mind you, there 

was nothing, nothing in their platform about harmonizing sales 

taxes either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So before they throw stones in glass houses, before they throw 

stones about what is said and what is done, I suggest they look 

in the mirror and take a good hard look in the mirror because 

what they‟re doing is completely contrary to their election 

platform document, Mr. Speaker. And the people of 

Saskatchewan, they won‟t be fooled, they know what they 

promised. And they know what they‟re doing right now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I go on to quote from The Battlefords Daily News: “Gantefoer 

made that statement during a breakfast [March 31st] at the 

Battlefords Chamber of Commerce. He came to the city to 

speak about the provincial budget, released March 24th.” 

 

So there you go, Mr. Speaker. We know what the budget 

entails. We know what‟s coming. We know a harmonized sales 

tax is coming, whether that‟s before the next election or right 

after the next election. We know that user fees for health care 

are coming, whether it‟s before the next election or after the 

next election, Mr. Speaker, if this Sask Party government is 

re-elected. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk about the Sask Party election 

platform document. This document that they put out prior to the 

election in November 2007. One of the most egregious things, 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most egregious things is something that 

they stated in this platform that is completely opposite of what‟s 

happening right now. They said, and I quote, in their platform, 

Sask Party election platform: 

 

Saskatchewan people expect their government to be open, 

honest, and accountable. A Saskatchewan Party 

Government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any previous 

government . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is completely false. It‟s untruthful. It‟s not, 

it‟s completely disingenuous and, Mr. Speaker, it‟s dishonest. 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4693 

And it will come forward to bite them firmly where anyone 

wants to decide they should be bitten, quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, as I said, Mr. Speaker, this is a false budget. It talks, it 

reduces the funding for forest fire suppression. It has no funding 

built in for teacher contracts that are upcoming, Mr. Speaker. So 

what signal is that sending to teachers, Mr. Speaker? Is it telling 

them that they are not going to get a raise? Or is it telling them 

that their school districts will have to find more savings, which 

means cuts, Mr. Speaker? What is, what signal does that send to 

the teachers of this province, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And so you know, I have a number of questions that I‟d like to 

put out, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps I could get some help from 

some of my colleagues because I need some help answering 

these questions, Mr. Speaker. Is this a budget dishonest in its 

spending predictions, Mr. Speaker? You bet it is. Is this budget 

causing uncertainty in the civil servant, civil service? You bet it 

is. Is this budget cutting programs like the Aboriginal 

employment development program and the Dutch elm disease 

prevention program as well as many others that are going to 

have significant impact in the future, Mr. Speaker? You bet it 

is. 

 

Is this a budget that is going to cause further hardship for 

Saskatchewan people, for instance the chiropractic program? 

Financial hardship, hardship regarding physical health and 

thereby causing hardship through emotional hardship, Mr. 

Speaker? You bet it is. 

 

Is this a budget that is going to incur further debt, Mr. Speaker? 

You bet it is. One only has to look at the budget document to 

see that that debt to the GDP [gross domestic product] ratio is 

going to be increasing steadily to year 2014 if the Sask Party 

stays in place. 

 

Is this a budget that disrespects the responsibility of duty to 

consult in announcing changes and cuts that were discussed 

with First Nations and Métis organizations prior to being 

introduced in the budget, Mr. Speaker? You bet it is. 

 

Is this a budget that disrespects our children by pitting separate 

school boards versus public school boards with respect to 

equitable funding to the amount of $275 less per student in the 

Regina separate school system? You bet it is. 

 

Is the NDP as the official opposition going to do everything in 

its capacity to hold the government accountable, inform the 

people of Saskatchewan about the truth of the nefarious 

ongoings of the Sask Party government, rather than the spin that 

Sask Party puts on all of its dishonest actions this government is 

taking, and be able to provide a much better and trustworthy 

alternative to . . . 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It now being 12:30 under rule 

30(6), I remind the members that the Minister of Finance now 

has 20 minutes to conclude the debate on the budget motion. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, once again it‟s a great pleasure for me to rise in 

this House and close the debate on the budget motion for this 

current budget year 2010-2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as anyone may imagine, this task of presenting a 

budget and preparing a budget is a rather formidable task, and 

I‟d be remiss if I didn‟t thank the people that helped in that 

whole entire process. First of all, I‟d like to thank the 

constituents of the Melfort constituency for their ongoing 

support, understanding, and good advice over the years. It‟s 

been a pleasure to support the people‟s advice and direction. 

 

And I would like to acknowledge my Melfort constituency 

assistants, Laurie Hookway and Peggy Gordon. In Regina here, 

I have to also recognize and thank and I express my 

appreciation to the people in my office here in Regina, to the 

chief of staff Dick Carter, also to Kim Jalbert, Carrie Klassen, 

and Fred Fedosoff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d be remiss as well if, having this opportunity, 

not to thank the Ministry of Finance under the leadership of 

Deputy Minister Doug Matthies for all of their work and 

dedication to helping to prepare the government‟s budget this 

year. I would especially like to thank the Premier, to my cabinet 

colleagues, to my caucus colleagues, and all of the support staff 

here in Regina for the support in the budget process. It‟s truly a 

document that we have prepared that is not just for us, but it‟s 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s important to state some incredibly 

important initiatives that we had in this budget. Mr. Speaker, 

there are some important things that we said that we wanted to 

do in terms of a theme for this budget. We‟ve used the three 

thematic ideas of balanced, forward-looking, and responsible. 

 

It‟s balanced because it‟s the only province in Canada that‟s 

reducing spending 1.2 per cent; it‟s $125 million. Mr. Speaker, 

it also on a General Revenue Fund basis shows a surplus of $20 

million. Therefore it‟s a balanced budget, and that‟s important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it‟s also important to recognize that 

government-supported debt has decreased to $4.15 billion and 

is going to remain flat for the duration of this budget. And that‟s 

an important initiative because it results in significant savings 

of interest costs to the people of Saskatchewan, not just this 

year but every year going forward into the future. Mr. Speaker, 

we were also very fortunate in that we were able to budget in 

such a way as that we had to use less than $200 million from 

our Growth and Financial Security Fund that was our rainy day 

fund and leave a balance of over $500 million in that account 

going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we wanted to make sure that this budget was 

forward-looking, and we made sure that we had key 

infrastructure investments that need to be supported going 

forward. We wanted to make sure that we supported economic 

development initiatives, that we were supporting education, and 

we were protecting core services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we wanted to make sure that this budget was 

responsible because we are of an obligation to lead 

Saskatchewan in a responsible way, while protecting core 

services for citizens that are in most need of our support. 



4694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, in the past it has always been of interest to me to 

have the opposition not represent quite factually the situation 

that has changed from November of ‟07 to March of ‟10. In 

November ‟07, I would like to remind the House that the 

General Revenue Fund debt in the province, that we inherited 

from the members opposite, was $6.8 billion. We also inherited 

a savings account balance of $1.2 billion, for a total of $5.6 

billion net. As of March 10th of this year, our General Revenue 

Fund debt is $4.1 billion, and we have a savings account 

balance of 500 million, a net number of $3.6 billion, which is an 

improvement overall in that period of time of over $2 billion, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a question that has been asked from time to 

time about what has our growth agenda contributed to. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, in 2009 while everyone was focusing on the 

collapse of the potash market, countries like China and India 

were doing business with Saskatchewan in an unprecedented 

way. As I mentioned in my budget speech, for example, while 

China was not purchasing potash in 2009, canola sales were up 

80 per cent to $553 million. Peas were up 51 per cent to $105 

million, and linseed was up 341 per cent to $69.4 million. 

 

In India, a similar country that was buying virtually no potash 

in 2009, there was $975 million of goods sold to India, which 

represents almost 45 per cent of the entire exports of the 

country of Canada . . . came from Saskatchewan, with only 4 

per cent of the population. And so we are punching way above 

our weight, and we need to recognize those successes as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the key organizations that deserve to get 

credit for that significant change in the sales across the 

continents was the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, 

STEP, who have done an absolute fabulous job with their 400 

business members in selling Saskatchewan‟s story right around 

the world. And in recognition of their achievements and the 

confidence that we have in that organization, we increased our 

contribution to that organization by 10 per cent in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2009 was a challenging year for every jurisdiction 

in the world as the world economy suffered the largest 

recession since the 1930s, and that has certainly had a 

tremendous impact on virtually every jurisdiction in the world. 

Many jurisdictions were severely hampered on their ability to 

move forward. In Canada many of the provinces have 

experienced significant and very troublesome deficits, and in 

Saskatchewan we were able to have some bright spots in the 

midst of the worst recession in decades. 

 

In 2009 in Saskatchewan, employment increased by 7,900 

people — 1.5 per cent — the only province in Canada that 

experienced positive employment growth in 2009. Our 

unemployment rate was 4.8 per cent, the lowest in Canada. Our 

population has risen through the last 14 consecutive quarters, an 

increase of over 16,000 people from October to October, an 

incredible record of success in the face of a world-wide 

recession, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget looks forward. And I‟d like to just 

mention some of the highlights. 

 

In 2010-11 our capital spending is going to be $632 million in 

our budget — the third highest capital budget in the history of 

the province, almost $3 billion over three years to fix the 

infrastructure pothole that was left by the previous 

administration. Mr. Speaker, part of that was $177 million in 

municipal infrastructure, an increase of nearly 30 per cent to 

make sure that we were able to capture all of the federal 

infrastructure and stimulus dollars that are available so that we 

maximize the opportunities that the province have. 

 

In agriculture we spent $16 million in agricultural research and 

development. We spent $16 million to the Saskatchewan 

Research Council to support the good work that they do across 

the province and for this country. We made a four-year 

commitment to the Canadian Light Source of almost $12 

million to ensure that the synchrotron is going to continue to 

prosper and do well as they increase the beamlines that are 

available for research scientists from around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made sure that we were sensitive of the needs 

of the heath care system by making sure that we spent an extra 

$7.9 million on health care training seats. We‟re spending $3.5 

million on our physician recruitment strategy and agency, $6.6 

million on a medical education system enhancements, and 

$10.5 million to start the patients-first initiative by reducing 

surgical wait times and wait-lists. And, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that that‟s responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to continue to deliver key health and 

social care programs for people that are most vulnerable. They 

say in a rising economy that a rising tide floats all boats, and 

that may be true, Mr. Speaker. But I think we have an 

obligation to recognize that not all boats are in the same shape. 

Some of them have been pretty beat up by life and have some 

leaks in them, and we‟ve got to make sure we don‟t leave those 

boats behind as the economy moves forward. And so we need 

to protect some core services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re increasing funding by $10 million to the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to help them with their important 

work. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re announcing that we have 

increased spending by $2.5 million to autism services as we 

help families struggle with this very difficult disease and 

challenge moving forward. And in this restraint budget, we‟re 

going to increase the spending to regional health authorities by 

5 per cent to provide funding for their base and increase for 

their funding, base funding of $2.6 billion. 

 

In social services, we are spending extra money, $345 million 

in income assistance programs. We‟re spending $182 million 

for child and family services including new child welfare 

spaces. Mr. Speaker, we‟re increasing the money that is 

available in the funding to school divisions so that they can 

exercise their important programs to educate our children going 

forward to the future. We‟re also making sure that we make our 

commitment and fulfill our commitment of 30 extra police 

officers over the four-year period of time, and that‟s going to be 

seen to in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had to tell our municipal partners that we 

are going to have to freeze their funding at an incredible $167 

million — historic high levels after dramatic increases over the 

previous two years. And we‟re going to move forward and fully 

fund the program as we had promised at 1 per cent of the PST 

in the next budget year. And that‟s a commitment we‟re 



April 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4695 

certainly going to keep because it‟s one that we made in good 

faith and we‟re going to keep in good faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made sure that we also made sure we‟re 

funding the province‟s complete share of agriculture 

stabilization programs, AgriStability, and invest in crop 

insurance and improve the services that those ministries or 

those programs deliver to our farm families in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we have lowered expenditures in 14 

ministries with the process that we‟ve developed for this budget 

. . . because we knew that there was going to be restraint that 

was expected and decisions were going to have to be made that 

were going to be difficult and heart-rendering, and we certainly 

have made those decisions. 

 

So we‟ve had 14 ministries that actually have ended up with 

reduced spending in this period of restraint and difficult 

challenges. The health growth is limited this year to a 3.1 per 

cent increase, and that‟s an incredible achievement as we 

struggle to make sure that we provide the services that our 

people need in regard to health services. Lower debt-servicing 

costs have helped us in that we‟re going to save $67 million 

budget over budget, and that‟s a worthwhile result of the 

paydown of our debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve also recognized that we need to reduce the 

size of government and the footprint that government has in the 

economy, and we‟re going to lead by example in this reduction. 

Over four years, our goal is to reduce the public service by 15 

per cent by a policy of attrition and vacancy management, Mr. 

Speaker. Every year, there‟s something between 6 and 8 per 

cent of people leave the public service from retirement or 

moving on to new opportunities. On average we‟re going to not 

fill 4 per cent of those positions. And we know it‟s an ongoing 

challenge. 

 

My colleague, the minister from Kelvington-Wadena, certainly 

spoke in more detail about this whole program. We know it‟s 

achievable, but we know we also need to set a target, and it‟s 

going to be a challenge to make sure this is done appropriately. 

Difficult decisions were made, and they had to be made. And 

we understand that this is what the member from Regina 

Rosemont meant when he said that the government must, quote, 

reign in spending, on a March 2nd, 2010 scrum. Indeed we have 

reigned in spending, and I hope that the members opposite will 

support that initiative because we certainly are consistent with 

his advice. 

 

I note that, in the following, that of eight provinces that have 

released their budgets, Saskatchewan is the only budget to show 

a decline year over year in budget expenses, and I think that is a 

leadership role that we can be very, very proud of. Mr. Speaker, 

Dr. Sherry Cooper, the Bank of Montreal chief economist, said 

in a newsletter March 24th, 2010, and I quote: 

 

This budget does what few others are likely to do this 

fiscal year — take immediate steps to rein in spending 

growth. [This budget] . . . should keep Saskatchewan high 

on the list of Canada‟s best positioned provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Paul Martin, a business commentator on CJME 

radio on March 25th, 2010 said, and I quote, “At the end of the 

day however this is probably the only government in the 

country that‟s cutting its spending.” 

 

[12:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as late as today‟s Leader-Post had a quote 

from Doug Elliott, in today‟s Leader-Post saying, in terms of 

the weekly wage exceeds the national average for the first time 

in our history, he said, “We‟re ahead of Canada for the first 

time . . . We can brag about it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in recent years governments of all 

stripes, including our own, have followed the well-worn path of 

bigger government and increased spending. Our government 

believes that it doesn‟t work that way. We believe you cannot 

spend your way out of a deficit. We have chosen a different 

path. 

 

This budget is balanced, forward-looking, and responsible. This 

path that we have chosen is not the easy path, but it is the right 

path to ensure Saskatchewan‟s economic momentum continues 

as we are poised to lead the nation in growth in the next two 

years. It‟s a right path for the new Saskatchewan. We‟re 

looking to the future with confidence and with hope. We know 

that, without a doubt, that the best days of this province are still 

ahead of us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll pridefully support the 

budget. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is the 

amendment raised by the member from the constituency of 

Regina Dewdney, seconded by the member from Cumberland: 

 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted, 

and the following be added: 

 

“that the government no longer has the confidence of the 

Members of this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan for the following reasons: presenting an 

inaccurate portrayal of the province‟s debt and deficit 

while forcing Saskatchewan people to pay the price for the 

government‟s financial mismanagement through hurtful 

cuts to important programs and services.” 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour please rise. Oh, pardon me. 

Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:47 until 12:48.] 

 



4696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2010 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 34] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Gantefoer Draude Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert Heppner 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Schriemer Stewart Allchurch 

Weekes Wilson Michelson 

LeClerc Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Bradshaw Kirsch 

McMillan   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 20; 

those opposed, 34. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. Order. 

Order. Before I call the motion, I did hear a comment about 

someone speaking the truth. Now where it came from, I don‟t 

know. But I want to remind members that I would ask members 

to be mindful of being respectful when the debate is being 

called, when the vote is being called. 

 

The motion before the Assembly brought forward by the 

Minister of Finance, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:51 until 12:53.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 34] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Gantefoer Draude Boyd 

Eagles McMorris Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert Heppner 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Schriemer Stewart Allchurch 

Weekes Wilson Michelson 

LeClerc Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Bradshaw Kirsch 

McMillan   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 34; those 

opposed, 20. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion is carried. 

 

It now being near the hour of adjournment, this House will 

stand adjourned until Monday, April the 12th at 1:30 p.m. 

 

In the meantime, I trust that all members will enjoy the Easter 

weekend and week with their family and friends. Have a great 

Easter. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4669 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4669 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4669 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4669 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4669 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4670 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4670 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4671 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4671 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4671 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4671 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4672 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4672 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4672 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4672 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Autism Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4673 

 Cancer Awareness Month 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4673 

 Coyote and Gopher Populations 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4673 

 100th Anniversary Salute 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4673 

 Taxes, Debt, and Interest Payments 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4674 

 Easter Celebrations 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4674 

 Poisson D’Avril 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4674 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care Provision 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4675 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4675 

 Municipal Revenue Sharing 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4676 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4676 

 Big River Saw Mill 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4676 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4676 

 Autism Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4677 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4677 

 Financial Reporting Practices and State of the Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4678 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4678 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4679 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4679 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4680 



 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4681 

  Yates (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................... 4681, 4684 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................... 4681, 4684 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) .......................................................................................................................... 4681, 4684 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4685 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4690 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4693 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 4696 

 Recorded Division (motion) ....................................................................................................................................................... 4696 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


