




















































Hansard: March 10, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 28A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4099 

 March 10, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to all members of the legislature, 21 

students from Sheldon Williams Collegiate who are here in the 

east gallery. And they are accompanied by their teacher, 

Steffany Salloum, and they’re in grade 11. They’re planning to 

continue their education of how democracy works with a 

practical example today. And I know we’ll all show them how 

the system works, and we’ll also learn and understand that what 

we’re doing is for their generation and coming generations. So 

thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly a fellow sitting in the east gallery, 

Lorne Hill, a former resident of Moose Jaw that I had many 

dealings with when he was still living in our community. He’s 

travelled around the province, worked in a variety of areas, but 

wherever he has gone, he has always shown a great dedication 

to community and the values that he feels are highly placed in 

his life and seem to remain fairly constant. So no matter where 

he’s been in the province, he’s been active and a contributor to 

the improvement of the province for all of us. So I’d hope that 

all of my colleagues would welcome Lorne to the Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 

member for Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the legislature, my local council, RM [rural 

municipality] council that I was part of before I became part of 

the legislature. Ron Risling is the RM administrator out there; 

Rob Kirkham who actually is my neighbour, but also a 

councillor out there; Vern Glaicar and Scott Haas. And I’d ask 

everyone to welcome them to their legislature today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the condition of 

Highway 310. The condition of Highway 310 is a potential 

safety hazard for the residents who have to drive on that 

highway each and every day. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Goodeve, Kelliher, and Hubbard. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

present a petition that was organized by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. This petition is in support of the 

implementation of a Saskatchewan scholarship fund, said fund 

promised in the Sask Party 2007 election platform. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from Saskatoon. It’s 

my honour to present this petition. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with 

petition in support of new long-term care beds in La Ronge, 

given that there’s a growing wait-list for long-term care beds in 

and around La Ronge and an increase in the aging population of 

Mamawetan Churchill Health Region. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures are from La Ronge and Air Ronge. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to a petition in 

support of maintaining quality health care services. And the 

petition indicates that the Government of Saskatchewan needs 

to recognize the integral role of all health care providers as 

valued members of the health care team, and that health care 

providers are employed across Saskatchewan and that they 

provide valuable care, compassion, and quality health care 

services to our citizens. The petition reads as follows: 

 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 



4100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors. And we know that rising living costs are 

having a huge impact on Saskatchewan senior citizens and that 

we need more affordable housing options and that would 

significantly help Saskatchewan seniors cope with the cost of 

living. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks are from the good town of Carrot 

River. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support to repair Highway 123 that goes to the community of 

Cumberland House. This petition is signed and supported by the 

leadership of the community of Cumberland House, 

Cumberland House First Nation. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. It’s a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a request for the Sask Party’s actions 

to match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of reducing the interest on fixed-rate 

student loans to prime. And I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the city of 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition with respect to water issues in rural 

Saskatchewan. This is one where the government ministry has 

decided to, directed SaskWater to cut off supplies of water for 

domestic use to Furdale customers. And the Furdale residents 

have been dealing in good faith with SaskWater for over 30 

years and have paid large amounts for their domestic systems. 

And the alternative water supply referred to by the government 

ministry is a private operator. And I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of Furdale 

causing great hardship with no suitable alternatives, to 

exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further water service 

cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause under The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 and 

The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this government 

fulfils its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by the good residents of Furdale, 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 

today, at the end of which I’ll also be tabling petitions left out 

on Monday in terms of naming the towns and cities across 

Saskatchewan. But the petition I stand to present today is in 

support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, it is the existing 

construction industry labour relations Act, 1992 has provided a 

stable environment for labour relations in the construction 

industry in our province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4101 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. A petition, Mr. Speaker, that was 

sparked by a 40 per cent increase in rents to some Battlefords 

area apartment dwellers. Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as 

follows. The petitioners: 

 

. . . call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop 

an affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords, and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford, the RM of North Battleford, and the village of 

Denholm. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

again today signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the government’s disregard and disrespect for 

constitutional legal rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligations to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today’s petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise, as I 

have every day within this session, to present petitions on 

behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it 

relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances 

by the Sask Party. They allude to the shameful $1 billion deficit 

created by the Sask Party. They recognize that this is a problem 

that’s not getting better, but worse, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Carlyle and 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of the expansion of the graduate retention program. 

The petition is calling for the inclusion of master’s and Ph.D. 

students in the grad retention program, which should in fact be 

a key component to make sure we keep our people here, part of 

the innovation agenda. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by good residents of Moose Jaw. I so 

present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Canadian Music Week 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today kicks off the 

Canadian Music Week which will run through to March 14. 

Canadian Music Week began in 1981, but this year’s 

conference in Toronto has grown to become one of Canada’s 

largest and most influential music events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadian Music Week was designed to stimulate 

the exchange of market intelligence, to increase dialogue, and 

provide networking opportunities for musicians. Today I would 

like to recognize the efforts of all people in the Canadian Music 

Industry, but especially our homegrown talent from right here 

in Saskatchewan. Many of our musicians had the opportunity to 

showcase their wares to 120,000 people from across the nation 

and around the world when they performed at the Saskatchewan 

pavilion during the 2010 Olympics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this group consisted of the following: The Deep 

Dark Woods, Def 3, Jack Semple and the Free Style Boogie 

Band, Brad Johner, Jordan Cook, La Raquette à Claquettes, 

Library Voices, Megan Lane, Andrea Menard, Mobadass, 

Donny Parenteau, Jason Plumb & The Willing, the Regina Riot, 

Kyle Riabko, Skavenjah, The True Jive Pluckers, the Ultimate 



4102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

Power Duo, and the Whitefish Juniors. 

 

I’d like to once again congratulate all of the participants that 

performed in Vancouver and say that based on their 

performance, the local music scene is alive and well in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Poster 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party is holding a fundraiser next month and recently 

distributed a poster advertising the event to all homes in 

Martensville. The poster superimposes an invitation to the pig 

roast fundraiser on a picture of the burning twin towers in New 

York City taken moments after the second plane struck the 

south tower on September 11th. 

 

Given the theme of the event, a photo of the fundraiser’s guest 

speaker or any of the many iconic images of heroic first 

responders would have been appropriate choices. But to use a 

graphic image of the burning twin towers in which thousands of 

people tragically died to raise political dollars is both shocking 

for its lack of respect and disturbing for its lack of judgment. 

 

This poster is now drawing national attention, Mr. Speaker. 

And online commentators are clear in their condemnation of 

this offensive fundraising poster. One said simply, “I’m at a 

loss for words.” Another said, “They have no sense of common 

decency.” And finally another said the poster’s approval spoke 

to a “basic lack of humanity.” Mr. Speaker, anyone who saw 

and approved this poster clearly lacks sound judgment. It’s as 

simple as that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Premier will call on his cabinet 

minister to immediately withdraw this ill-conceived and 

offensive poster. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Red Cross Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. “Would it not be 

possible, in time of peace and quiet, to form relief societies for 

the purpose of having care given to the wounded in wartime by 

zealous, devoted, and thoroughly qualified volunteers?” This is 

the question Henri Dunant, the Swiss founder of the Red Cross, 

asked after he witnessed suffering on an Italian battlefield in 

1859. 

 

Mr. Speaker, March is Red Cross month and I would like to 

take this opportunity to recognize those people that make this 

organization successful. The Red Cross makes no 

discrimination as to nationality, race, religious beliefs, class, or 

political opinions. The Red Cross endeavours to relieve the 

suffering of individuals, being guided solely by their needs and 

to give priority to the most urgent cases of distress. 

 

This was never more evident than the rapid and expansive 

response to the needs of the people of Haiti after the recent 

devastating earthquake. At a time when the people needed 

assistance, the Red Cross was one of the first organizations to 

arrive. It is because of their volunteers’ tireless effort that for 

over a century, the suffering of people around the world has 

been eased. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was an 

honour to act as a server at the 9th annual Unions of Regina 

Christmas dinner for Regina’s less-fortunate residents on 

December 22nd, 2009. I was joined by the Regina members 

from Elphinstone, Dewdney, and Walsh Acres. This event is 

organized by the Regina and District Labour Council with the 

support of affiliate and non-affiliate unions, the Saskatchewan 

Provincial Building & Construction Trades Council, the 

Canadian Labour Congress, and community partners. 

 

This event would not be possible without the incredibly 

generous donation of the Delta Hotel and its staff. Christmas is 

a time of year that can be incredibly stressful for individuals 

and families who are struggling financially, emotionally, and 

socially. At this year’s event, more than 1,500 people attended 

and were provided a place to warm up, a fantastic meal, 

activities, and gifts for children. Appreciation was evidence; 

many thanks were provided. 

 

I would be remiss not to thank the event organizer of this year’s 

dinner, Janice Bernier, and the many union donors, volunteers, 

and their families who made the evening possible. Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in thanking 

all those who contributed to the broader needs within our 

community and supported the ninth annual Unions of Regina 

Christmas dinner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Speed Skater Wins Olympic Gold 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For nearly 

three weeks, the eyes of the world were on Canada. There was a 

strong contingent of Saskatchewan athletes representing our 

province as well as Canada at the Vancouver Winter Olympics. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize Regina’s very own 

Lucas Makowsky for his performance at the 2010 Olympics. 

Lucas competed against the best in the world that they had to 

offer in the 5000 and 1500 metre speed skating races. Lucas 

was part of the men’s team’s pursuit which collected Canada’s 

fifth and final long track speed skating medal. This Canadian 

team of dedicated skaters defeated the United States in a 

head-to-head race for gold. 

 

Lucas Makowsky’s story is one that has been many years in the 

making. While attending high school at Regina’s Campbell 

Collegiate, he epitomized the term student athlete. Now all his 

hard work has resulted in a gold medal for his country. This 

gold medal is especially important to the people of Regina who 

had the pleasure of watching Lucas grow up right before their 

eyes. Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to recognize 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4103 

Regina’s Lucas Makowsky who is a remarkable example of 

hard work and dedication. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Tribute to Robertson Trading Post Founder 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. The Robertson Trading Post has 

been a landmark in La Ronge for more than 40 years. It is a 

general store with groceries, clothing, and hardware, a northern 

camps supplier and outfitter, a fur trader in a 200-year tradition, 

and an exhibitor and seller of fine northern craft, the work of 

many First Nations artists. 

 

Alex Robertson began working for the Hudson’s Bay Company 

in northern Canada and formed his own independent fur-trading 

company in 1967. Working in the North, Mr. Robertson grew to 

love the exotic and intricate works of art crafted by Dene and 

Cree artists. In the 1940s he began to purchase and collect 

beautiful pieces, including beaded hide gloves and moccasins, 

jackets, a rare ruffed grouse feather fan, birch bark bitings, 

sculptures carved from moose and elk antlers, and intricate 

baskets of birch bark. These works highlight northern plants 

and animals and reflect First Nations culture and spirituality. 

 

Alex Robertson decided to build his own collection while also 

acting as the seller of other pieces to customers who admired 

his collection displayed in the Robertson Trading Post. The 

Saskatoon Craft Council, located in Saskatoon Nutana, curated 

a public exhibition of the Robertson Trading collection on 

January 15th to February 21st of this year. 

 

Along with my colleagues, I want to thank the Robertson family 

for their vital contribution to Saskatchewan culture life and for 

engendering such appreciative support for First Nations artists. I 

also want to thank the Saskatchewan Craft Council for 

highlighting this beautiful collection and exhibiting it for a 

larger public audience. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Hosts the Saskatchewan Winter Games 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s an 

overwhelming national pride in the performance of our 

Canadian athletes at the Olympic Games in Vancouver, and 

rightfully so. However at that same time there was another 

exciting event: the Saskatchewan Winter Games that were 

going on. 

 

The Winter Games were especially exciting for my home 

community of Moose Jaw as that city played host to 1,800 

athletes, coaches, and officials participating in 19 different 

events. The games provided an opportunity for athletes to 

partake in a multi-sport event in preparation for a higher level 

of competition such as the Olympics. 

 

The Winter Games attracted 4,000 visitors to the city. Such 

events are a tremendous economic boost to the local economy. 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t say enough about the positive effects that 

this had on Moose Jaw. 

 

Besides the economic value to the community with busy hotels, 

restaurants, and retail outlets, there was another bigger effect. 

Seeing how friends and neighbours came together to host this 

event gave me great pride. Fifteen hundred citizens volunteered 

in planning, scheduling, preparing accommodations, security, 

transporting to and from events, and food — feeding hundreds 

of hungry athletes, no easy task. It meant working together for 

the success of the games. 

 

I call on all members to acknowledge the athletes, the coaches, 

managers, officials, parents, and volunteers for the success of 

the Saskatchewan Winter Games, February 14th to 20th, in 

Moose Jaw. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Supply of Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I said 

yesterday, the government’s own website shows that the 

number of doctor vacancies in the province has increased by 50 

per cent since the election of the Sask Party government. And 

this is a real problem right across the province. In fact, 

yesterday the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities passed a motion on this very issue. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: when will the government 

admit that any strategy that increases, increases the vacancy by 

50 per cent of doctors in this province is a failed strategy, and 

when will they step up and do something about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Many of the members on this side of the House had 

the privilege of spending the morning at the SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention, and I had a chance to speak to the convention. 

 

More importantly, there was an accountability session, and — 

no surprise, Mr. Speaker — health care dominated the questions 

from the floor of the SARM convention . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The member asks if I participated in that one. 

The answer of course is yes; we were all there as a cabinet. 

 

And, you know, there is more work that needs to be done. Mr. 

Speaker, we have laid out a plan that includes new training 

seats for doctors, new training seats for residencies, doubling 

the training seats for residencies. We have a recruitment 

agency, Mr. Speaker. The minister will have an announcement 

on this issue tomorrow — more developments. Here’s the 

bottom line. Compared to 2007 when members opposite were 

the government, there are today 164 more doctors practising in 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



4104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Premier. As 

the president of SARM said, and I quote, while he was talking 

to the media, the quote is, “It’s becoming a huge issue in a lot 

of communities . . . We definitely need some help.” 

 

Well yesterday the members of SARM who talked to us while 

we were there, many of them indicated that their communities 

are paying hundreds of thousands of dollars to recruit and retain 

rural doctors. And they simply can’t afford it because it’s 

money that should be spent on local infrastructure. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: why is the government 

leaving and abandoning these communities to work out these 

arrangements on their own? These are the responsibility of the 

provincial government, not the municipal government. I ask the 

Premier: when will you take up your responsibility and help 

solve this problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the other thing 

that Mr. Marit of SARM said is that the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] are still very unpopular in rural Saskatchewan. Part of the 

reason why they are very unpopular in rural Saskatchewan 

today is the decimation that happened to rural health care when 

they were the government, Mr. Speaker. That’s part of the 

problem, part of the problem. 

 

When that member sat in the cabinet of the province of 

Saskatchewan, I was on a volunteer committee in Swift Current. 

What were we doing, Mr. Speaker? I was on a committee 

raising money, Mr. Speaker. We were raising . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I was on a volunteer 

committee of people in Swift Current when those members 

opposite were the government. What were we doing? We were 

raising money to supplement recruitment programs. We 

recruited a doctor to stay in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When we took office, we undertook to keep our promises to 

increase training seats for doctors, for residencies, Mr. Speaker. 

We undertook to keep our promise, the first one made and kept 

by a government to actually have an agency focused on 

recruitment. The net result is 164 doctors, more doctors in this 

province than what was the case when the members opposite 

were the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the comments made at the 

SARM convention from many of the delegates when we were 

talking to them was exactly about this issue the Premier’s 

talking about — that is, broken promises. That’s what they said. 

They said, the Premier and members of the government 

travelled the province and promised to fix health care. Sadly 

that promise was broken and is broken and the doctor vacancy 

has increased by 50 per cent. 

 

[14:00] 

But it’s not only in that area; it’s in home care as well. We’re 

now seeing the home care workers fleeing that profession 

because the government isn’t funding it properly. And now 

they’re asking workers to work a split shift, which means 

allowing them to be on standby for 12 hours a day and paying 

them for eight. How much sense does that make when you’re 

trying to recruit health care workers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over the last two and a half years we’ve been working 

diligently to recruit health care workers in all parts of the 

province, whether it’s in urban Saskatchewan and rural 

Saskatchewan because, quite frankly, when we came to 

government in 2007 it was a mess because of the former 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had some of the lowest retention rates in 

Canada for nurses. Mr. Speaker, we went to work and we put 

together a recruitment agency, Mr. Speaker, that has moved the 

nursing recruitment of new grads from the worst in Canada to 

the best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’re going to hear more on this tomorrow, but 

the recruitment agency is going be making an announcement at 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] that is going to do the 

very same thing — moving from not a great retention record of 

our graduates in the U of S for medicine to one of the best in 

Canada. Mark my words. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask members to allow 

the member to place the question. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister asked us to 

mark his word. That’s the problem. The members at SARM 

marked his word three or four times on the issue of health care, 

and it keeps getting worse. Every plan they bring in, the 

problem gets worse. That’s the problem. 

 

The problem is they had $2.3 billion in the bank to fix the 

problem. They now have a $1 billion deficit. And one of the 

delegates came up to me and said, how is this going to work? 

When they had 2.3 billion in the bank, they couldn’t solve it. 

Now they’re in deficit $1 billion, now they’re going to solve it. 

This is the problem. 

 

My question to the minister is: in home care when you can’t get 

workers when they’re . . . need to work eight hours a day, how 

is solving the problem making them be on standby for 12 hours 

and asking them to be paid for eight? How is that a solution? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if you want to start talking about comparing records to 

records, I’ll put our record on recruitment and retention of 

health care professionals against theirs any day of the week. 

 

For years the registered nurses were saying that we’re short; 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4105 

we’re absolutely short. And for years, that opposition absolutely 

turned their back on the nursing profession, Mr. Speaker. In two 

and a half years, we’ve set a goal of 800 more nurses in this 

province — a goal that they thought could never be reached. 

 

In fact the minister, the former minister, the member from 

North Battleford said, we don’t want to set any goals. Why? 

Because we just aren’t going to meet them, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

meeting this goal, and we’ll meet every goal that we make, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re at 75 per cent. We’re 75 per cent of our way to 

our goal of 800 nurses in the first two years, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re doing it with physicians as well as all other health care 

workers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Premier 

rant and rave and make plans, but nothing happens. Nothing 

changes. The problem still exists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many home care workers are parents who have 

children at home. Many of them are women. Now you’re 

having a difficult time getting people to work in home care and 

there’s a shortage. Now the solution of the government, as I 

understand it, is to say to them, you now need to be on standby 

for 12 hours and we’ll pay you for eight. And you have to work 

in different locations — not just one, but multiple locations. 

And how is a person going to arrange day care or the needs of 

their family? And how many people are going to stay in that 

profession, given this? I just simply don’t understand. 

 

But more importantly, the public don’t understand the kind of 

solutions this government is bringing forward. And I ask the 

minister, when will he come to his senses, quit ranting and 

raving and announcing plans, and fix the problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, that member 

has been in the province for maybe a year. I don’t know why in 

a year he’s so down on this province, Mr. Speaker. He seems to 

be absolutely down. Now perhaps it’s because he came from the 

promised land. Did he come from the promised land of Alberta? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member had spent 

many, many years in Alberta. And obviously, you know, the 

grass was way greener on that side of the fence, Mr. Speaker. 

And if he’s going to be so negative about the province, I wish 

he would go back to that greener pasture, Mr. Speaker. Quite 

frankly, quite frankly, the people of Saskatchewan are not 

interested in the doom and gloom from that Opposition Leader, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in two and a half years we’ve made gains in the 

health care system. Is it enough? Absolutely not. We have a lot 

more work to do. That’s why we’ve increased the number of 

training seats in many professions so that will benefit us into the 

future — something that the opposition members, when they 

were in government, didn’t do. What they did do was cut 

training seats, and that’s why we’re in the position we’re in 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Financial Support for Health Care Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister gave every 

indication that his government would no longer be co-paying 

for chiropractic services. The financial bungling of the Sask 

Party has put many health programs in jeopardy. 

 

To the minister: are interagency hospital transfer fee subsidies 

and senior subsidies for road ambulance trips the next programs 

to be chopped out of the Health budget due to the government’s 

financial mismanagement? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I answered the questions 

yesterday that, you know, there are many services that are 

insured services through the Canada Health Act that we cover, 

Mr. Speaker. There are a vast number of services that we cover 

that aren’t insured. Some are subsidized; some are paid 

completely by government, Mr. Speaker. The drug plan would 

be one of them. 

 

We are looking at all the options, Mr. Speaker, because what 

we need to do is to, when health care is 42 per cent of the 

budget and we’re going to keep our spending down in this 

government on a tight budget as we move forward, we have to 

look at all of those expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those decisions have been talked about and will be talked about 

up until budget day. And there will be much debate after budget 

day, Mr. Speaker, but that’s when we’ll find out the answers to, 

for example, the chiropractic question and many others. You 

can use many other examples, Mr. Speaker, but I’m not going 

to answer issue by issue until we get to budget day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every cut the minister 

makes because of the Premier’s mismanagement of the financial 

situation affects the health of someone in Saskatchewan — 

someone’s parent, someone’s grandparent, someone’s spouse, 

someone’s child. Two weeks ago when asked, the minister said 

he would not rule out the complete elimination of the seniors’ 

drug plan and the children’s drug plan. To the minister: are 

children and seniors the next victim of his new slash and burn 

policy? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, for years and years I can 

remember on the opposition benches when they were 

unfortunately on this side for as many years as they were, they 

talked forever about, you know, oh if the Sask Party ever 

becomes government, the whole world is going to cave in, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 



4106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, but what I will say . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, all it was was doom and 

gloom from that side, Mr. Speaker. They fearmongered and 

fearmongered and fearmongered. Mr. Speaker, I will put our 

two and a half years of health care management against many 

years of theirs, i.e., 52 hospital closures, Mr. Speaker; Mr. 

Speaker, the smallest college of medicine in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. At one point under their watch, we were down to less 

than 100 seats for nursing. 

 

We’re paying the price for those decisions back then, Mr. 

Speaker. Our two and a half years of government, and 

especially all ministries including the Ministry of Health, can 

quite easily compare to their very best record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, well a smile and a chuckle isn’t 

going to make people happy about this budget. What we have 

here is a minister desperate to find any saving he can in his 

budget in order to toe the line of the Premier’s announcement 

that there will be no more than 3 per cent of an increase in the 

Health budget. 

 

According to the minister, everything is fair game. No program 

is safe from his axe. And to quote the minister, every line item 

is being looked at. And he said it again: everything’s on the 

chopping block. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: long-term care and home care are 

heavily subsidized by the government. Are these two programs 

also on the chopping block? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we cover a number of 

services that aren’t insured, Mr. Speaker, and most of those 

services or all those services will continue to be covered. Mr. 

Speaker, what they’re going to try and do over the next number 

of days is certainly fearmonger like they’ve done for many, 

many years. That’s what they fall back on is continuing to 

fearmonger, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I will say is that it is a tough budget going 

forward. There are going to be tough decisions. But all we 

heard, all we heard in the past year is where we should be 

spending more, spending more, spending more. That’s what 

they would want to do under their watch. They would love to 

see a huge deficit, obviously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That isn’t the tack that our government is taking. We’re taking a 

very responsible financial tack, Mr. Speaker, looking at all 

spending. And, Mr. Speaker, those decisions are tough but they 

will be announced certainly on March 24. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the people of this 

province fear most is someone who can’t manage the money. 

We’ve been there and done that, and we don’t want that any 

more. 

 

And what the minister won’t say, he won’t say if any of the 

programs are safe. If he’s talking fearmongering, say no. Say no 

today — no cuts on any of these programs. He won’t say it. 

He’s being too cute. If he’s not cutting these programs, tell the 

people who rely on them. Tell them now. Tell them today. If 

he’s not cutting the seniors’ drug plan, tell the seniors today. If 

he’s not cutting the co-payments for chiropractic services, tell 

them today. 

 

Now why do you think the minister’s leaving people hanging 

and wondering what’s going to be happening to them on the 

24th? Why is he causing worry and fear by saying everything’s 

on the chopping block? Is it so on budget day he can say, oh 

well I only cut two or three programs? So I could have cut 

more. I’m a big hero. Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can absolutely tell you 

we won’t do what that former government did — close 52 

hospitals around the province, Mr. Speaker. I can also tell you 

what we won’t do. What we won’t do is cut not only 52 

hospitals around this province, but hundreds of health care 

workers around this province lost their jobs because of the 

decisions of that former government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a tough budget and, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to be hearing the decisions that our government made. I 

will say that health care is going to be in very good shape 

moving forward. Absolutely it will be, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

continue to deliver services across this province, from corner to 

corner, with more nurses and more doctors that we’ve already 

seen increase over the last two and a half years. We’ll continue 

to see improvements in the health care system like that, Mr. 

Speaker, under our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Project Payment and Planning 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party says that building a 

new domed stadium is a generational opportunity. How does 

the government plan to pay for it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you for the question. Indeed we are partners 

with the Government of Canada, the city of Regina, and the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. We have worked hard to embark 

upon a feasibility study. That feasibility study was released on 

March the 1st . . . 

 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4107 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister of Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. The feasibility study said three things. It said that 

indeed it is feasible to go ahead with a large complex such as 

that in the heart of Regina. It’s not often that there is a large 

tract of land like there is in Saskatchewan, in Regina, and then 

certainly that’s what the study said. It also said that it would be 

feasible, that it would be economically feasible from an 

operating perspective to go ahead with that, Mr. Speaker. And 

third of all, it said that more work has to be done on the capital 

accumulation phase. 

 

[14:15] 

 

So we are finished the feasibility stage. We’re moving to the 

capital accumulation phase. We’re asking residents, we’re 

asking the private sector to come forward with their ideas. 

Indeed that’s what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I recall that the Premier said that 

this project needs between 100 million and $180 million in 

federal funding to go ahead. But we know that the Conservative 

MP [Member of Parliament] who actually represents the area 

where the stadium is proposed to be built told the Leader-Post 

that this project isn’t even on Ottawa’s priority list. 

 

Now at the same time, the Premier has an idea that he wants to 

build a new medical isotope reactor at the University of 

Saskatchewan. How does the government plan to pay for it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very 

clear with the people of Saskatchewan. The priorities of this 

government will be health care. It will be education. It will be 

fixing the mess that was left by members opposite. When you 

talk about an infrastructure deficit in Saskatchewan it’s health 

care, in Saskatchewan it’s education, in Saskatchewan it’s 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. What this government will 

certainly do . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that infrastructure 

deficit certainly extends to highways in our province. Mr. 

Speaker, what this government will do is we will look at 

opportunities — whether it’s innovation, whether it’s medical 

isotopes, whether it’s a reference plant in southern 

Saskatchewan for carbon capture and sequestration, whether it’s 

a generational opportunity like a stadium for Saskatchewan — 

we will look at all those opportunities, Mr. Speaker. We will do 

so in a responsible way, Mr. Speaker. And again, we will not do 

what members opposite did and leave this province in an 

infrastructure deficit beyond compare. Why, that’s what they 

did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that the 

Premier wants Ottawa to pay 75 per cent of the estimated $500 

million cost for the isotope reactor. That’s about $375 million. 

And he also wants the federal government to pay on an ongoing 

basis the $70 million annually that it costs to run this particular 

project. Now we note that last week in the federal budget there 

wasn’t any mention of this. 

 

The Premier also announced a joint carbon capture and storage 

project with the state of Montana with a lot of fanfare last 

spring. How does the government plan to pay for it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the money is set aside for the 

carbon capture and reference plant in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I know there are comments that 

members overreact to. But there are times when there is certain 

members . . . And a lot of opposition members have been really 

working hard to listen to the answers, but there are some are 

totally interfering, which is creating a problem. I recognize the 

Premier . . . I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — So, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t hear how the 

Premier plans to pay for this, but we know that he said that this 

needs $100 million in federal funding to go ahead. Since then 

Ottawa has put money into two similar projects in Alberta but 

nothing for the Saskatchewan-Montana project — nothing for 

this project, nothing for the stadium, nothing for the isotope 

reactor. 

 

It seems that the Sask Party’s special relationship with Ottawa 

is one-sided, or maybe it’s just in the Premier’s mind. Now the 

Saskatchewan people are on the hook for between 600 to $700 

million for megaprojects that are on the Premier’s wish list. 

Does the government have the money to pay for any of these 

megaprojects? Or should we add them to the list of the Sask 

Party’s broken promises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, just a 

suggestion. The hon. member has asked an important question. 

He indicated at the beginning of his question that he didn’t hear 

my answer, and I just offer this to members opposite. If they’re 

actually listening for the answer instead of yelling in the 

Assembly, they can actually hear the answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers aren’t on the hook for 

anything. With respect to the carbon capture project, we do 

have money set aside in Crown Investments Corporation for the 

share of the government’s partnership in the carbon capture and 

sequestration project with Montana. 



4108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

The Big Sky Sequestration Partnership, which would apply for 

funds for the US [United States] side, have now submitted their 

application. It has a file number. It’s now received by the 

Department of Energy who obviously also are partners with the 

project in Weyburn. We’re also working with the federal 

government with respect to the federal government’s share in 

the program. We’re going to continue to lead in this area, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll lead over the objections of the doom and 

gloomers opposite in the NDP. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask the opposition members to come to 

order. Order. Order. I will ask the Leader of the Opposition to 

come to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. If other members wish to have a 

private dialogue, I would ask them to go behind the bar or meet 

outside in the halls. At this time we’d like to hear the comments 

from the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Why thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of amendment to 

Bill 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

In developing these amendments, the government has consulted 

closely with representatives from non-governmental 

organizations, health region authorities, business associations, 

and health professional associations. I wish to thank them and 

their colleagues for their dedication to the working on this Act 

and to bring this Act up to . . . to bring this new Bill in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tobacco use in Saskatchewan remains high, 

particularly amongst young people. The government has 

already taken several important steps to curb smoking and the 

harmful effects of environmental tobacco smoke, including 

enacting a ban on smoking in the workplace. Through these 

amendments to The Tobacco Control Act, government is taking 

further steps to protect the health of Saskatchewan people and 

continue the reduction of tobacco use in our province.  

 

Specifically these amendments will: prohibit the sale of 

flavoured little cigars and provide the authority to restrict the 

sale of other flavoured tobacco products; prohibit tobacco and 

tobacco-related products from being visible to the public from 

outside of retail premises; prohibit the use of outdoor signs that 

advertise and promote tobacco at a place or premise where 

tobacco or tobacco products are sold; providing the authority to 

create regulations regarding indoor signs that indicate the price 

of tobacco and tobacco-related products at retails premises; 

provide the authority to exempt prescribed signs and items from 

the restrictions on tobacco advertising and promotion; prohibit 

the sale of tobacco and tobacco-related products in pharmacies; 

provide the authority to restrict smoking near doorways, 

windows, and air intakes of public buildings; prohibit smoking 

in the enclosed common spaces of multi-unit dwellings, such as 

apartments and condominiums; prohibit smoking on the 

grounds of schools; and prohibit smoking in a vehicle when a 

child under the age of 16 is present. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to building a 

healthier Saskatchewan, We believe these amendments to The 

Tobacco Control Act will do a great deal to protect 

Saskatchewan residents from the harms of environmental 

tobacco smoke and reduce the use of tobacco, notably among 

our province’s younger people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of the 

amendments to Bill 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 

2009. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 

2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise and make comments on the Bill 

No. 133, The Act to Amend the Tobacco Control Act. I’d like to 

commend the government for the additions that they made to 

this legislation. Not only the cigarette, the flavoured cigarette, 

cigarillos, and reducing or putting in place enforcement of not 

being able to parcel out these packages, that they have to be 

contained in their actual packaging that have the prescribed 

quantities and prescribed number of units. I think that’s a good 

step. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you also have to put in place some type of 

enforcement and some type of enforcement unit that will be 

able to check on these changes that are being made because one 

of the early . . . Back up a little bit here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I sat on the first tobacco control committee in 1999-2000. And 

in 2001, we brought the initial report here to the legislature. 

And some of the changes that the minister has proposed today, I 

won’t argue with him. I think they’re good moves — banning 

smoking in schoolyards. But I do know from the initial round of 

consultations that the legislative committee made in our first 

round, which was ’99-2000, there was a great deal of concern 

from the various school boards as to how these would be 

enforced. And would you just be moving students off the school 

grounds and onto neighbours’ property or neighbouring 

properties? And how exactly would you enforce this and who 

would enforce the new regulations? And it was a big concern 

when we did the initial consultations and the initial discussion 

on the original legislation that was brought in in 2001. 

 

But the questions still remain. Does it just move people off to 

neighbouring properties? Does it move students off to 

neighbouring properties? And who will enforce the regulations 

and whose responsibility is it if students are moving beyond 

school property? 

 

It’s one more job that you’re not going to have teachers 

providing. They are not out in anywhere near enough numbers, 

or it’s just one more job that they don’t have time to do to be 

enforcing tobacco regulations in the schoolyard. So there has to 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4109 

be some accommodation that’s made there. And it’s a difficult 

one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m not saying that it isn’t necessary, and I’m not saying that 

the minister isn’t making the right move, but I also would 

question how it’s going to be enforced. And those are things 

that we need to look at. Because we all know that this 

legislature and, if you have a large enough majority, 

government can put in place any type of legislation. But for it to 

be accepted and adhered to by and I think respected by the 

citizens of the province, there needs to be an understanding of 

why you put it into place, and an understanding of how it 

affects various areas across the province and what type of 

enforcement is going to be there. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So to put a law on the books that you have no hope of enforcing 

and may cause other problems in other areas, you need to look 

at the big picture. And you also need to be aware of what you’re 

putting in place and the repercussions of that legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say to prohibit the smoking of a person 

in a motor vehicle when another person under the age of 16 

years is present, is in the motor vehicle — and it’s noted in the 

explanatory notes that Nova Scotia and Ontario have similar 

legislation — I believe that it is a good step. But again, I would 

question by putting it in law, do you expect everyone to realize 

that it’s there and to automatically follow it? There needs to be 

enforcement, and who exactly is going to enforce the legislation 

and how it’s going to be enforced is an issue. 

 

There are a number of other pieces, Mr. Speaker, that are 

contained in this new legislation, the amendments to The 

Tobacco Control Act. And when I was first reading through 

them and having a look at it, what I did, I went back in 

Hansard. And I looked at some of the comments that were 

made when the initial tobacco legislation was brought forward, 

and I think that the final report was tabled in January of 2001. 

And the interesting part is that there was a number of 

reservations that were tabled and were in the appendix to the 

original report. These reservations were the Sask Party 

members of the all-party committee and they had concerns 

about some of the recommendations that were put forward 

originally. They stated that they were unable to support the 

recommendations. 

 

And the recommendation was 4.1(b) which calls for 100 per 

cent smoke-free seating in restaurants, bars, bingo halls and 

casinos within five years unless these businesses could opt to 

install an enclosed and separately ventilated designated 

smoking room. They felt that there was adequate reasons — it 

must be things that must be done to protect non-smokers from 

the reported effects of second-hand smoke — but that this 

recommendation was not realistic. 

 

That just draws to mind a number of other questions as to how 

realistic are the recommendations that are being put forward 

today by the minister and how will they be enforced and how 

will they be policed and what are side effects and issues that go 

along with them. I don’t doubt that they’re necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, but I would just question as to how thoughtful the 

minister has been in how much background has been done for 

this legislation. 

 

Because we also know that when it was first announced, when 

the minister first announced and made his comments that this 

legislation was coming forward, he also announced that 

smoking would be banned on outdoor patios. There was some 

outcry and I’m sure quite a few phone calls to the minister’s 

office. And when the legislation was tabled in the House, patios 

are nowhere to be found. 

 

So that raises a number of red flags, Mr. Speaker. First and 

foremost is that the minister actually didn’t do his work before 

he brought the legislation to this House, obviously had not done 

his consultations with stakeholders and people that were 

affected. So it brings me back to my initial comments and 

concerns. How do you enforce this? And what are the 

repercussions that will come from these measures being put in 

place? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the initial report that 

was tabled in January of 2001 from the special committee on 

tobacco control. And there was some objections put forward by 

the Sask Party members on the committee to the process 

followed by the committee in deciding who was able to address 

committee members and who was not. While at that time there 

was obviously . . . I mean they had concerns that people they 

felt were important, had important contributions to make to the 

deliberations of the committee, had not been allowed to appear 

before it. 

 

What we’re seeing now is a piece of legislation put in place or 

tabled before this Assembly that has had no consultations 

whatsoever. So I’m not sure how you find consultations a 

priority at one point in time on this topic, but when you’re in 

this position and government in bringing forward the 

legislation, all of a sudden consultations don’t have to happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only on this piece of legislation, but 

we have seen it time and time and time again with pieces of 

legislation that have been brought forward by this government, 

that the consultations are only done with people who agree with 

the legislation that’s being brought forward, whether it was 

essential services or it was changes to The Trade Union Act. It 

was only supporters and people who were requesting the 

legislation that were allowed to have any type of consultation. 

Others could basically pound sand. There has been total 

disregard for the general population within the province. It was 

evident in those Bills. 

 

It’s evident in Bill 80 that there has been a great deal . . . we had 

to make a great deal of noise to get any type of consultations. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would use the term consultations very 

loosely because the minister has said with that Bill, well he 

consulted with CLAC [Christian Labour Association of 

Canada] who has a vested interest in the passage of Bill 80 and 

has basically ignored the other unions that represent workers in 

this province in the trades who support the trades, support 

development of the trades and the apprenticeship program, who 

have worked many, many years to build a good working 

relationship. And when we look at 17 years without a labour 

dispute or disruption in the construction area across this 

province, and in a time when there is a great deal of 

construction going on in the province, all of a sudden the 



4110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

government brings forward this Bill 80 piece of legislation with 

no consultations other than with an out-of-province supposed 

union. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The question before the 

Assembly is the Bill No. 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment 

Act, and I’d ask the member to keep her comments to this 

specific piece of legislation. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

apologize if you felt I was straying from the amendments to the 

tobacco Act. But what I was really drawing notice to was that 

while the Saskatchewan Party members on the special 

committee on tobacco control in 2001 stressed the point that 

there needed to be broad consultations and repeated 

consultations with some groups. And they felt so strongly about 

this, Mr. Speaker, that they even put reservations attached to the 

official report that was tabled in this legislature in January 

2001. 

 

I mean they felt strongly about consultations, but yet when we 

see the new piece of legislation and the amendments to The 

Tobacco Control Act, there is question as to what kind of 

consultations have taken place. So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

say it’s not consultations at the convenience of the minister. It 

should be honest-to-goodness consultations that happen right 

across business that the government is doing. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that that’s where it becomes vitally 

important for the opposition to make sure that we do thorough 

scrutiny of these pieces of legislation and ask the questions that 

obviously the government hasn’t taken the time to. And mister 

deputy . . . or, Mr. Speaker, sorry. I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I 

expect the Deputy Speaker to be sitting there. 

 

But it is important that consultations are done. And I just 

wanted to point to the other examples where this government 

has clearly fallen down — clearly, clearly fallen down. And the 

consultations have been non-existent on other pieces of 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, I could sit here and talk to my 

colleagues, and we could all agree on something. But that 

doesn’t mean it’s a legitimate piece of legislation that should go 

forward. 

 

You need to make sure that you have done thorough 

consultations, that you have looked at all of the repercussions 

that will come out of that piece of legislation, and make sure 

that you’re prepared for it. And, Mr. Speaker, you need to also 

make sure that you are prepared for whatever those 

repercussions may be. 

 

So those are my comments when it comes to consultations. And 

that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that I was looking at and drawing a 

comparison between Bill 80 and the poor consultations that 

have been done in that piece of legislation. Also the poor 

consultations that were done with essential services and the 

changes to The Trade Union Act and how that will have 

repercussions that will affect many, many more people in this 

province. And it will have a lasting effect and a lasting distrust, 

I have to say. Mr. Speaker, it really builds a distrust for the 

government, of the government, and the things that they are 

putting forward. 

 

And it’s something that, as you go through a number of these 

pieces of legislation and realize that there hasn’t been thorough 

consultations done, you start to look for the pitfalls and the 

areas that could be of concern and may not, in fact, even be 

workable. So The Tobacco Control Act is one of those. 

 

And I draw the comparison to the lack of consultations when 

we see that once the minister did actually make public 

comments on this piece of legislation, that it was coming 

forward, he at that time included patios, but has since, between 

making his comments and actually tabling the legislation in the 

Assembly, all of a sudden patios have disappeared. So if he had 

done his consultations first before he made his announcement, 

he may not be doing so with a bit of a red face, Mr. Speaker. He 

may have been able to move through the piece of legislation 

that he had proposed at the beginning. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that are in here 

that are all good moves. And it’s actually encouraging to look at 

the distance we have come in this short period of time. And I 

think back to the original tobacco control report and the initial 

legislation that came forward, and Saskatchewan was the first 

jurisdiction to put in place the covers and having the power 

walls covered, and not a normal place. And that was the intent 

so that power walls which . . . We were so used to walking into 

just about any store, any operation, and there was a power wall 

of cigarettes because we know, by marketing, that they are put 

there for a specific reason. And the whole intent of having those 

walls covered and moved was that we de-normalized tobacco 

and tobacco in our communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that has since been picked up by many other 

jurisdictions around the world. And in between there, it had a 

substantial court challenge as to whether it was a legitimate 

move for governments to make. And I’m very proud of the fact 

that it did withstand the court challenge and that it has been 

picked up by other jurisdictions around the world, not only 

across Canada but around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were at the forefront making changes. Some 

would argue that we needed to be a little quicker, but we always 

made sure that we were thorough in the discussions that we had 

and in the position that we took. And I hope that this piece of 

legislation will turn out to be that thorough and that we won’t 

see repercussions that the government has not prepared for and 

has in fact made accommodation for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues 

that are anxious to make comments on this piece of legislation. 

And we have people to talk to and see if those accommodations 

and preparations are in fact in place for the government’s 

legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would adjourn debate 

on Bill 133. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 133. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[14:45] 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4111 

Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill 135, The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009. The amendments to 

this prescription drug Act will require pharmacies to record the 

sale of non-prescription codeine products in the pharmaceutical 

information program, better known as PIP. PIP is a secure 

web-based computer application that provides authorized health 

care providers such as pharmacists, physicians, and nurses who 

have access to medication history of Saskatchewan patients and 

other tools to help make drug therapy decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, non-prescription codeine products can be harmful 

if used inappropriately, and pharmacists have indicated that 

they feel limited in their efforts to prevent abuse and misuse. 

Currently there is no central collection of information on sales 

of these products in the province and there is a risk of misuse of 

this medication. By recording these products in the patient 

medication profile in the pharmaceutical information program, 

we hope to prevent the inappropriate use and enhance patient 

safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, federal and provincial regulations and bylaws 

currently govern the sale of non-prescription codeine products. 

In Saskatchewan, pharmacists are not permitted to sell more 

than 50 tablets without a prescription and must record all sales 

of these products in their store. However because there is no 

centralized collection of information of sales of these products, 

it is challenging for pharmacists to verify potential 

inappropriate uses. Due to the risk of harm and abuse with these 

drugs, the College of Pharmacists have expressed its support for 

a more effective way for pharmacies to monitor their sale. We 

believe the proposed amendments of The Prescription Drugs 

Act will do a great deal to limit misuse and improve patient 

safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Going 

through the Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs Act, Mr. 

Speaker, basically I mean it’s pretty straightforward by the 

looks of it. Reporting the sale of non-prescription codeine sales 

and having a central collection for the data and the information 

is important. And there needs to be something in place that will 

facilitate that. And by the looks of this piece of legislation, 

that’s what it will do, other than we have a few housekeeping 

amendments that are also put in place, changing department to 

ministry, which is happening throughout. Whatever Bills are 

put in place, there is also that housekeeping process that has 

been adopted by the government flipping to the ministry title. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see any problems with this Bill, and I 

can clearly understand the reason and the rationale for wanting 

a collection of the data across the province and for pharmacists 

to be able to report to the pharmacist information profile, I 

believe is what the minister stated. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are others in our caucus and 

stakeholders that will have more expertise in this area than for 

sure I do. So at this point in time, to facilitate others in my 

caucus to make comments and to speak to stakeholders across 

the province about the Bill, and if there’s any problems that 

they see with it, at this point in time I’ll adjourn debate on Bill 

135, the prescription drugs Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 135. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 112 — The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to be on my feet today to provide some comments to 

Bill No. 112, An Act to amend The Justice of the Peace Act, 

1988 and to make consequential amendments to certain Acts. 

 

And so what essentially has taken place with the introduction of 

Bill 112 is the government’s proposing legislation that will 

increase the number of justices of the peace in the province. 

And if we’ve learned anything today in question period and this 

week in total, whenever they attempt to increase the numbers of 

professionals working in Saskatchewan, especially in this case 

this week — doctors in rural Saskatchewan — they’ve been 

magnificent failures. And so I’m not sure that you can trust the 

Bill that they introduce when they’ve tried three or four things 

and had plans that are smouldering on the ground. 

 

When it comes to increasing the numbers of other professions 

in the province, you have a Health minister in the province of 

Saskatchewan who says before the election, that health care in 

rural Saskatchewan, it’s in a bad state and they’re going to fix 

it. And then he comes to office and inherits $2.3 billion from 

the previous administration and then says that, well we’re going 

to increase the number of doctors in rural Saskatchewan. And 

you look on his own website and it says that there are now 50 

per cent more vacancies on the website than there were when 

they took office. 

 



4112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

It’s absolutely a shocking level of hypocrisy. And so when it 

comes to increasing the numbers of professionals and people in 

any profession working in Saskatchewan, it’s difficult to trust 

their ability to get that done. 

 

Now it’s important to note that there are a very large number of 

justices of the peace currently working in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and they do tremendous work. If you ever 

attempt to navigate through the justice system in Saskatchewan, 

it can be a complex system. And with the geography that our 

province has and the population that’s spread throughout the 

province, it would be exceedingly difficult to have a justice 

system that didn’t have justices of the peace — very 

responsible, learned people — aiding in a wide variety of the 

processes that take place within the justice system. And so I 

would like to thank the many people who are currently doing 

this work in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

And so I’ll outline at some length just a few of the many 

processes that they do perform to ensure a positive outcome 

when it comes to people’s interaction with the justice system. 

 

Now there are various roles that they play, and one of them is to 

administer oaths for criminal charges laid by the police or 

public. And so if you are in a position where an oath must be 

made for a criminal charge laid by the police or a member of 

the public, you can go to a Justice of the Peace who you may 

have greater access to than a Provincial Court judge. 

 

And it’s important for a number of reasons because if you live 

in a remote region of the province like La Loche or Sandy Bay 

where court is heard on a weekly basis or biweekly basis, you 

will have access to timely interaction with the justice system so 

that if you were been charged or had charges laid, you can see 

that justice is meted out in a reasonably quick fashion. 

 

Another important role that justices of the peace play within our 

justice system is to assist in initiating criminal charges, and this 

is most often done when police lay charges. Another role is to 

confirm or cancel police-issued processes. Another role which 

is very important is to review and sign court-issued processes, 

so they will review and sign a summons. They will review and 

sign warrants or undertakings that were court issued. 

 

Another role is to review and issue subpoenas that compel 

witnesses to attend a court, so the role they’ll have to play is to 

review the information and evidence presented. And it’s most 

important because it draws on somebody who has a lot of 

experience with various issues, and you need somebody who 

has good and sound judgment, who’s very knowledgeable, 

because they make important choices. And certainly it keeps the 

system running smoothly. 

 

Now those are just a few of the roles that they play in ensuring 

that the justice system runs smoothly. Now they also play a role 

in administering oaths for affidavits, affirmations, and 

declarations. That’s a role that would be used in many places 

and many cases. 

 

They consider search warrant applications, which plays an 

important role in society because we are a society that values 

two things, and one of which is our privacy, but the other is that 

we wish thorough and appropriate investigations. And so it’s 

important that we have a justice system that balances both 

important roles — the important role of the demand for privacy 

and the desire for privacy versus the society’s interest in a 

thorough and appropriate investigation. And so it’s a vital role 

that justices of the peace play. 

 

Now another demanding role, especially in rural Saskatchewan, 

is releasing people under conditions after arrest when they’re 

held in custody, and so they have judgments to make. They are 

sometimes called out in the middle of the night to make these 

judgments, and so it’s demanding in many ways. It calls on you 

to get up in the middle of the night and travel in order to fulfill 

your duty. And so it’s important because if you live in Sandy 

Bay and your judge is coming out of Prince Albert, you don’t 

want to have to wait three and a half hours for somebody to get 

there in order to do these things. So that’s another important 

role that they play. 

 

They also play a role in show-cause or bail hearings. It’s yet 

another area where they handle very difficult issues. Again it’s 

integral to the administration of justice in Saskatchewan and if 

you need help . . . or anybody who’s interacted knows that it’s a 

difficult system sometimes to navigate. And so justices of the 

peace play an important role in show-cause bail hearings. 

 

Another instance where they play an important role is 

performing in the absence of Provincial Court judges. And 

that’s absolutely crucial, given Saskatchewan’s geography and 

population demographics, because they essentially will perform 

some of the duties of a Provincial Court judge in the absence of 

a judge. And yet again, when you’re in a remote part of the 

province or a rural part of the province where you don’t have a 

judge present, it’s an important duty and we thank them for that. 

 

Now they often handle more judicial activities, including 

accepting pleas and then sentencing after the acceptance of 

those pleas. So that’s an important duty as well. They’ll also, as 

another part of their duties, grant adjournments where a 

Provincial Court judge is unavailable. 

 

[15:00] 

 

If you step back and take a look at how the justice system is 

comprised, you’ll see that, in that not exhaustive list that I’ve 

detailed, the system clearly couldn’t function without justices of 

the peace. And so it is certainly important that we make 

changes and amend legislation and bring forth consequential 

amendments that are reflective of the needs of the province 

when it pertains to judges and Justice of the Peace, to ensure 

that the system runs smoothly. 

 

Justices of the peace also have a role in traffic tickets, parking 

tickets, noise violations, and some of the other, what we would 

consider minor offences. And it’s clearly an important role and 

it would be difficult for the justice system to operate without 

their input and contribution. 

 

Now as is the case with any Bill, the opposition in 

Saskatchewan takes its role very seriously. And so we, if you 

look strictly at the consultative process, what has happened in 

recent history in Saskatchewan with the Saskatchewan Party 

government, it’s important that you consult with affected people 

when you’re introducing legislation. And so we have questions 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4113 

certainly about who’s been consulted on Bill No. 112 because 

they have a poor history of consultation on a number of other 

Bills and issues that directly affect Saskatchewan people. 

 

If you look at what happened with Bill 80, another piece of 

legislation brought forward by the government, failed to consult 

with people directly affected by that Bill. We want to ensure 

that the same hasn’t taken place with Bill No. 112. 

 

If you look at the media in the last few weeks and if you chat 

with people . . . And I talk to many teachers and educational 

assistants. My brother and mom are directly employed in the 

education system in the province of Saskatchewan, and so I 

have occasion to meet with many people that work in the 

education system in Prince Albert. I’ve got a number of friends 

who are teachers, and they’re gravely concerned about what’s 

going on with the lack of consultation on educational assistants. 

In fact there seems to have been a complete lack of 

consultation. And we want to ensure that consultation takes 

place on every Bill, including the Bill before us today. 

 

If you look at what has happened with consultation on Bills 5, 

6, and 43, it’s interesting to note that Bills all directly related to 

labour issues, there’s been no consultation. Certainly in fact it 

was the opposite. It was something that they said they wouldn’t 

do, and then they did it anyway. And so if you look at Bill No. 

112, we want to ensure that there’s been some consultation, and 

we’re not sure that there has been. 

 

If you look specifically last fall, they introduced a Bill to save 

the horses of the Bronson Forest. And what we’d learned, when 

we did our jobs as the opposition and made calls in that area, 

we learned that they hadn’t consulted with virtually anybody 

that lives in that area, especially First Nations and Métis people 

whose traditional territory encompass the Bronson Forest. And 

so their record on consultation is poor at best, and so we want to 

ensure that there’s been consultation on this Bill. 

 

Another example of lack of consultation is the school boards 

and the tax situation. They introduced a system where school 

boards around the province have no access to the tax base. And 

I suppose that in a perfect world it would be . . . you’d want to 

allow the school boards in Saskatchewan to be able to make 

decisions directly for the people who are under their watch. 

They’re elected at the local level to administer the education 

system in Saskatchewan and so they feel accountable to the 

people that elected them. And what has happened is that, in 

spite of the fact that they’re elected and they’re supposed to be 

accountable for the education system in Saskatchewan, the 

government unilaterally made decisions without consulting 

them and took away their ability to access tax dollars for people 

in their areas. 

 

And so what you’ll see has happened is that where you have 

decisions being made at a provincial level without consultation 

directly affecting people that live and work in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we want to ensure that that hasn’t taken 

place with respect to Bill No. 112. 

 

Another example, simply: we discussed earlier this week where 

women’s victim services workers in Saskatoon had the 

complete lack of consultation when they had funding removed 

for 75 per cent of the employees working in support of victims 

of domestic violence in Saskatoon. We had 14 different 

advocacy groups explain that they hadn’t been consulted at all 

by this government before funding was removed, and that 

support hasn’t been replaced by the government. And there was 

a complete lack of consultation in that case. And we want to 

ensure with this Bill that that also hasn’t taken place. 

 

If you look at what has happened very recently with our power 

company, you have to ask yourself who the Saskatchewan Party 

government consulted before it decided to hire a private 

company to produce power in Saskatchewan to privatize a large 

percentage of SaskPower. Now SaskPower’s generating 

capacity will be increased by 300 megawatts, but what happens 

is the people of Saskatchewan are on the hook for the entirety 

of the project. 

 

And there’s no getting around it. You can try to hide from 

capital costs as a Crown corporation by doing this type of deal, 

but what the Saskatchewan Party fails to understand is that 

when you look at a balance sheet, you have to account for a 

20-year contract for power in the same way that you would as 

capital costs, especially with a guaranteed price for power that 

they won’t release to the public. That we’ll never understand. 

All we know is that the Saskatchewan people are on the hook 

for the profits of a company that is outside of the province of 

Saskatchewan when the exact expertise to build and operate 

natural-gas-powered power plant exists already at SaskPower. 

 

And so we want to ensure that on Bill No. 112 that consultation 

has taken place in a better manner than it has with Bill 80; Bill 

5; Bill 6; Bill 43; with educational assistants; with the Bill, 

horses of the Bronson Forest; with school boards all over the 

province of Saskatchewan; with women’s . . . victims services 

workers in Saskatoon; the people of Saskatchewan before 

privatizing a large part of their power corporation. 

 

And so we feel it’s exceedingly important to this Bill to ensure 

that that’s taken place because it’s our job to scrutinize 

legislation that comes before this House, and we take that job 

very seriously. 

 

Now in closing, I would like to quote from a book that was 

released in 2008 called Saskatchewan Politics: Crowding the 

Centre. And in that book is a tremendous quote about the legal 

system in Saskatchewan, and I’d like to put it on the record. On 

page 95 it says: 

 

Our legal system’s prestige — perhaps even its majesty 

— rests on its transcended quality, existing above, and 

avoiding corruption by, the exigencies of daily demands 

and passions. Its constancy is its strength. Its content and 

its processes have developed slowly over time and are not 

to be battered by the demands of our current situation. 

And, yet, it seems that our legal system responds to our 

needs, including our need to see justice done, so 

imperfectly. The administration of justice faces no greater 

challenge than to preserve the rigor and impartiality in the 

way that law works in our society while subjecting it to 

the changes that will make it an effective social 

instrument for all people in their vastly different social 

contexts and with all their vastly different social needs. 

Certainly two places where this adaptation must take pace 

is in having the legal system available to all on a more 



4114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

equal footing and in the response to social disorder 

through the administration of criminal justice. 

 

Law, after all, is manifestation of the self-determination 

ideology that has shaped both our political system and our 

sense of personal entitlement. Both as individuals and as a 

political community we can make choices with the 

confidence that when those choices are expressed in law 

they will be honoured and that these attempts to shape our 

future condition will be vindicated. But if law in this way 

is so closely tied to our public and private integrity it must 

itself have integrity. This is to say that law — the 

mechanism of justice — must itself meet the underlying 

conceptions of justice which are: the right of all to be 

treated with dignity (with respect for personal capacity 

and not to be enslaved through poverty, poor health, low 

status, or dispossession) and the right to equal treatment. 

Law’s challenge is to reflect in its operation the political 

values that led to its development, values of respect, 

dignity and equality. These values ground the connection 

between people in our political society and govern the 

way we act and develop as a political community. When 

law is not serving these values, either because it is not 

available to some or because it is detached from the 

reconciling and restorative function it is meant to 

perform, then it has become hollow and sterile, and our 

political community is vulnerable to the diseases of low 

commitment, resentment over tyranny and bitterness over 

being rendered invisible and insignificant. When we 

worry about inadequacies in the administration of justice 

we are doing nothing less than worrying about the future 

of our community. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 112. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 113 — The 

Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to enter into the debate on The Justices of the Peace 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. And my colleague 

previously has spoken to the points contained in the previous 

Bill. And really what this consequential amendment Act does is 

it amends several other pieces of legislation that come out of 

The Justices of the Peace Act. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I’m particularly interested in 

understanding is what kind of effect these consequential 

amendments will have on three important pieces of legislation. 

One is The Homesteads Act which I think is an important piece 

of legislation that affects women. The Emergency Protection for 

Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act which is an 

Act that is there to support young people that are involved in 

the sex trade. And the other piece of legislation that I’m 

particularly interested in is The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we learned this week — well we learned 

earlier, but we learned this week for sure — that the 

government has no intention of supporting victims of domestic 

violence by having on-the-ground support in the city of 

Saskatoon which is the city I represent. I mean these are four 

workers that worked through the Ministry of Social Services to 

support actual victims of domestic violence and their children. 

They did very important work on the ground. They did works in 

terms of taking that abused woman and her children to seek 

emergency shelter, go down to the police station, go to the 

hospital, in some cases go back into the home to retrieve 

articles of clothing and school supplies for their children. Very 

practical on-the-ground programs and supports for victims of 

domestic abuse. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I found so interesting from the 

ministers was that this program wasn’t available across the 

province and that they wanted to go the lowest common 

denominator which is interesting in itself. And all I can say is 

that when you have a program that’s working, that’s supportive 

to women, it seems to me what you might want to do is to move 

that program to other parts of the province and give other parts 

of the province access to that program, not simply blow the 

program up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so we’re curious to know what kind of impact the 

government’s previous legislation is going to have on The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Act which is a groundbreaking 

piece of legislation that was introduced by the former minister 

of Justice, Bob Mitchell. And it was hailed by women’s groups 

and groups involved with the domestic violence issue as a 

groundbreaking piece of legislation. 

 

And I am worried that with what we saw with the decimation of 

the program in Saskatoon, that we may see a further erosion of 

legislation around victims of domestic violence. So we saw the 

program being blown up in Saskatoon. I think what we need to 

be assured of by the government is that it does not undermine 

the premise of The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, which 

was a groundbreaking piece of legislation in the 1990s. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other groundbreaking piece of 

legislation was the emergency protection for victims of child 

sexual abuse and exploitation. And this was the piece of 

legislation that came out of a legislative committee of the 

legislature where the former member from Humboldt, Arlene 

Julé, and one of my former colleagues, Peter Prebble, were 

involved in taking a real look at what was happening in the 

province when it came to child sexual abuse and exploitation of 

children, particularly children involved in the sex trade. And 

what this particular piece of legislation allowed for was the 

emergency protection of victims, young victims, young children 

who were on the street and that they could be taken into care as 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4115 

a result of what was perceived to be and what was harmful 

activity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we will want to see whether or not this particular piece of 

legislation, these quote, “consequential amendments” has an 

impact on that particular piece of legislation, which as I said 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, is groundbreaking and doesn’t undermine 

that legislation. 

 

And then of course, the other piece of legislation is The 

Homesteads Act which is an important piece of legislation when 

it comes to matrimonial property rights. And what that piece of 

legislation says is that a partner cannot do anything to 

undermine the homestead or the home without the other 

spouse’s support. And, Mr. Speaker, we think that’s important 

in terms of certainly women’s rights in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, you know, it’s not unusual for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to try and sneak in a few funnies and undermine 

legislation, undermine programs, because this government 

hasn’t been particularly transparent and accountable. And my 

colleague earlier spoke about some of the decisions of this 

government that have not been transparent and certainly haven’t 

been accountable. 

 

And we even had the Privacy Commissioner earlier this year, 

who is a legislature officer of this legislature, talking about how 

he’s finding it very difficult to deal with privacy concerns in our 

province because he doesn’t have the resources to deal with 

those concerns at a time when people are becoming more and 

more concerned about their privacy and more and more 

concerned about access to information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As my colleague earlier reported, this is a government that 

doesn’t exactly consult with people. And there are several 

examples of this, particularly in my own critic area where it’s 

becoming more and more obvious that certainly a partnership 

that we used to have in education — where we had the 

department, the directors of education, the school trustees, 

teachers, the school business officials, and the parents through 

school councils’ association — were at the public policy table 

and, Mr. Speaker, that’s no longer happening to any kind of 

degree. 

 

And in fact it doesn’t matter where I have gone as the critic in 

the last several months, people are talking about what had been 

a historic partnership in the province is no longer there. You go 

to school boards, they talk about it. You meet with teachers, and 

they talk about it. And certainly when you meet with parents, 

they’re talking about that they’re not at the public policy table 

to discuss educational policy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the information that used to be 

available to school boards, teachers, parents, is held very close 

to the chest by the minister and his officials. And people feel as 

though there is no longer any kind of transparency. There isn’t 

any longer any kind of accountability when it comes to public 

policy in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we need to be very mindful as we look at these pieces of 

legislation that the government isn’t trying to pull a fast one. 

We have three very important Bills that are referenced in this 

particular consequential amendment Act. And those important 

Bills are the emergency protection for victims of child sexual 

abuse and exploitation. We want to make sure that this 

particular “consequential amendment” does not undermine that 

legislation. 

 

The Homesteads Act is an important piece of legislation that 

certainly protects women and men and their children. And we 

also have another piece of legislation, The Victims of Domestic 

Violence Act, which was groundbreaking legislation in the 

1990s. And we want to make sure that that particular piece of 

legislation is not undermined. So, Mr. Speaker, with those few 

comments on this particular Bill, I would move that we adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The Justices of 

the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 

2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a delight and honour to enter into the series of second round 

of debates on a variety of Bills. And I’m talking today on Bill 

No. 115 of An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, to 

make certain consequential amendments and to repeal The 

Laws Declaratory Act. 

 

And quite often people think these Bills are relatively 

straightforward and they should just be accepted, and obviously 

the good work of the government has been done. But sometimes 

it’s not done. 

 

And I remember last year, particularly when I stopped to speak 

about the SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] Bill about 

identification. And little did we know — I was talking a bit 

about ID [identification] and we continue to raise the issue 

about ID issues — but little did we know that we uncovered, by 

talking about it, that the Privacy Commissioner turned on the 

TV and heard about this Bill being moved forward that he was 

supposed to be consulted on and he wasn’t being consulted. 

And that next day, the Bill was actually split, and then 

eventually the part that was controversial was lost. So it’s 

important that we have these kind of debates and discussion. 

 

And I know, not as a practising lawyer or even a lawyer at all, 

this is kind of an interesting Bill for me because it seems like a 

catch-all Bill. That’s what my colleague, the member from 

Regina Lakeview, called it. He was referring to the fact that it’s 



4116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

five different parts sort of rolled in all together and they don’t 

seem to have any connection or rhyme or reason. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might even call the Minister of 

Justice to order and say, this has got to have some reference. 

This has got to have some focus. These are five different topics. 

But we say it’s a consequential Act and that’s okay because 

sometimes you have to do that kind of thing. There’s little 

pieces that have to be rolled together and it would be too small 

to have five different Acts. We’d be here all day. 

 

We are going to be here all day though because there are some 

questions I have to ask about this particular Bill. And I think it 

is very interesting that sometimes it’s somebody who has not 

been schooled in the law in a formal way but schooled here in 

the past few years as a legislator, as we take a look and we talk 

and we ask questions. And I’m finding more and more that’s 

our role, is to ask pointed questions by our experiences — and 

I’ll talk more about that — some of the experiences that we’ve 

had. 

 

There’s some very interesting questions that arise out of this 

piece. So there’s five different pieces in this Bill. And I’ll 

review first from what the minister says. And of course the 

minister . . . And I know how this goes, being a former minister. 

The minister’s remarks are rather concise and to the point 

because they can be used later. If there’s any interpretation that 

has to be done in terms of the Act, his comments or her 

comments are very important because they could end up as part 

of a lawsuit or a court proceedings, and we have to make sure 

that the minister’s remarks are right on the mark. They can’t be 

freewheeling. 

 

But I do have some questions because quite often they open up 

a bit of a Pandora’s box, and we want to know, so why did he 

say that, or why did she say that? And so today I do have some 

questions and some comments about that. And again as I said, 

the member from Regina Lakeview actually was very helpful in 

illuminating some of the different points that we have before us 

today. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, he talks about five specific 

amendments as I referred to the minister’s remarks. One of 

course talks about right off the bat the agreements, making sure 

there’s some consistency in the enforcement of monetary 

penalties and cost awards in terms of the international trade 

panels. And apparently this has been brought forward. There’s 

been some commitment made by the provinces to pass 

legislation so this can be consistent right across the nation. And 

on one hand we say that consistency is very important but again 

this is where flags go up. 

 

A lot of questions because here again the TILMA [Trade, 

Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] questions arise, 

and we don’t know, we don’t know what are the implications. 

What are the full implications about this? We saw this as one of 

the key broken promises that came out of the campaign. The 

government, the Sask Party at the time campaigned that they 

would not go into TILMA, and then they did a complete 

turnaround and we’re heading down that road. 

 

Of course, it’s been very secretive. We’re not sure exactly what 

all the details are. And quite often we find out the details after 

the fact, not when we should be consulting the public as we did 

in June of ’07 when we had some very public consultations 

about TILMA. And we had a full understanding of where the 

people were and how they stood on that. Here we have buried 

within an Act dealing with consequential amendments some 

aspect of that. And people I’m sure will have some questions 

and we will during the committee hearings on that Bill. 

 

So what is this all about? Of course the track record here of 

doing things after the fact as opposed to before the fact is really 

an issue that we have some concerns about. So I will refer 

further to that when I get into my main body of my comments, 

but I do have to say that right off the bat I do have some flags 

around that area. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The other one that comes right off the bat is the talking about 

how it affects The North-West Territories Act in establishing 

that they . . . And I do want to say that that’s a very interesting 

issue because here, in terms of the declaratory Act and 

surrounding the historical date of transfer of Rupert’s Land to 

the Hudson’s Bay Company of Canada, and therefore when did 

we become a territory, and I understand that was in 1870 — 

July 15th, 1870. And then the impact of us becoming a province 

and all the different pieces of legislation that follows. 

 

Now I have to say right off the bat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 

reminded of living in an old house. And you know where 

certain things are in your old house, right, because they’ve 

never been moved. You know that’s where they are. You can 

picture them. I have to say if we’re changing things from way 

back then to modernize it, who’s actually looking that far back? 

 

Now there’s two things: either it’s we always look back there in 

some trivial matter because that’s just the way of doing 

business — the lawyers need to do business. Fair enough. They 

must have refined that process that it’s no big deal because we 

are now in 2010, some 105 years after we’ve become a 

province. And if that’s the issue of just refining something 

that’s a process we do every day, and I don’t know because we 

haven’t got that information. How many people actually look 

back there? Do we really want to change things now? Is it really 

a necessary change? 

 

Or on the other hand, maybe it’s something very consequential 

because we know when we look back on past records, 

particularly when we’re dealing with establishing human rights 

or in the First Nations around what was happening about treaty 

rights, that type of thing, it’s very important not to mess with 

original documents. Don’t put our interpretation of what 

happened in 1870 or 1905 or 1670 — best to leave the original 

records alone so you can have the original interpretations. 

 

So I do have to ask, is this a trivial matter or is this a very 

significant matter? And we don’t seem to have an indication 

from the minister in his comments that the impact of this. We 

may think it’s a trivial matter, you know, and I go back to my 

old house metaphor that it may be not a significant matter to 

move something. But if you’ve ever lived in an old house or 

renovated something in an old house, you do anything to an old 

house, it seems to be affecting the whole system. So it’s an 

important thing. Is this really important to be doing? And so I 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4117 

do have some questions about that. 

 

And I do want to say that I appreciated the comments that my 

colleague from Regina Lakeview made on this, talking about 

the history of Saskatchewan as we go back via the North-West 

Territories to Hudson Bay land, to Rupert’s Land, and prior to 

that. It’s very important that we understand all the things that 

happened along the way as we became a province but also what 

happened to the First Nations during that time, and the Métis 

Nation — and particularly this year as we celebrate the Year of 

the Métis. This is very important that we recognize the impact 

and how we handle our old laws and statutes. 

 

The other question I have here and it seems like one that’s 

relatively straightforward, the whole issue of marriage. The 

commitment, the promise to marry, the breach of promise to 

marry, and that would be a relatively straightforward thing. It 

seems that the minister has cited two reasons for us not to or to 

remove that or to change that one because there might be a 

constitutional challenge run as probable cause for that. But, you 

know, I always have to worry about that. I know that quite often 

that’s cited as a reason when really we have to have more than 

just the words “probable cause.” Like what is it that we see that 

causes it to be in that, turn that case probable? Because I know 

lawyers can sometimes throw that up and it’s not really all that 

probable. 

 

There’s a lot of things that are probably happening out there. 

But you know, what really is the cause for the Ministry of 

Justice to raise a flag on that one this month? Is there things that 

are happening across Canada that caused it to be of 

significance? And so I have some real questions about that. 

 

And the other one, and I’d like to know more about this. The 

minister doesn’t go long into this discussion, but he talks about 

and I quote, it “. . . does not reflect current societal views and 

expectations of persons intending to marry.” Now I’m not sure 

on what he bases that. And now I don’t have anything more to 

add to that except for more questions because I think there are 

questions out there. As we live in our global society, what we 

view as expectations around commitments to marriage is not 

quite the same around the world and we’re living more and 

more in a global community, a global village, many people 

would say. 

 

So we have to be careful again in how we change our laws. Is it 

something we’re being premature? Is it something that’s 

necessary to do? What are the effects of changing something 

that we don’t . . . The unintended consequences, I think is the 

word that I’m looking for. What are the unintended 

consequences of changing that? And I want to come back and 

talk about that in a minute. 

 

But I do want to say right off the bat that really, if I’m going to 

focus on three pieces, that I have concerns, and I think that 

we’re going to . . . And I know there are five, and so the other 

two pieces I think that other people will go into length. I don’t 

have a lot of background on that. And I think that right now the 

three that I would really like to choose to talk more about and 

spend my time wisely on is talking about the TILMA impact, 

the TILMA effect — and I think this is something that we really 

need to explore. The declaratory Act I’d like to talk a little bit at 

length at. And I’d like to talk a little bit at length around the 

whole provision concerning the marriage, the promise of 

marriage. 

 

And not that I have any solutions to those, but I do have to tell 

you that they’re flags. They’re flags particularly around 

TILMA. And what does that mean? And I don’t see how this 

government is being transparent and accountable and how 

they’re rolling out their approach to these trade agreements that 

are starting out in Western Canada with BC [British Columbia] 

and Alberta. 

 

And, you know, my colleague from Meewasin and I were at a 

pensions discussion on Monday, a very important discussion 

about pensions and how they’re impacting seniors across 

Saskatchewan, and the impact that’s having when you get these 

common agreements. And of course the panellists said there 

that often the concern is raised that you’re racing to the bottom 

of the barrel, that when you agree to a standard across a certain 

area, that you are really going for the bottom of the barrel. 

 

And so here we don’t see a commitment from this government 

that we are not going to be reducing the penalties, that we are 

not going to make it easier for the participants and whatever, 

the people who are participating in the trade, to make it easier to 

take advantage of Saskatchewan law. We don’t want to see that. 

We think our laws and their penalties are fair now. We don’t 

think that they’re overly burdensome. 

 

I know that the Premier has been on record of going to think 

that, especially in occupational health and safety. He said that 

there was way too much red tape. I don’t have the quote right in 

front of me, but he did say that when he talked about 

occupational health and safety. And we see that is when it’s 

hugely, hugely important — occupational health and safety. 

 

So we don’t want to see our regulations, our standards, reduced 

via people taking advantage of our standards by knowing that 

the penalties are actually laxer than they ever were before. We 

don’t want to get the word out that Saskatchewan’s regulations 

you can thumb your nose at because penalties are not there, you 

know. 

 

We think that’s an issue. We think it’s important that they be 

strong, they continue to be strong. And if anything, we should 

see these penalties across Canada to be strengthened because 

this is an important thing, particularly when you come to 

occupational health and safety, when you come to investment 

regulations, when people are investing or businesses enter into 

the province.  

 

I think of tourism. Tourism is one that where we see people 

who often during the winter months take advantage of really 

good deals and hope to go south on a very good vacation, and 

what happens? Something has happened with the vendor and 

people are out of luck . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m glad 

I’ve got an audience over here. Very important. My words 

aren’t lost. 

 

But I think this is very important. I do get kind of dry thinking 

about the problems that may arise by particularly ill-thought-out 

pieces of legislation which we have seen before. And we have 

seen legislation come back and split in two and all of a sudden 

they morph into two or three pieces of legislation. Sometimes 



4118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

they get dropped the very next day. But I do have some 

questions about this. 

 

In TILMA we saw various promises being broken. TILMA was 

one that we knew . . . we had a lot of suspicion that was going 

to bite the dust pretty quickly after the government came to 

power, that the days of when the Premier had promised that 

TILMA would not go forward, that in fact it would go forward. 

And we wouldn’t know an awful lot about it until after the fact. 

 

And so here we see pieces of that surfacing without a lot of 

information. And as I said earlier, the minister choosing his 

words very carefully didn’t give us an awful lot to go on except 

that other provinces were going to follow. But other than that, 

we don’t know. Is this a race to the bottom? How is the 

consistency going to be fair across Canada so that the citizens in 

each province can be rest assured that they’re not giving 

something up? 

 

And as I said, you know, on Monday talking about pensions, we 

saw people talking and worried about the race to the bottom. So 

it’s a real fear. It’s a very real fear that people are concerned 

about. 

 

So TILMA’s out there. TILMA is a reality that this government 

has to face. And people are going to be concerned because this 

is the aspect of TILMA that they were worried about — the 

penalties, the actual enforcement when the rubber hits the road. 

And here we’re seeing the rubber getting close to the road, but 

it’s our job to ask those questions. 

 

Now the other one, as I said, the declaratory Act. And I find this 

interesting because you know before we get into this Bill, or we 

got into this Bill, I never heard of this before. And it may be 

just a small thing, but I do worry about, as I said, if this is of 

significance. And we don’t know whether this is a trivial matter 

or a significant matter, and for many people who rely on 

original records, this could be of significant nature. 

 

And I have some questions. And of course at some point, I hope 

that the minister can assure us that this has no impact on people 

who use original sources for particular interpretations, whether 

they be human rights or treaty rights or those kind of things that 

were established in those periods of time, that that’s what they 

would be going back to look for. 

 

And I used my old house metaphor and I think that really is the 

case. I just, I guess I’m a little nervous because why this would 

come forward after 105 years, especially in our technology of 

computers. And the way that I’m sure lawyers and their clerks 

do their work, they must be pretty efficient of finding out the 

old records. 

 

And so that’s why I say is this really a necessary piece? Or is it 

closing off a door, that boy, we’d be really sorry that we do. 

And in fact the unintended consequences that we actually have 

to do more work because we’ve set one set of systems that 

seems to be right, but really if you want to dig deeper, you have 

to go back to the original records anyways. So I think that I 

have some questions, and as a non-lawyer, I don’t know the 

implications of all that. But I do have some very real questions 

about, about this for sure. 

 

The other piece that I wanted to go to back again that I want to 

talk about was this commitment to marry and all of that. And as 

I said earlier, I really enjoyed reading the remarks. And I 

thought they were very illuminating by my colleague, the 

member from Regina Lakeview. He gave us a good, I think, 

good history lesson about this, talking about the engagement 

ring, the big engagement ring, and who would pay for the 

engagement ring if somebody was stood up. And many of us I 

don’t think can relate to that. Hopefully we can’t totally relate. 

We’ve heard stories. We’ve heard stories. And that was one that 

comes to mind and you think, so what happens when that kind 

of thing happens? But you know one thing that really makes me 

think about this in this world these days, and I said earlier, 

thinking about the global nature of our communities and our 

world views on different norms of marriage and that type of 

thing. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I think about different things that have happened over the 

course of history, like the lost children, the children who came 

over from England. And we’re just settling out those issues. 

And of course the issue in Haiti where we have children being 

fast-tracked into Canada and the implications of that. 

 

And I was just reading a book this week, Last Night in Twisted 

River by John Irving, talking about the Kennedy fathers. Now I 

don’t know how many people here know what a Kennedy father 

is. A Kennedy father was a young man who was married during 

the Vietnam era. And the commitment was, the exemption from 

the draft, was that if you’re in a marriage and your wife was 

pregnant, you were exempt from the draft. And so there were a 

lot people who got into those relationships. And the mother 

became pregnant and then shortly after, the marriage broke 

down. And they are now referred to the fathers, the Kennedy 

fathers. And the children, I don’t know if they have a name. But 

I thought that was an interesting story. I didn’t know about that. 

But just sort of a mindset that there are people out there who are 

. . . That’s what they’re called, Kennedy fathers. 

 

And of course we see that in many cases around the world 

where you avoid war by marrying into another country. And 

you get into the country and you’re okay. And then quite often 

what happens further down the road is the marriage dissolves, 

for a variety of reasons. Not likely, and most of it is because 

there wasn’t a strong bond that we’re used to in our marriages 

right now. 

 

So I have a question about this — and I don’t know what the 

right answer is — is what are the implications around that kind 

of thing with this Act about breach of promise of marriage? 

And what’s the implication of that? So I don’t know what the 

answer is to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I wonder if the 

Minister of Justice has his people thinking about the kind of 

things that are happening around promises of marriage and what 

that has to do with around immigration and that kind of thing. 

 

And the other one that really comes to mind too — and again 

not first-hand experience with this, but hearing stories — is the 

implication around the Internet. Quite often we hear stories and 

we base our legislation on our past history. And as I said, I 

appreciate the stories from my legislative colleague, but I’m 

thinking about into the future. What is the implication around 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4119 

the Internet? Because we see more and more relationships being 

built around the Internet and actually via the Internet around the 

world. And what’s the implication of that? And we see much of 

our legislation — in fact, I know this government has passed 

legislation — dealing with the Internet, the implications of the 

Internet in terms of credit, in terms of warranties and that type 

of thing. 

 

What is the implication for marriage in law around promises 

made via the Internet for people who are in Saskatchewan, 

outside the province, maybe even outside the country, maybe 

somewhere else? Has the government considered that? And I 

really think that’s something that really needs to be looked at 

because we are living in a brand new century, you know. 

 

We talk about this century, you know, the age of the Internet. It 

goes without saying that that should be one of our screens that 

we think about when we’re testing our legislation because it’s 

not the old, it’s definitely not the old days. And clearly I have 

sympathies for whoever’s jilted. I think that’s the old term, or 

left at the altar. That’s a tragic thing when that happens. But 

now we just say people have to sort of buck up and get on with 

the rest of your life. 

 

But clearly now, in terms of immigration, in terms of some of 

the things that are happening around the world, that’s just not 

good enough, and particularly if there are ways that people are 

being taken advantage of. And somehow people seem to be able 

to work that into it, to make a buck, to help facilitate these 

relationships. And there’s a whole implication, is there a third 

party part to this process in terms of breach of promise of 

marriage? Now maybe there is; I don’t know. Maybe that’s in 

another Act, and if that’s the case, I’d be very happy to hear that 

because that would be good news that that has been taken into 

consideration. 

 

But because of the limited amount that the minister shared with 

us, I was concerned about that because that’s the first thing that 

came to mind for me. And I do have some concerns that when 

we think about marriage and we think of the implications of 

marriages going badly for a variety of reasons, it’s unfortunate 

with us. We want to make sure that our laws are there to 

support the people who have been taken advantage of, and that 

it’s just not an oversight and not oversight because we just 

didn’t think of it. This is a time where we think of these things 

and we really push at the limits of the legislation and say, can 

we make this better? This is a time to make it better. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’m really saying here when I 

look at some of these pieces, I look at . . . You know, it’s funny. 

We look at that old piece, the declaratory Act, and I’m saying, 

is it really necessary to do this? I’d like to know more about 

that. Is it necessary? And I throw out the old house thing again 

you know, or just a simple phrase, if it ain’t broke, why fix it? 

Why do we leave that? But more information would be great, 

you know. 

 

I just hate to see us limit people who need the protection on 

some very major pieces of legislation, either it’s human rights 

or treaties or all of that kind of stuff. And I guess it just brings 

to mind, I mean, have we consulted with those groups who 

would be using that kind of legislation? Or if it’s trivial and 

people do it every day, maybe they have a system that makes it 

work every day really well. Why do we do that? 

 

I’ve talked a little bit about the marriage piece, and I won’t say 

much more about that except for I do hope Justice is looking at 

that because we will have questions. I will have questions 

during committee about that, and they should be ready in terms 

of have they thought of the Internet? What about that type of 

thing? And have they thought about those? Because there still 

are arranged marriages. There still are arranged marriages. 

Maybe not between families and not as my colleague had earlier 

talked about between families and assets and that type of thing. 

But for other types of benefits, i.e., getting into countries, 

getting those kind of benefits, what is the implication for that? 

 

And of course I do want to end just on the whole question about 

TILMA. This TILMA thing was one that really is a major issue 

for us in terms of the credibility of this government. We saw 

that there were numerous broken promises as I said, whether 

it’s greenhouse gas promise. And we have credibility . . . The 

minister suffers a lot of credibility issues around that. And this 

government suffers a lot of credibility issues around the TILMA 

issues. And we’re seeing it bubble up through here, and we’ll 

see it bubble up in different Acts over the next while as they 

seek to standardize our trading environments. 

 

And of course we think that’s a good way. It’s a good thing if 

it’s done well and it’s done appropriately and there’s 

appropriate consultation with people and everybody’s on board. 

We think it’s very inappropriate when it’s done in the dark of 

night, and this seems to be fitting in that category when we see 

different professional pieces of legislation coming forward and 

people haven’t been consulted. 

 

I think about the teachers, the changes that happened there. 

They’re concerned about their standards of professional 

training. Not a lot of consultation, if any, involved in that. And 

so why we would have confidence that there has been at this? 

We hear of this kind of thing after the fact, not before. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be taking my seat 

pretty soon. And so I would move to adjourn reading on this, 

adjourn debate on this Bill. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Queen’s 

Bench Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 119 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 119 — The 

Ticket Sales Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter into debate on this 



4120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

very important piece of legislation. Over the next few hours I 

hope to take the opportunity to talk about the importance of this 

Bill to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and to help 

the minister with some of the shortfalls in this particular piece 

of legislation, so that when he has the opportunity to re-examine 

it and when we bring forward potential changes at a later date, 

that he’ll understand why we’re bringing forward those 

potential changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to start by saying I think the intent of 

the Bill everyone agrees with. The intent of the Bill is to fix a 

problem, a problem that we saw most recently when a number 

of large concerts in the province of Saskatchewan where 

Saskatchewan people didn’t get access to tickets to those 

events. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all share the values or 

view that we in fact should have a system that’s fair and honest 

and allows people to have access to tickets to events in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I think that’s a commonly held view 

by all 58 members of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We however though can approach this from a number of 

different directions on how you actually would fix this 

particular piece of legislation, this particular problem, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we saw as a problem was events in the 

province of Saskatchewan, tickets going on sale for those 

events, and many of the tickets never actually being for sale 

within the province of Saskatchewan. Because simultaneously 

with those tickets going on sale online, the companies that were 

actually responsible for selling tickets were buying large 

amounts of those tickets or setting aside large amounts of those 

tickets for resale at a later date at a higher price. 

 

So only a small portion of the actual tickets to the venue or to 

the event in Saskatchewan were available to consumers at the 

time the tickets were made available to the public. So many 

Saskatchewan residents didn’t have an opportunity to purchase 

the ticket, even if they were sitting right by their computer, had 

the order form all filled out and just had to hit enter, and they 

hit it the precise moment that the sales of the tickets began. 

Many Saskatchewan residents still were not afforded tickets, to 

find out the next day that tickets that they would have liked to 

purchase were in fact available on the Internet by a secondary 

seller, a company that was actually owned by the primary 

selling company, at a much higher price. So Saskatchewan 

residents could in fact buy a ticket at twice the price or maybe 

two and a half times the price, one and a half times the price of 

the face value of the ticket. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that raised the concern of many 

Saskatchewan people. So what we had is a situation where a 

company was making an additional profit through what might 

be seen as a loophole in the law — not having to follow the 

same rules that they would expect others to follow, and 

definitely not the rules that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan would expect them to actually follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that many times before. We’ve seen it 

in many aspects in our lives. We’ve seen it in legislation passed 

in the House before where we thought legislation would do one 

thing, and it does another. 

 

We saw it last year in a budget, Mr. Speaker, when we were 

told that we were going to have a balanced budget and $1.9 

billion in potash revenue. In fact we have actually today the 

reality, a negative number, Mr. Speaker. The province of 

Saskatchewan, believe it or not, is writing a cheque for $204 

million to the potash companies. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think one year ago in this Assembly when 

hundreds of people were sitting here listening to a budget, did 

they think that they’d be writing a cheque, the government 

would write a cheque with their money back to the potash 

companies for $204 million? I don’t think anybody of the 6 to 

800 people that were in this Assembly listening to the budget 

believed that one year later that their government would be 

writing a cheque for $204 million to the potash companies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, many times when things may be put forward 

with good intent, the end result isn’t what the intent of what was 

being put forward was. And, Mr. Speaker, and we need to learn 

from these things, and we need to ensure that laws are put in 

place so people don’t abuse their rights, don’t abuse the 

opportunity to take advantage of others. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

seen many of those types of circumstances over the years. But 

our responsibility as legislators is to ensure that those types of 

practices are stopped and that the concerns and needs of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan are brought forward in 

a meaningful way and that changes are made to fix the 

problems as the people of this province see them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think we all want to inherently believe that 

when something’s brought forward by any minister of the 

government, that it’s brought forward with the best of intent and 

that it should be in fact represent, should represent what was 

brought forward. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And I think that’s the same type of concern that people would 

have when they were buying tickets from a seller of tickets. 

And they would be buying these tickets and offering to 

purchase tickets with the intent that those tickets in fact would 

be available at face value, and that they actually would have the 

opportunity to buy those tickets when they came for sale on the 

Internet. Or when you went to the local Ticketmaster, that in 

fact you’d be able to buy that ticket and you’d be able to see . . . 

to purchase that ticket for the event and that there wouldn’t be 

blocks of tickets withheld only to be sold at later dates at higher 

prices. 

 

Similarly when people come to this Assembly and hear a 

budget, they expect that budget to represent the reality of what 

the circumstances are going to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also would believe that the actions of those 

who were undertaking these steps — whether it be the ticket 

sellers, Mr. Speaker, or the company which buys the tickets, in 

many cases through automated processes — would be fair and 

honest in their endeavours. Mr. Speaker, that would be very 

similar to any actions that would be expected by anybody in a 

business transaction. 

 

You would expect that if something’s advertised, you’d actually 

have the opportunity to purchase that item at the advertised 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4121 

price. That would be a normal expectation — that if you see an 

ad in the paper that says you can buy something for 99.99, that 

if you went to purchase that, you could actually buy it for 99.99. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d say that’s very normal. I think that that’s what 

the citizens of our province would want. 

 

They would also expect that if you purchase something, you 

have to pay for it. I would think that’d be a real normal, real life 

expectation — that if you purchased something, you order 

something, you pay for it. And I think most citizens would think 

that that, and everybody in this Assembly would think that’s the 

way that real business is done. You order something, you pay 

for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think those same expectations need to be held by 

the citizens of Saskatchewan about our own actions, Mr. 

Speaker. If we order something, we should pay for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been brought to my attention by a number of 

my constituents that there are circumstances when members 

don’t pay for things that they ordered. And I think that’s quite 

serious. 

 

I had a constituent visit me a few weeks ago and talk about the 

fact that during a period of time that a sitting member of this 

legislature signed for some $19,000 in alcohol that was 

delivered to this building, today that bill’s still unpaid. It’s 

never been paid for. I think, as we would expect, the citizens of 

the province would expect that they would have to pay for 

something if they ordered it. I think it should be the same, Mr. 

Speaker, for members of this Assembly if they order something. 

 

Now the good thing about this, Mr. Speaker, this particular 

situation, the bill’s still unpaid; the individual could still pay it. 

He has the opportunity if he wants to step forward and he can 

pay that $19,000 bill, Mr. Speaker. And I think the people of 

Saskatchewan and I think the citizens of this province would 

expect that. I think the citizens of the province would expect an 

individual who ordered $19,000 in alcohol to actually pay for it. 

Mr. Speaker, I think today that the good thing about this is we 

still have an opportunity for that to occur. That individual is still 

a sitting member of this Assembly, has the opportunity to pay if 

he so chooses. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member opposite to 

talk about the Bill, not to be drawing members, sitting 

members, into a debate on a Bill. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was indicating on 

The Ticket Sales Act, if you were to buy a ticket, you expect to 

pay for it. So if you order something you would expect that 

you’re going to have to pay for that ticket, or you would expect 

not to consume or not to go to the event or not to consume what 

you purchased, to return it if you don’t intend to pay for it. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that same expectation should be even 

enhanced in those of us who serve in public office, those of us 

who have a responsibility to the public. 

 

I have concerned constituents about a situation. I think that it is 

only appropriate that the member from Swift Current actually 

pay that $19,000 to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

He has admitted to being, that he accepted . . . [inaudible] . . . 

he ordered that, and he learned from it. I think the only final 

step now is to pay it back. The people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, I think, should be entitled to payment for that 

$19,000, Mr. Speaker, and I think many Saskatchewan people 

believe it should be paid. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to now talk a little bit about another 

aspect of this particular Bill. This Bill talks about secondary 

sellers not being able to be in direct corporate connection to the 

primary seller — talking about that you can’t be a secondary 

seller of tickets to an event if in fact you are in any way 

connected to the primary seller. So that the primary company 

couldn’t own a secondary company that sold tickets, or a 

primary company couldn’t hold even shares or any portion of 

ownership in a secondary company that would actually sell the 

tickets at a higher price. 

 

Well I think that that makes logical sense. If you’re trying to 

ensure that no individual or nobody has priority access to 

tickets or the ability to interfere with fairness in the sale of 

tickets, in the distribution of tickets so that all Saskatchewan 

people, or all people for that matter, have access to it, that 

connection should be a concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in life I think that there are always concerns about 

influence of one person over another, or the ability of an 

individual or company to influence another that needs to be 

taken into consideration. And those types of concerns and 

considerations are important. They are important not only in an 

aspect like this particular Bill, the selling of tickets, but in life 

in general. 

 

There should be an expectation of the general public and the 

people of Saskatchewan that the regulations and laws of the 

jurisdiction or province, government, federal government 

should in fact be there to safeguard the well-being of 

Saskatchewan citizens. And ensure that they don’t allow people 

to be taken advantage of as a result of rules, or as a result of 

legislation, regulations that are in place. So it’s a very good step 

to ensure that the primary seller and the secondary seller of 

tickets in this Act cannot be one and the same. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation doesn’t fix 

the problems that exist with the resale of tickets, Mr. Speaker. 

And as a result, I think there are many companies that have 

concerns about this piece of legislation. I think those concerns 

need to be addressed. 

 

I think, like many other pieces of legislation that we’ve heard 

about, many Saskatchewan companies have come forward and 

said they weren’t consulted. This piece of legislation was 

brought forward without consultation. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

seems to be a pattern forming here. At one point, I thought that 

the only people who didn’t get consulted were ordinary working 

people in the province, because we heard Bills 5 and 6, no 

consultations. We heard Bill 43, no consultations; Bill 80, no 

consultations. So I thought perhaps the government was very 

selective in their consultations. 

 

What we’re finding out: no, they’re not selective in their 

consultations. They simply don’t do any. It’s not that they don’t 

just consult with some groups. They don’t consult with 

anybody. So, Mr. Speaker, what’s the quality of legislation that 

is brought forward if you don’t consult with anybody, if you 



4122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

don’t talk to the people in the industries that are responsible? 

 

Well I can tell you what happens. Bill after Bill after Bill, 

people come and talk to the opposition and say it doesn’t cut it. 

It’s not good enough. It doesn’t fix the problem. It creates new 

problems. And why are they saying that? Because they never 

had an opportunity to have any say prior to the Bill being 

drafted, prior to the Bill being introduced, prior to us having to 

get up in the House and say it doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that’s exactly the problem with the fiscal mismanagement 

in the province. 

 

Last year a budget was put together. Who was consulted? 

Obviously not the bureaucrats. Obviously not the people who 

have to deliver the programs. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? We’re hearing that widely now, that we’re going into 

a budget that will be delivered in this House on March 24th that 

there’s no plan to. There’s no pattern; there’s no system of 

looking at what should be done for appropriate reasons. It’s 

going to cause chaos. The word chaos is used a lot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s like last time, the last budget, Mr. Speaker, a 

year ago. We stood in this House and told the government and 

the people of Saskatchewan that their prediction of $1.9 billion 

on potash was laughable. And what did the Minister of Energy 

and Resources tell us? Absolutely. He said it should be $3 

billion, not $1.9 billion. Now look, I understand. I understand. I 

don’t expect a lot from the Minister of Energy and Resources. I 

honestly don’t because anybody that’s going to tell me that they 

can raise $3 billion on potash revenues and resources to the 

province of Saskatchewan when the price of potash is already 

tanking. 

 

And we know that sales are going down. Everybody else is 

saying it. The government can’t seem to get the message from 

the companies, from the countries that buy potash. It’s really 

unfortunate. It’s not bad enough to be out the $1.9 billion, but to 

have the minister responsible stand up and say it should be $3 

billion, it really does go to, can you actually expect to be able to 

take his predictions or his numbers on anything, on anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to — the very day of the 

budget — to say those numbers just didn’t work. And the 

people of Saskatchewan heard that. They heard the Finance 

critic talking about that budget was built on a house of sand. 

You know, the base was sand. It was shifting every day. The 

predictions were absolutely out to lunch, Mr. Speaker. But 

we’ve seen that pattern before. 

 

Now we hear later from various sources that the Premier, in the 

middle of a football game, phones and changes the numbers in 

order to balance his budget. You know, is that true or isn’t it 

true? Perhaps. Does it really matter? It doesn’t really matter 

how it changed. The fact is the numbers were wrong; the 

Premier intervened. So the Premier is directly responsible for 

what happened. But does that surprise me or does it surprise the 

people of Saskatchewan? I say no because those who know, 

know that the Premier in his own life and his own business life 

has not had a great deal of success. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — For the last five minutes I’ve heard 

hardly anything about — in fact nothing — on the Bill. I would 

ask the member to return to the Bill we’re discussing. 

Why is the member from Athabasca on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery is a famous guy from northern Saskatchewan. His name 

is Austin Laliberte. And Austin is here visiting us. And Austin 

is here doing some work and is joining us in the Assembly 

today. And I want to point out that Austin is here working for 

his family, his two wonderful kids and his wife. 

 

But Austin is related to two very important, famous people. One 

of them is his brother, Devin. And Devin is a well-known 

athlete throughout northern Saskatchewan. And the other 

person is actually a bit more famous than his brother Devin. 

And he is uncle to the great Mieka Belanger who is my 

granddaughter. And this is her uncle, so he has two famous 

people in his family that he can call very special — his brother 

Devin, and of course his niece Mieka, who is also my 

granddaughter. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it a lot of times in the Assembly, 

Mieka and Brodey and Nixon are very special grandkids. But 

we’re very pleased to have Mieka’s uncle here today. And I ask 

all members to welcome Austin to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. After that 

short introduction I would just like to get back to talking about 

Bill No. 119, The Ticket Sales Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I started to indicate earlier that this Act, although I think 

the intent is the appropriate intent, its outcome will not result in 

fixing the problem the people of Saskatchewan had. And it will 

also create other problems for Saskatchewan businesses that 

didn’t exist before. And why did that occur and why is this 

legislation not addressing the problem in a manner which best 

fits the needs of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

That’s because of the lack of consultation. I had the opportunity 

to meet with some of the businesses that deal with tourism and 

tours in the province of Saskatchewan, both to events like 

musical concerts and sports events and, Mr. Speaker, this 

particular piece of legislation makes it difficult for those people 

to compete and for their businesses to thrive in the province of 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4123 

Saskatchewan. Now it’s an unintended consequence of what 

this legislation as it is brought forward is intended to do. I don’t 

believe the government intended to create that problem, but 

they have. And they have created that problem by not 

consulting with the industry itself as they developed this 

legislation. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation as it is currently drafted — 

although with, I would argue and said from the very beginning, 

an admirable intent; an intent I think all 58 members of this 

legislature would in fact enforce its outcome — its outcome is 

not what was intended. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 

unintended consequences that we see in this legislation are a 

concern because a group of businesses in this province that 

have had the opportunity to develop and grow over a number of 

years, that have served Saskatchewan people well, will in fact, 

will in fact have difficulty maintaining the ability to be 

profitable businesses as a result of this legislation. 

 

Now I can tell you I don’t believe that that was the intent of the 

government. I just think it’s one of the things that were never 

thought through, not understood, and as a result of not having 

those consultations. I happen to know that those business 

people have also met with the government, and I think that 

perhaps the minister also understands that there are some 

unintended consequences in the development of this legislation, 

not having looked at it from all the angles, not having done the 

consultations prior to putting in the legislation. 

 

Let’s hope that the minister, if he has been consulted, has 

learned from this, will actually bring forward changes that will 

fix the problem. I don’t know if he will. You know, a confident 

minister would. A confident minister would want to bring 

forward legislation that dealt with the real problem and in fact 

didn’t hurt Saskatchewan businesses. I’m hoping that’s the 

case. We will have a great deal of opportunity moving forward 

to see whether or not the minister in fact will bring forward 

amendments to this legislation to make it meet the needs of 

those Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I continue my remarks, I’d like to deal 

with the issue about, you know, the unintended consequences 

are often the oversight of not looking at things more carefully 

and not taking the time to actually examine things thoroughly. 

Now last year’s budget, we understand it wasn’t properly 

examined. We understand the interference by the Premier. But 

it didn’t surprise many people here that we’re aware of the fact 

that his own personal business life has also seen him have 

significant shortfalls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At one point, with the assistance of $150,000 provincial 

government money, he opened and brought the Country Music 

Hall of Fame to Saskatchewan, putting forward a business plan 

saying that it would be profitable, Mr. Speaker. In very short 

time he was bankrupt. The Country Music Hall of Fame went to 

Alberta. It’s pretty sad when you can’t sell country music in 

Swift Current, Saskatchewan, you can’t sell country music in 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And he couldn’t 

sell any tickets to it. That’s the problem. He couldn’t sell 

tickets. And, Mr. Speaker, he even was talking about 34,000 

people a year visiting, and I think he had some 3,000 people 

visit. Not a very good . . . couldn’t sell many tickets so when 

that occurred, Mr. Speaker, he would have liked to have a ticket 

sales Act that made people buy tickets, I think. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so there’s always unintended consequences and 

the fact that those unintended consequences cost people and 

businesses money are always a concern, always a concern, Mr. 

Speaker. So we need to examine this Bill in detail to firmly look 

at the concerns and do due diligence on behalf of those 

companies in Saskatchewan that are concerned about the 

shortcomings of this Bill. And we need to fully understand what 

their views are and why they have those views prior to passing 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there are considerable, considerable concerns by tourism 

operators and companies in Saskatchewan that in fact buy 

tickets and resell them. But they sell them as part of a package 

to events, whether they’re concerts or sporting events, Grey 

Cups when they’re held here, and other major sporting events, 

Mr. Speaker. And they’ve had the opportunity to operate these 

businesses for many years and all of a sudden we’re changing 

the rules to negatively impact them. But what’s most important, 

we didn’t talk to them. We didn’t talk to them. And you know 

when most mistakes are made in life is when you think you 

know all the answers, when you think you know how to do 

everything, when you think you know better than everybody 

else and you don’t talk to anybody. 

 

So on this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, again we 

saw no consultation. And day after day we hear from people 

around the province to say that they’re not consulted on many, 

many pieces of legislation brought forward by the government. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility to bring these issues 

forward. And when those unintended consequences come 

forward, Mr. Speaker, it’s incumbent upon a government to act, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s incumbent upon a government to take 

responsibility for those unintended consequences. Today we 

have a fiscal mess in this province like we have not had in more 

than two decades. And I’m going to call it a fiscal mess. We 

went from $2.3 billion in the bank to a over a $1 billion deficit 

in two and a half years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that it’s not a revenue 

problem, it’s an expenditure problem. Because in 2007, the 

budget was $7.8 billion. Last year it was well over 10 billion. 

When you take the potash out. Mr. Speaker, that’s a mess. And 

how did we get in that mess? Reckless spending. Reckless 

spending — spending beyond your means. Wishing things to 

reality without the foundation on which to build the building, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we’ve seen in the last two years 

as budgets have been put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the government pay off $2 billion in debt 

in the General Revenue Fund, and then borrow more money 

than that in the Crown corporations, telling us they paid down 

the debt by 40 per cent when even they know that’s wrong 

because they’re just talking about the General Revenue Fund. 

They’re not talking about the total debt. The total debt includes 

both the General Revenue Fund and what’s in the Crown 

corporations. So if you take from one hand and put it in the 

other, it’s not a paydown. That’s mismanagement. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member is wandering away from 



4124 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

the intent of the Bill again. I will ask him to return to Bill No. 

119, The Ticket Sales Act. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the point I was making was about 

consultation on this Bill and consultation on the bigger financial 

picture results in the same things, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 

Speaker, going back to the Bill itself. 

 

We have seen companies come forward and say there’s been no 

consultation. I know they’ve met with us, and they’ve asked for 

us to co-operate with the government in making changes. They 

believe that the government will do the honourable thing and 

make the right changes. Well I haven’t heard from the minister 

responsible — as the Opposition House Leader — the minister 

responsible, Minister of Justice that he intends to make changes 

to the Bill to make it appropriate to fix the problems that have 

been indicated by the industry. 

 

By the way, the changes they’re bringing forward that they 

would like to see continue to fix the intent of the problem so 

that Saskatchewan people have first access to tickets, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact the solution they brought forward is simpler 

and easier and better. And better, quite frankly, when you sit 

down and look at it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hope the minister will learn from those 

consultations and move forward and bring to us when this Bill 

reaches committee. And in fact it’ll reach committee much 

sooner if the minister would give us indications that in fact he is 

going to be responsive to the needs of Saskatchewan people and 

in fact make the appropriate changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consultation, consultation, consultation — it’s 

such an important thing. And, Mr. Speaker, it is even more 

important, more important when the degree of risk, the degree 

of uncertainty is added. And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated 

before, it’s even more important. The larger the decision, the 

more consequence to the province and to the people of the 

province, the greater the consultation there should be, and the 

greater, the greater consultation with informed people it should 

be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen numerous examples over the last 

couple of years where the government’s failed to do appropriate 

consultation. And in doing so, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan are paying a price. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing 

decisions today where the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan weren’t consulted, decisions like investing in 

Northland Power, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of millions of dollars 

of investment. 

 

Now they’re saying the investment’s from the private sector. 

Yes, they’re putting up the capital but, Mr. Speaker, the 

consumers, the people of Saskatchewan, are paying for it 

because they’re going to be paying exorbitant power prices in 

order to pay for that capital, Mr. Speaker. They’re taking the 

risk because Saskatchewan taxpayers are taking the risk if there 

is an increase in actual cost of natural gas going into the 

production of that power. The risk isn’t with the company. The 

risk rests with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re privatizing our Crown corporations. And when, 

when were the people of Saskatchewan ever consulted on that? 

Because this government said prior, prior to winning the 2007 

election, they wouldn’t privatize Crown corporations. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re doing it. They’re doing it by stealth because 

they don’t have the courage that the former premier of 

Saskatchewan, Grant Devine, had to put the issue before the 

people of Saskatchewan and be defeated as a result of it. 

 

Nor did they have the courage of their former leader, Elwin 

Hermanson, who in the middle of an election said, I’d do it. 

And it cost him an election. But you know what? Mr. 

Hermanson had a great deal of courage and integrity. He put it 

before the people of Saskatchewan and took the defeat that the 

people of Saskatchewan gave him as a result. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important to be transparent, honest, and forthright with what 

you’re going to do. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what consultations 

are about. Now there’s been no consultations on the Northland 

Power deal; none with the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now about 7 per cent of the power generation in Saskatchewan 

is going to be privatized to a company from Ontario with the 

profits going out of the province. An Ontario company will 

make the profits — Ontario of all places. Profits going to 

Ontario. Why can’t SaskPower do that? 

 

Why can’t SaskPower do this? Only because the government in 

power ideologically believes this should be done by a private 

company. SaskPower does the very same thing. Lo and behold, 

we can do it well. We do it in many projects. For years and 

years SaskPower has generated power through natural gas 

generation. Why aren’t we doing it here? Because we have a 

Premier that believes the government shouldn’t be in business. 

 

Now this is privatization of our Crown corporations by stealth. 

It is removing the right of people to have a choice because you 

told the people of Saskatchewan that you wouldn’t do it, and 

now you’re doing it. You didn’t consult. You did not consult 

with the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And it should 

be shameful, shameful actually. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all people want is to be consulted and 

allowed to have their say, be part of the decision-making 

process. Mr. Speaker, as we go on to talk about Bill 119, The 

Ticket Sales Act, and its implications on people, it is very 

important that we have consultations. And we know, as an 

example, several businesses have met with the Minister of 

Justice. They have brought forward their concerns and brought 

alternatives to improve the Bill. 

 

Now we’re wondering to see whether or not the minister will 

act upon those consultations and improve the Bill, bring 

forward a new version of the Bill or make some amendments, 

because it is amendable in its current form, to meet the needs of 

those businesses in Saskatchewan. We believe Saskatchewan 

businesses should be considered when we’re putting forward 

legislation for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I don’t know about the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, but I 

do know my leader believes that business needs to thrive, 

flourish, and grow in the province of Saskatchewan. I know the 

Leader of the New Democratic Party believes that it’s through a 

strong economy with three pillars that you move forward as a 

province. And those three pillars include strong businesses: 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4125 

businesses that have the opportunity to grow; businesses that 

have an opportunity to make profit. It’s businesses that employ 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But he also believes very strongly in strong rights for unions 

and working people so that the wealth generated by a company 

is shared so that the people of the province of Saskatchewan get 

ahead. And he also believes in strong government with strong 

legislation and regulation to ensure that we have strong fiscal 

management moving forward, to ensure that the businesses that 

invest capital in Saskatchewan know what the rules are and that 

they are protected in that investment and that they can in fact 

have some certainly of what future that investment will have in 

this province. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current government has seen fit to keep in 

place the majority of the rules and regulations and legislation 

brought forward by the previous government in the oil and 

natural gas sector. In fact he’s kept them all. The rules brought 

forward, the legislation and regulations put forward by the 

former government are in place today, and the natural gas and 

oil industry in Saskatchewan is flourishing. It’s doing very, very 

well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not doing nearly as well as the Premier’s 

trying to make the people of Saskatchewan and Canada believe 

when the other day he said to the people of Saskatchewan that 

we’re going to surpass Alberta in oil production. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan need to know that 

currently today Saskatchewan produces about 400,000 barrels a 

day, and Alberta produces about 2 million barrels a day in oil. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Conventional oil. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, so the Premier in trying to play a 

word game, trying to play a word game, Mr. Speaker, tries to 

portray a picture that’s not real. So he said, yes. Then one of the 

members shouts across, he says, conventional oil. But he 

doesn’t explain anything, and he lets the people of 

Saskatchewan believe that Saskatchewan’s actually going to 

surpass Alberta in oil production. 

 

The reality is today Saskatchewan produces 400,000 barrels and 

Alberta 2 million barrels a day. But did the Premier, did the 

Premier put all the facts on the table for the people of 

Saskatchewan to judge? No, he didn’t. So through a sleight of 

hand or sleight of words, he’s trying to leave an impression that 

is not real about all of a sudden everything is so much better. 

 

The other point that I think is absolutely important to 

understand is our production hasn’t gone up. Our production’s 

been pretty steady over the last number of years. Alberta’s 

production is going down because more and more — in 

conventional oil — because more and more is coming from the 

tar sands. 

 

But if you look at true oil production, we’re at 400,000 barrels a 

day in Saskatchewan. They’re 2 million barrels a day in 

Alberta. And he’s trying to say they’re the same or trying to 

portray to the people of Saskatchewan that they’re the same 

through a sleight of words, Mr. Speaker. 

So that goes a lot to the, goes exactly to the look of what is 

intended to be done by legislation by the wording you use, by 

how you put forward your budget, by saying you’re paying 

down the debt by 40 per cent in the General Revenue Fund 

while increasing your debt in the Crown corporations. 

 

We saw that once. We saw that game before, in the 1980s. We 

called it Devine economics. Historians talk about the 1980s as 

the years of Devine economics. They did the same thing. They 

said they were doing things in the General Revenue Fund, 

increasing debt in the Crown corporations. 

 

I’ll tell you what. Saskatchewan people have seen that game 

before. Saskatchewan people aren’t going to buy that game. To 

say that you’ve got 400, that you’re going to surpass Alberta in 

oil production, to say you’re going to do this and that, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, they’re not going to buy 

it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill dealing with the ticket sales is an 

important Bill because it says it’s going to fix the problem. But 

what it actually does is create several new problems for 

businesses in Saskatchewan. So it doesn’t fix the problem that’s 

intended to be fixed because, in fixing it, it creates new 

problems, Mr. Speaker. And that’s often referred to as 

unintended consequences. And when there are unintended 

consequences, it’s important to understand them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been trying to, over the last 45 minutes or 

so, talking about unintended consequences and some of the 

previous unintended consequences that we’ve had as a result of 

. . . Perhaps a misuse of words. Perhaps not fully understanding 

or explaining something. Perhaps trying to sell something in an 

aspect with only half the picture there, like a debt. As an 

example, talking about GRF [General Revenue Fund], not 

talking about total debt. 

 

You know, the government’s own mid-year financial report 

showed a significant increase in overall debt. It did. And their 

projection showed increases all through to 2013. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re out there on . . . There’s billboards out there 

saying they paid the debt down by 40 per cent. Now maybe on a 

precise day they did that, Mr. Speaker. But today, that would 

not be an accurate portrayal of the situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Bill is. It’s not quite an 

accurate portrayal of what is intended to be accomplished by the 

Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, as a result, Saskatchewan people have 

brought forward concerns to the minister. And I hope the 

minister’s paying attention to the concerns raised by the 

business people of Saskatchewan, concerns that have been 

shared with us as well. We hope the minister will bring forward 

amendments to deal with those concerns, because those are 

important, important aspects of moving forward in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as members of the legislature are responsible 

to the people of the province. And we should work hard in order 

to try to bring forward legislation that in fact meets concerns. 

And when, after we’ve made a mistake by bringing forward 

legislation that doesn’t meet all those concerns, we should have 

the courage to say, well we made a mistake, and fix it. 

 



4126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

That’s all that we’re asking of the minister today is to fix some 

concerns that were brought forward by business owners in the 

province of Saskatchewan so that in fact the legislation does 

what he intends to do because I do believe the intent is an 

admirable one. But it needs to be brought forward and fixed in a 

manner in which deals with the concerns that have brought 

forward by different companies that are secondary sellers of 

tickets in the province that I don’t believe he looked at or took 

into consideration when developing this particular legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very important to always examine what 

the consequences are. It’s important to know what the outcomes 

are, Mr. Speaker, and to then, once you do learn new facts, to 

bring them forward. And that is very, very important. Mr. 

Speaker, during this particular development of this legislation, 

there was without doubt many Saskatchewan citizens pushing 

the government to do something about the fact that they weren’t 

able to buy tickets to events. And for that, I think the 

government has stepped forward and I actually commend the 

government for looking at fixing what is not an easy fixed 

problem because there are several dimensions to the problem. 

 

But in fixing it we need to ensure that Saskatchewan people and 

Saskatchewan businesses are not hurt in an adverse way by 

what we do. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to thus make some 

changes to this Bill in order to ensure that and we need to work 

together co-operatively to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan’s needs are in fact reflected in the outcome. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this particular piece of 

legislation, I have a number of definitions here that are of 

interest. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today many of the tickets to events are sold 

online. In many cases there is software today that allows 

companies, without ever having to actually be even at the office 

to push a button, to buy tickets online, and not just one ticket, 

but many tickets. In fact there are companies around North 

America who routinely buy a number of tickets to every major 

concert event or every major sports event that goes on around 

the country, and they don’t even in many cases sell them all. Or 

they resell them in some cases, even at lower prices. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will attempt to regulate and 

control that. It will attempt to make a greater number of tickets 

available to Saskatchewan citizens earlier in the process, and at 

face value — at face value, not at an increased price. That’s 

good. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t deal with some of the traditional 

problems of tickets and scalpers. As an example, it doesn’t 

prevent somebody from standing outside an arena or standing 

outside the football stadium or a concert and selling a ticket at 

two or three times the face value. Mr. Speaker, I think we all 

need to identify that’s nearly impossible to prevent. That’s 

nearly impossible to prevent. But this does deal with companies 

being able to do the same thing systemically through the 

development of systems to do just that — sell tickets at an 

enhanced sale price to the consumers of the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’m looking this particular piece of 

legislation, I still have many concerns. And those concerns 

come about as a result of the lack of consultation. The apparent 

systemic lack of consultation across the broad piece, Mr. 

Speaker, raises concerns of my colleagues and myself and the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. We have heard 

repeatedly, major changes in the fabric of our province have 

been brought forward without any consultation. And these 

changes, Mr. Speaker, are having a profound effect on the 

people of Saskatchewan. And that effect is not always positive. 

 

And in fact in most cases, Mr. Speaker, there are always, in 

decisions, those who feel they should be consulted that never 

have been. Now if there’s been an attempt to consult people, 

that’s one thing. But for the primary stakeholders in major 

changes to not be consulted, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very serious 

concern. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am at a point where I think I’m going to 

wind down my comments and give my colleague a few minutes 

before 5 o’clock to share some of her view. Mr. Speaker, this is 

an important piece of legislation. I hope the minister has taken 

the time to pay attention to some of the changes that we think 

need to be made. I wish he would take the time to consult with 

those business people once again and bring forward the 

appropriate amendments to the legislation. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my seat and give the 

opportunity of other members to speak. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

adjourn debate on Bill 119 at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] from Regina Dewdney has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill 119. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? Carried. 

 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 121 — The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 

to rise to enter the debate on Bill 121, The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, which according to the 

minister, combined with amendments to two other Acts, sets the 

stage for adoption of a results-based environmental framework 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

So I want to preface my comments here with the lack of 

credibility with this government talking about the environment. 

Well the lack of credibility on many fronts, but particularly 

when it comes to the environment. For example, we saw in 

2007 this government during the election promised to stabilize 

emissions, greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 and reduce them 

by 32 per cent by 2020. And just last fall this same government 

introduced a piece of legislation to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions by 20 per cent from 2006 levels by 2020. So two very 

different things of commitment for one thing and coming out 

with something very different. 

 

So again on many fronts, but particularly around the 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4127 

environment, this government has little credibility. This is a 

government with a Premier who talked about ragging the puck 

on the environment. This is a government who’s promised to 

protect our environment, but why should we believe them now? 

 

And just a note here with Bill 126, the Bill that I had mentioned 

earlier, it was a very different approach here. This Bill 121 that 

we’re talking about today very much speaks about best 

practices from around the world, but Bill 126 tends to shun the 

best practices and the global approach on reducing greenhouse 

gases. So again I just want to say this is a government who says 

they want to protect our environment, but again why should we 

believe them now? 

 

I just too want to echo my colleagues this afternoon in the 

discussion of some of the previous Bills that have come up. I 

would like to echo their concern about consultation and the 

government’s track record on consultation, or more like the lack 

thereof consultation. The government has said they have 

consulted and they’ve committed to ongoing consultation with 

this Bill 121, but with whom have they consulted? Has it been 

industry people only, or has it been a broad-based consultation? 

And are they committed to a broad-based consultation going 

forward as they plan to implement this? 

 

[16:45] 

 

As my colleagues have mentioned, this government’s 

consultations around Bill 80 and essential services have been 

one-sided. And is this again the case with Bill No. 121, the 

environmental measures and protection Act? 

 

We heard the other day from the Minister of Justice that a very 

valuable program, the domestic violence program, had been cut 

and then consultations were now taking place, so . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — In what community? 

 

Ms. Chartier: — That would be in Saskatoon. So again, are all 

the necessary stakeholders who are impacted by this Bill, have 

they been involved in the discussions? 

 

So what is Bill 121, the environmental measures and protection 

Act, promising to do? Well in referring to the Ministry of 

Environment’s Towards a Results-Based Environmental 

Regulatory System for Saskatchewan — this is basically the 

document summarizing the ministry’s response to a report it 

commissioned — so what is this Bill promising to do? Well: 

 

The results-based environmental model is about a healthy 

environment, communities and economy. 

 

Our current system of environmental regulation is not 

supporting sustainable growth. We are focused on 

processes and not focused on environmental outcomes. 

The way the Ministry conducts its business means that 

growth is too often held up in the government system, 

with the result that costs and timelines can be increased 

with no incremental benefit to the environment and 

investment and innovation can be discouraged. 

 

So this is what the ministry says they’re working to do: 

 

The Ministry of Environment is working to create a better 

system and we believe the answer lies in a results-based 

regulatory model. In the big picture, a results-based 

model has the Ministry focusing on setting standards and 

codes for the environmental outcomes which hopefully 

will be translated into a government wide standard. The 

private sector is accountable for meeting those standards 

and finding the most appropriate methods and processes 

to achieve the outcome. 

 

So this is the basic concept of this Bill. So without a doubt, 

there’s definitely some merit to the proposal and the idea of 

developing an environment code is a good one. 

 

But there are other examples out there of results-based models 

or where self-regulation or results-based models haven’t always 

worked. We need only to think back to 2008 and the listeriosis 

outbreak here in Canada. So we saw self-regulation break down 

with the death of Canadian citizens and a very insensitive 

Conservative Saskatchewan cabinet minister talk about death 

from a thousand cold cuts. 

 

So the environment is an area where outcomes are absolutely 

critical. When something goes wrong, it can go very wrong and 

it can have long-term, life-threatening impacts. So we have to 

be very mindful when it comes to the environment, thinking 

that those things that do go wrong can be very bad for all of us 

and have long-term consequences. So in a news release in 

November when the Environment minister introduced the Act, 

as she said: 

 

Throughout our consultations, we heard that 

environmental regulation in Saskatchewan needs to better 

reflect best practices in protection of the environment and 

keep up with the pace of economic development. 

 

She goes on to say: 

 

Results-based environmental regulation will allow us to 

do both by focusing on the use of effective, 

custom-designed environmental safeguards, rather than 

one-size-fits-all approaches. 

 

So I completely agree that a cookie-cutter approach usually 

isn’t the best way to do business, but we also need to ensure 

that people know what we expect of them. So I’m not so sure 

that this government yet knows what we need to expect of 

people involved in the industry. Government is asking us to 

pass this Bill without knowing what the new minimum 

standards of protection will be. 

 

So who is going to be writing these standards? And how will 

they be enforced? So this is critical in all of these questions 

here. Again I hate to harp on consultation, but who is the 

government going to consult with to develop these standards? 

This is absolutely critical moving forward. 

 

So industry certainly has the expertise, but others do too. And 

we all have a stake in this. It’s the environment so we need to 

ensure all stakeholders are involved. So there is merit in the 

government’s proposal to establish a series of baseline 

objectives that the industry would be required to meet. And a 

lot depends on how those objectives are set and whether or not 



4128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2010 

they’re rigorous enough to be meaningful in some way. 

 

So how will this all work? Well this is apparently is how it’s 

going to work. So from the ministry’s report on the report they 

commissioned: 

 

Much of the aim of a Results-Based regime is to 

“decouple” responsibilities for compliance [industry, 

developers, proponents] and enforcement [so decoupling 

responsibilities in enforcement by government], by 

clearly defining the desired environmental outcome and 

making the operators clearly accountable to provide that 

result. 

 

The emphasis is on . . . progress toward environmental 

goals and targets and on enabling firms to maintain 

compliance. 

 

So how will enforcement work? We don’t know that, and this is 

critical. When you have someone who is degrading the 

environment, we need to know how they will be held to 

account. And who will do the enforcement? How will we know 

or have any sense of whether or not the industry has in fact 

achieved or not achieved the desired results? So these are all 

things the government has to sort out in short order, and it 

doesn’t sound like this has been done yet. 

 

So when I first read this Act, actually it reminded me . . . As I 

said, there is definitely merit in this, but it reminded me of 

being a teenager. And I just want to clarify here that I was never 

this kind of teenager. I was the daughter of a police officer and 

a very responsible, law-abiding youngster. But imagine your 

parents go away. So this is what Bill 121 reminded me of. 

 

So parents go away and leave the kids alone in the house. The 

kids have a crazy party and trash the house. They break 

windows, all kinds of things. But these kids are pretty 

industrious, and before parents get home from their vacation, 

the kids have replaced the windows. They’ve polished up the 

dog. They’ve got everything back in order, fixed it up. And 

parents come home and don’t realize at the time that anything 

ever happened. 

 

So the parents seem to be no wiser. But then we need to know 

which kid was hospitalized with alcohol poisoning. How has 

the dog, who was shaved, recovered? But again on the surface 

the kids have managed to pull it together. But when dad gets the 

ice bucket out nine months later at Christmas to use for the 

holiday season, we discover that someone has been sick in the 

ice bucket. So it’s about those times when everything looks 

good on the surface and all . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And this is the land we’re talking about. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — This is the land. This is our environment. So 

we need to know not just what outcomes are but what happens 

all along the way. So what looks good on the surface, you meet 

the requirements at the very end, but 10 years down the road, 20 

years down the road, we open up that proverbial ice bucket and 

see that someone has damaged our environment. 

 

So again what looks good on the surface might have long-term 

consequences. So I’m a little concerned. Again there definitely 

is merit in this, but we need to make sure that those baseline 

standards are established. 

 

The other thing that we can talk about here is that the Clifton 

report noted that “Saskatchewan does not have . . . [the current] 

staff capacity or capability to monitor and regulate the current 

industry and oversee the social license . . .” 

 

It notes, the report notes that the Ministry of Environment is 

short of certain important skill sets — engineers, 

hydrogeologists, water quality and air quality specialists, 

toxicologists, epidemiologists, and risk assessment specialists. 

So in other words, the Ministry of Environment currently 

doesn’t have the capacity to do the job. 

 

So then the report goes on to suggest that: 

 

. . . the Ministry of Environment should consider 

developing a long-term “preferred supplier” relationship 

with a private sector firm who could be kept on retainer to 

provide these capabilities. 

 

The government in this paper agreed that this was the way to 

go. So instead of building expertise in government to manage 

and protect the environment, the government is going to be 

contracting it out. So in the end, this results-based environment 

management is privatization by another name . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Not very far. 

 

So in conclusion I just would like to say that this Act going 

towards a results-based model has merit, but before we can pass 

this Act, I think the government needs to think about all those 

previous details to make sure that we . . . about we need to think 

again about how enforcement works, how the operator is, how 

the . . . We need to think of how industry will be held 

accountable. These all need to be in place. To vote on 

something before we know what it will look like, I think, would 

be irresponsible. 

 

So what will we do to ensure people are accountable? So I’m 

just going to actually give you a couple of . . . talk about some 

of the key recommendations of the Clifton report. So 

implementation of the results-based regulatory system, this is 

one of the key recommendations: 

 

Implementation of the Results-Based Regulatory System 

is a very significant undertaking that will affect most units 

in the Ministry of Environment. The first step in the 

implementation should be to develop a comprehensive 

implementation plan with designated project managers 

and a dedicated steering committee who can commit to an 

intensive schedule that will transform the Ministry of 

Environment to a fully results-based organization within 

24 months. 

 

So that’s the Clifton, one of the . . . That is first key 

recommendation from the Clifton report. The ministry’s 

response was in agreement: 

 

The Deputy Minister of the Environment will be held 

accountable for implementation; this will include 

appointing an Assistant Deputy Minister to Chair the 

Implementation Steering Committee with the goal to have 



March 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4129 

the Results-Based Regulations implemented by the 

Ministry and the regulated . . . where practicable by 

March 31, 2011. 

 

So time, time is of the essence here. That’s only a year away 

and I don’t see any evidence that we have got all that 

information here. So I have some concerns around that. Time is 

of the essence, but again the work has not been, the foundation 

has not been laid yet. Just one of the second, the second key 

recommendation from the Clifton report: 

 

[The] Adoption of a results-based regulation will require 

enhanced compliance assurance capabilities that will 

consist of a full range of compliance assurance tools 

ranging from education to technical audits to 

enforcement. The core of the compliance assurance 

program will be technical audits of [the] operations 

selected on the basis of history, past performance and 

environmental risk assessment. 

 

It is proposed that the Ministry of Environment develop a 

cadre of qualified certified environmental auditors who 

would conduct compliance audits on selected permit 

holders. The basis of selection would be by exception. 

 

So has this been thought through? Has this been done? The 

ministry response is that they’ve agreed with this, that they will 

establish a separate auditing unit that will have the 

responsibility to establish and implement this process “to 

objectively evaluate, document and report on the performance 

of commercial and industrial operations in regards to 

compliance with environmental laws, regulations and codes.” 

 

So again I’m going back to consultation here, but in terms of 

developing the code to make sure . . . What do we know we are 

evaluating? Have we set that baseline standard yet? We have 

not. So it would be again irresponsible to support this Bill 

without knowing that those things are in place. 

 

Again I want to go back to my house party analogy and the kids 

in the end being able to clean up the house so it looks good 

enough, but remembering that there was all kinds of damage 

done that on the surface can look like it’s repairable but there 

may be long-term outcomes, consequences — that ice bucket 

that people find 10 years down the road. So I want us to think 

about that ice bucket and that house party when we think about 

this Bill. 

 

And again I really, really want to emphasize the importance of 

consultation. Not only is consultation key for making sure that 

we have people feeling included and part of the process, but 

when you connect politicians and bureaucrats to the people on 

the ground, that’s when the best policy outcomes happen. So 

that’s absolutely critical. 

 

And again this government has not shown itself to be incredibly 

adept in thorough consultations so this is definitely a concern of 

mine. 

 

Again in review, in review I just want to point out that this 

government is talking about the protection of the environment. 

And this has been a government who has not proven themselves 

to be incredibly committed or one might say somewhat 

untrustworthy, where we had a promise in 2007 and something 

very different surfacing in 2009. So again, how can we be sure 

we can believe this government now? 

 

And with that, thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., the hour of adjournment, 

the Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 

a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4099 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4099 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4099 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4122 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4099 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4099 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4099 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4099 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4100 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4100 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4100 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4100 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4100 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4100 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4101 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4101 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4101 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4101 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canadian Music Week 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4101 

 Poster 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4102 

 Red Cross Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4102 

 Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4102 

 Regina Speed Skater Wins Olympic Gold 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4102 

 Tribute to Robertson Trading Post Founder 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4103 

 Moose Jaw Hosts the Saskatchewan Winter Games 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4103 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Supply of Health Care Workers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4103 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4103 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4104 

 Financial Support for Health Care Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4105 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4105 

 Project Payment and Planning 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4106 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4106 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4107 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4108 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4108 

 Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4111 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4111 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4111 

 



 

 Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4114 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4115 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4119 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4126 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


