




















































Hansard: May 17, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 62B  MONDAY, MAY 17, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5575 

 May 17, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — Debate will continue. The session will resume 

but I should just make mention to members that just before 5 

p.m., when the member from Saskatoon Fairview moved 

adjournment of the Assembly, the motion was defeated on a 

voice vote. 

 

The member was inadvertently allowed to continue in debate. 

And in the past it would have proceeded but changes to the 

rules in rule 62(3) classifies a motion to adjourn the Assembly 

as a dilatory motion. Rule 62(5) states, “A Member who has 

moved a dilatory motion that is defeated is precluded from 

continuing in the debate on the question presently before the 

Assembly.” Consequently the member may not continue his 

remarks on this debate and I advised the Opposition House 

Leader of this oversight earlier today. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

extremely pleased this evening to enter into debate on a very 

important Bill before the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 

over the next three and a half hours or so, we‟ll have the 

opportunity to share a viewpoint that many of the members 

opposite, I‟m sure, do support. But their leader and some of 

their members of the cabinet won‟t allow their members to truly 

share and voice their own opinion, Mr. Speaker, on how they 

feel about this very important issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue before us is The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. And a piece of legislation that in 

fact, Mr, Speaker, allows for the sell-off of over 3 million acres 

of protected land, Mr. Speaker, without having it debated in this 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the minister can say, well that isn‟t going to happen, Mr. 

Speaker, but if she truly wanted to have an open, consultative 

process, Mr. Speaker, she would have consulted with the 

wildlife agencies and others prior to implementing this Bill. Mr. 

Speaker, that didn‟t occur. So many, many groups are upset. 

Many, many groups have voiced their opposition to the 

opposition party. They‟ve voiced their opposition to this Bill to 

us, Mr. Speaker, and so it becomes incumbent upon us to take 

that groundswell of opposition out there in the public and bring 

it to this Assembly for debate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have the Wildlife Federation saying they 

don‟t support the Bill. We have Nature Saskatchewan saying 

they don‟t support the Bill. And we have various other wildlife 

protection groups, Mr. Speaker. The FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] as well, Mr. Speaker, don‟t 

support this Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan are saying why, why do we have to have this 

Bill, and why now? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been the ability for the last 30 or more 

years for land to be sold when it‟s deemed appropriate by the 

government through a very open process debated in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, where the land removed from the 

protection was brought here and debated in the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, prior to it being removed from protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister so wanted to sell a portion of 

wildlife habitat protected land, she could do just that by 

bringing a Bill to this Assembly, detailing what that land is, Mr. 

Speaker, allow this Assembly to debate it openly and honestly, 

and then put the question, put the question to this Assembly and 

giving the people of the province of Saskatchewan a real 

opportunity to debate whether those specific pieces of land 

should in fact be sold. Now, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t see that Bill, 

that before us, Mr. Speaker. What we see before us is a removal 

of about 3.5 million acres of land from protection, Mr. Speaker, 

and being put solely in the responsibility of the minister to 

determine whether or not it will in fact remain protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and the official 

opposition don‟t feel that this Bill is necessary. If the minister 

truly wants to sell off land that landholders today want to buy, 

there is a mechanism today in which she can do just that. That 

mechanism is to bring a Bill with those specific, detailed pieces 

of land or parcels of land to this Assembly for debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, had the minister done that, I think both the people 

of Saskatchewan, the FSIN, the Wildlife Federation, and many 

other groups would have been much more comfortable. But 

with the Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, those groups aren‟t 

comfortable. And nor are we, the official opposition, 

comfortable with the fact that what was once the purview of the 

Legislative Assembly, the rights and responsibility of the 

people of Saskatchewan would have been upheld in this 

Assembly is now unilaterally being given to the minister. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our principle of democracy would say that 

major policy decisions, major legislative changes should in fact 

be debated in this House. And, Mr. Speaker, those 3.5 million 

acres of land belong to the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s owned 

land. It‟s owned by every single citizen of this province. And 

those citizens, through their elected Assembly, should have the 

say whether or not it‟s sold, Mr. Speaker. It should not be left in 

the hands of a single minister. That is a mistake. It is a tragedy 

in the making, Mr. Speaker, and it is something that the people 

of Saskatchewan have indicated they don‟t favour. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we examine this Bill in detail, and the 

changes that are being proposed, Mr. Speaker, it leaves a great 

deal of questions that the people of the province have. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has indicated many times, when 

asked very direct and pointed questions, that there weren‟t 

meaningful, proper consultations prior to the Bill coming in to 

the House. And, Mr. Speaker, those meaningful consultations 

may have alleviated concerns that the people of this province 

have. And, Mr. Speaker, they can‟t be alleviated if those 

consultations don‟t occur. 



5576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, since the Bill has been in the House, I will say that 

there has been consultations, but those groups are not any less 

concerned today than they were prior to those consultations, 

Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, they frankly have difficulty 

understanding why the minister insists on the change that‟s 

before the House. If the minister wanted to sell off some of the 

habitat to protect the land, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a mechanism to 

do so today. Why didn‟t the minister simply avail herself of that 

mechanism and bring forward the changes that she wished to 

make? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read into the record a letter from 

. . . or portions of a letter from a gentleman by the name of 

George O‟Bertos who was responsible for the program that 

protected much of this wildlife land over the last number of 

years. And I‟m going to read the first portion of the letter, Mr. 

Speaker. And it says, I am writing . . . and it‟s to the minister. It 

says: 

 

Dear Madam, 

 

I am writing you in regards to my deep concern over your 

proposed changes to the critical wildlife protection Act. I 

was the land resources management specialist for the 

Department of Agriculture lands branch at the time these 

lands were being determined for designation under this 

Act. Because of my experience in this field, I was chosen 

to work directly with the provincial wildlife biologist in 

determining which lands were designated as wildlife 

habitat protection under The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. 

 

My area of responsibility was mainly in the parklands and 

northern grain belt of Saskatchewan where many of these 

lands are located. My submission to you is therefore 

based on this area only. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this individual goes on to weigh out a very 

compelling case, a very compelling case that this legislation 

should not move forward. Mr. Speaker, a very compelling case. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are literally dozens of letters that have 

been brought forward by citizens on behalf of themselves or 

organizations that share an opinion that this legislation simply is 

not in the best, best interest of the province of Saskatchewan 

and/or the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from the Wildlife Federation, Mr. 

Speaker, and they share a common view as well that this Act 

should not — I repeat, Mr. Speaker, should not — be 

implemented, and it should not pass in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, and in fact the government should withdraw this 

legislation and take the time to properly consult with the people 

of Saskatchewan, consult with the various stakeholder groups in 

the province, Mr. Speaker, and if they still believe after those 

meaningful consultations that a piece of legislation is required, 

to come back next fall with a piece of legislation that meets the 

needs both of the stakeholders, the people of Saskatchewan, and 

the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all share a common view that the 

ranchers, many of whom would like to purchase portions of this 

land, are good stewards of the land. That‟s not the issue before 

us. We‟re not saying that those ranchers are not good stewards 

of the land because we believe they are, but that‟s not the issue. 

This is land that‟s has been designated and set aside to be 

protected for all the people of Saskatchewan, for future 

generations, for our children and grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, 

and for their children and their grandchildren as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These lands are protected because they‟re pristine land in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, that have unique values, either 

biological value in their plant life, Mr. Speaker, or biological 

value for the animals which inhabit specific parts of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people feel a need to 

be consulted. And that‟s all they‟re asking for when they‟re 

asking for this Bill to be set aside, for it not to be proceeded 

with, Mr. Speaker, and for the opportunity to be consulted in a 

meaningful way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there are many members on 

the other side that share that view. I think there are members 

that share the view that there should be meaningful public 

consultations. I think the member from Thunder Creek probably 

shares that view that there should be meaningful consultations 

and this Bill set aside, Mr. Speaker. I believe there are many 

members who actually believe that this Bill should be 

reconsidered, Mr. Speaker. But of course the government won‟t 

allow them to speak openly about what their constituents want 

and what they truly believe themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation in their letter, they very 

clearly appreciate the magnitude of the controversy that has 

developed as a result of the proposed sale and changes in 

protected status to wildlife habitat under The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act lands. “And accordingly our federation and the 

30,000 members we represent continue to have grave . . .” Mr. 

Speaker, I want to repeat that. Their members — all 30,000 

members — continue to have grave concerns about the 

long-term implications of the proposals contained in that 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are 30,000 Saskatchewan residents represented by the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation that are saying they have 

grave concerns, Mr. Speaker. That alone should give members 

concern on the others in the government, Mr. Speaker. The fact 

that an organization representing 30,000 Saskatchewan 

residents have grave concerns about this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, should give the members opposite the opportunity to 

take a step back and say, maybe, just maybe we aren‟t doing the 

right thing and maybe, just maybe we should review the 

legislation and reconsult, commit to meaningful consultations 

with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, reconsult those 

groups that feel they weren‟t adequately consulted, redraft the 

Bill if they think a Bill‟s necessary, but even more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, take a step back and say, do we really want to do 

this? Do we really need to do this? 

 

If there are ranchers out there that want to purchase land, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s a current mechanism for it, so why is this Bill 

needed? Why would we want to take the protection and security 

of the legislature of Saskatchewan away from these lands and 

put it in the sole hands of a minister? Mr. Speaker, that‟s what 

many people cannot understand. There is currently a 

mechanism to do just what the government would like to do. So 

why would we want to take away a protective mechanism 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5577 

where there‟s a counterbalance and a check-and-balance system 

and put it in the hands of a minister? I don‟t know. 

 

Without that, without these changes, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

could do exactly what she wants to do, but she‟s not identifying 

for this legislature or for anybody why she needs the changes 

she needs in order to do what she wants to do. Mr. Speaker, we 

don‟t know why. We don‟t know why these changes are 

proposed. And the minister hasn‟t taken the time to articulate 

them. And when the minister hasn‟t taken the time to articulate 

these changes, Mr. Speaker, then why, why should we move 

forward without giving it careful consideration and due 

diligence, Mr. Speaker? And I would argue we shouldn‟t. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have before me here now a press release from 

the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation media release dated 

Tuesday, May 11, 2010, just a few short days ago. And I‟m 

going to read it into the record, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation (SWF) continues 

to have grave concerns surrounding the recent Legislation 

aimed at dismantling the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

(WHPA), the legislation that was created almost 30 years 

ago and is still considered to be one of the most visionary 

conservation programs ever developed in North America. 

 

That‟s talking about the current legislation, Mr. Speaker, the 

legislation that now is in existence in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It‟s considered to be one of the most visionary 

pieces of legislation in North America. 

 

The over 3 million acres presently protected in the Act 

would now be controlled under regulation and would be 

able to be sold or changed at the discretion of the 

Minister. Under WHPA, any lands that were removed or 

changed were required to be debated in the Legislature 

. . . 

 

Currently, it would have to be debated here, Mr. Speaker, which 

is the appropriate place for the protection of special land in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

. . . be debated in the Legislature and allowed for public 

scrutiny. Under the new legislation there would be no 

transparency. In addition, to the newly passed 

Conservation Easement Legislation that the Saskatchewan 

Government would place on most of the sold parcels 

gives the Minister the power to remove or change the 

easement without public knowledge or recourse. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it takes away the power of the legislature and 

the members of this legislature and puts it in the hands of a 

single minister, Mr. Speaker. That is a very, very grave concern. 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

“The combination of a lack of consultation and the 

aggressive time line on this Bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many 

important questions unanswered,” states Darrell Crabbe, 

Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation (SWF). “We need the Minister to table this 

Legislation until all the variables can be properly 

addressed.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so we have one of the most significant wildlife 

stakeholders in the province, Mr. Speaker, saying table this 

legislation, shelve it, and let‟s move onto meaningful 

consultations: 

 

The SWF sees a “no net loss” agreement, as has been the 

policy of every Provincial Government since the WHPA 

was introduced; changes to create public transparency; the 

establishment of a Conservation Lands Fund and the 

continuation of protection of properties under WHPA 

legislation; as the most pressing issues and is prepared to 

work with the Government towards this goal. 

 

“The SWF is a predominately rural organization. A recent 

poll of our member base indicates that we have over 

7,000 landowners and over 3,000 livestock producers in 

our membership. We recognize that the present operators 

that lease many of these properties have and continue to 

be excellent stewards of these lands. We want to work 

with all [Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that, we want to 

work with all] stakeholders to hopefully create a win-win 

scenario for all involved. We need the cooperation and 

commitment of the Provincial Government to make that 

happen,” states SWF President Ray Wild. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation has over 30,000 

members in 121 branches across Saskatchewan and is, per 

capita, the largest wildlife conservation organization of its 

kind in the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the representatives of the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, who represent more than 30,000 members, 

have indicated they have grave concerns about this legislation. 

They‟re asking their government, Mr. Speaker, their 

government — because the government represents all the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan — to take a step back 

and re-examine its course to table this legislation, to set it aside, 

and in fact deal with the issue at a later date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the members are talking about the 

language used by the Wildlife Federation saying . . . [inaudible] 

. . . the legislation. Mr. Speaker, they don‟t understand the 

legislation, don‟t understand the terminology in the legislature 

like the members opposite do or I do, Mr. Speaker, but what 

they really want is this legislation withdrawn. They want it 

withdrawn, and they want it withdrawn so that they can take a 

step back and have those meaningful consultations. 

 

And members opposite may laugh about that, but this is a 

government who the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

are saying quite frankly now don‟t consult, a government that 

promised in its election platform to be open and transparent that 

isn‟t open and transparent. Now, Mr. Speaker, they have an 

opportunity here to do the right thing, the right thing for the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the right thing for the people 

of the province, Mr. Speaker, the right thing for their children 

and my children and our grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, by simply 

withdrawing this legislation and taking the opportunity to 

review whether or not in the long run this is what should be 

done. 



5578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, in the meantime if the 

minister wants to deal with some specific areas in which 

individuals would like to purchase land, she has a mechanism to 

do that. In fact as early as tomorrow, she could bring forward 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the specific problem if 

there is one. But we haven‟t seen that. We haven‟t had the 

minister articulate for us what the problem is. All we‟ve seen is 

a minister bring forward a piece of legislation that gives her 

total control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whose interest is this legislation in? Is it in the 

interest of the schoolchildren in our province who‟d like to have 

these lands for future generations to be able to explore and, Mr. 

Speaker, have the opportunity to learn about our biodiversity, 

Mr. Speaker, learn about our wildlife in our province? No, Mr. 

Speaker. Today those children, just like all of us in this 

Assembly, own that land because we as Saskatchewan citizens 

all own that land. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s shameful to think that 

maybe some children in future generations wouldn‟t have those 

opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with admitting this may not be the 

correct course of action, taking a step back, withdrawing the 

legislation and doing some meaningful consultation? I think 

there‟s many members over there who probably share that view. 

 

I think the Minister of Highways probably agrees with it. I think 

the Minister of Highways probably does agree that this isn‟t the 

right course of action, Mr. Speaker, but can he say otherwise? 

He can‟t. He can‟t . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Highways is talking about agreeing to 

everything. I don‟t know what‟s wrong over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are members opposite, I‟m sure, that do 

agree with the number of people who have serious concerns 

with this legislation, serious concerns that there should be a 

re-examination of the legislation before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re not saying don‟t bring it back next year if 

you do the meaningful consultations and work with the groups 

to improve the situation, Mr. Speaker. The government has the 

ability to do that, Mr. Speaker. But to ram through 

ill-thought-through, poor legislation, it‟s not in the interest of 

the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s not in the interest of their 

constituents. It‟s not in the interest of my constituents. It‟s not 

in the interest of future generations, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s 

certainly not in the interest of stakeholder groups who have 

spent many, many years insuring that Saskatchewan had among 

the best, if not the very best, conservation program in all of 

North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that program is talked about with a lot of pride, a 

lot of pride by some of these stakeholder groups, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it‟s the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Ducks 

Unlimited, Nature Saskatchewan or any one of another half a 

dozen organizations that have a great deal of interest in the 

future of our protected lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a little bit of the history as to 

why this was brought in. In 1984 the provincial government 

initiated a conservation process by passing The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. So this Act‟s been in place for now 

about 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 

Now known as The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, this 

legislation protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and wetlands or 

one-third of all wildlife habitat in the agricultural region in its 

natural state. Protection of these lands makes the Act the most 

cost-effective wildlife habitat conservation program in 

Saskatchewan. The Act prevents the government from selling 

designated Crown lands, and lessees require permission before 

any clearing, breaking, or drainage occurs. The philosophy of 

this Act is to conserve wildlife habitat while enabling 

compatible traditional use to coexist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 3.4 million acres amounts to about 5 per cent 

of Saskatchewan‟s agricultural region and about 80 per cent of 

the region‟s total protected natural areas, which also include 

areas such as parks or protected wildlife and ecological areas. 

Protecting these lands has been found to be the best 

preventative medicine to ensure habitat for the survival of 

endangered species and spaces for those species, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a great deal of time was spent in designing this 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and putting in 

particular protections that were in the interest of all of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — in the interest of all 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan not just a few, Mr. 

Speaker. And we should all strive to, in all that we do in this 

Assembly, to ensure that our actions are in the best interest of 

all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the members opposite told me this 

was about selling land to ranchers, and they were going to do it. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there may well be a good case to sell some 

land to ranchers, but under the existing legislation they can do 

that. So why haven‟t they tried to do it under the existing 

legislation rather than taking the control of the legislature from 

the legislature, the control of this legislation and the sales of 

these lands from these legislature and putting it in the hands of 

a minister? Mr. Speaker, that question‟s never been, never been 

answered. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s an important question that 

needs to be answered. 

 

The Wildlife Federation wants that answer. Ducks Unlimited 

want that answer. Many school children across the province 

want that answer, Mr. Speaker. And they need that answer 

before they can understand why this legislation, why this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker is moving forward. Mr. Speaker, why 

is this going forward? That‟s the fundamental question. Who 

wants this? Who‟s demanding it? And in whose interest is this 

legislation? 

 

Well somebody tells me it‟s in the interest of ranchers. I don‟t 

disagree that there may be ranchers who want to buy their land. 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated just a few minutes ago, that can 

be done under the existing legislation in a very open and 

transparent way by the government bringing forward a Bill, 

dealing with the specific pieces of land they want to move out 

of protection and dealing with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read into the record a letter from Gary 

Seib, acting general manager of Nature Saskatchewan, that 

says: 

 

We write concerning the government‟s statements that 

conservation stakeholders organizations were consulted 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5579 

about the Crown land sale program, in particular the sale 

of land designated under the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act (WHPA). 

 

Both the Ministers of Agriculture & Food and 

Environment have publicly stated WHPA lands will not 

be sold. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these ministers have said to these 

organizations in the past that these lands would not be sold, Mr. 

Speaker. And then they turn around after telling the very 

stakeholders who have issues and concerns about these lands 

that they won‟t be sold and they introduce a Bill saying they 

will be. Mr. Speaker, how can these organizations trust a 

government that will tell them one thing and then move to do 

another? 

 

“We can assure you that no meaningful consultation regarding 

the sale of Crown lands has occurred with Nature 

Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, we heard the minister repeatedly 

in the House say consultations had occurred. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the major organizations, Nature Saskatchewan is saying: 

 

We can assure you that no meaningful consultation 

regarding the sale of Crown lands has occurred with 

Nature Saskatchewan. On occasion we were told some 

details of the land sale program, but this is not 

consultation. 

 

[19:30] 

 

They were told, Mr. Speaker. They were told. They were not 

asked, they were not consulted, they were not able to put 

meaningful input in, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, we heard in 

this House those consultations had occurred. But the very 

organizations that were supposed to have been consulted, Mr. 

Speaker, are saying, no we weren‟t. No, we were not consulted, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That raises grave concerns for the rest of the population of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because they rely on these 

organizations to look after the interests and needs of the people 

of Saskatchewan in conserving those lands, Mr. Speaker. And if 

the very organizations the people buy memberships to and that 

they trust to look after these very important issues are not 

consulted, Mr. Speaker, that does leave grave concerns, the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

Nature Saskatchewan was never asked for an opinion 

about the sale of Crown lands. The Crown Lands 

Stakeholder Forum, which did provide an opportunity for 

discussion about the management and future of Crown 

lands, was abolished by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not only was there no consultation. The forum 

in which they could have done consultation, Mr. Speaker, the 

Crown Lands Stakeholder Forum, was abolished by the 

Minister of Agriculture, Nature Saskatchewan is saying. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, why wouldn‟t the people of Saskatchewan be 

concerned if the Minister of Agriculture is abolishing the very 

forum in which groups and organizations would have the ability 

to voice an opinion? I‟d be concerned, as I would think 

members opposite should be concerned. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

We request you to urge the government to delay the 

passing of these amendments to the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act which would see these lands removed 

from the Act and placed under regulation where they 

could be sold at the discretion of the Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Nature Saskatchewan is asking the government to 

withdraw the legislation. Mr. Speaker, do the honourable thing, 

withdraw this legislation, hold meaningful consultations, and 

then, and then, Mr. Speaker, decide whether or not it‟s 

appropriate, if it‟s even appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to say the 20 members on our side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker, that have all spent numerous hours 

talking about this Bill, feel very strongly that people of 

Saskatchewan should have been consulted. And these 

organizations should have been consulted, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, nobody that we have talked to — and I mean 

nobody — believes that the minister should have the sole 

discretion and power. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not saying that ranchers who‟d want 

to purchase the land are not good stewards. We‟re not even 

saying they shouldn‟t be able to purchase the land. What we‟re 

saying is, there‟s a process that should be carried out. There‟s a 

process which the government has at its disposal to deal with 

the sale of Crown lands, Mr. Speaker. And if the government 

wants to sell Crown land, they should follow the current 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “The Government has not properly consulted with 

the public on this very important issue [the letter goes on to say] 

which has the potential to cause significant consequence to [the] 

biodiversity in Saskatchewan.” And this letter‟s written to the 

official opposition looking for their assistance in stopping the 

passage of this legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we live in a democracy where the minority 

have their say and the majority get their way, Mr. Speaker. So 

we‟re asking the government, we‟re asking the government to 

do the right thing because, Mr. Speaker, we know many 

members, many members on the government side share the 

values of the people of Saskatchewan that have concerns about 

this legislation . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And, Mr. 

Speaker, they can laugh. 

 

There‟s members laughing today who clearly are indicating 

they don‟t care about what the people of Saskatchewan say. 

They don‟t care what these groups say, Mr. Speaker, who 

would like this legislation withdrawn and the opportunity to 

have meaningful consultation. But, Mr. Speaker, I hope they 

think about it. Because, Mr. Speaker, they are here to represent 

all the people of Saskatchewan, not just a few ranchers who 

want to buy land. They‟re here to represent all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say and I want to stress that we 

have nothing against those ranchers and we believe they‟ve 



5580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

been great stewards of the land. But if there‟s parcels of land 

that should be sold and taken out from under protection, there‟s 

a mechanism to do it now. And let the government use the 

appropriate mechanisms and not take away the accountability 

and the transparency of this legislature so that a minister can do 

it unilaterally when she wants to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not appropriate. I want to repeat that. That 

is not appropriate, Mr. Speaker. This legislation was put in 

place with its current protections for a reason — to prevent 

from going on exactly what is being proposed by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province and past 

governments have worked very hard and diligently to ensure 

that any changes were debated in this House and that any sale 

of land went through the transparency and scrutiny of this 

legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is changing today, changing with this 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a shame because the 

people of this province don‟t want those changes. The people of 

Saskatchewan care about their wildlife habitat protected lands. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite put this legislation 

forward without consulting the people of Saskatchewan. And 

now the people of Saskatchewan are saying, we want to be 

consulted; we want to have a say; and we don‟t want this 

legislation passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the government listening, Mr. Speaker? Is the 

government listening? Do they care about what the people of 

Saskatchewan say? Mr. Speaker, is the government listening? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m hoping they are. I‟m hoping that there 

are members opposite there, I‟m hoping the Deputy Premier, 

who is in the House tonight, Mr. Speaker, listening to this 

speech . . . My apologies, Mr. Speaker. I hope the Deputy 

Premier is listening to this speech and cares, and cares, Mr. 

Speaker, and cares about what the people of Saskatchewan 

want. Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier 

should in fact care a great deal about this legislation. Many of 

his neighbours and friends are individuals who participate in 

these organizations, and they care. So that means the Deputy 

Premier should care because he represents those people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I have an article in my hand 

from The StarPhoenix that says, “Short-sighted of gov‟t to sell 

protected land.” And in this article it says, StarPhoenix article 

of April 29th, 2010, Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as 

a responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these aren‟t my words. They‟re the words of 

The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, an editorial, I believe. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re saying it‟s short-sighted. And that‟s what I‟ve 

been saying for the last about 45 minutes, Mr. Speaker. And all 

we‟re asking of that government is, if they made a short-sighted 

choice, Mr. Speaker — and that‟s what it is; it‟s a choice; 

governing is about choices — they have the opportunity 

because they haven‟t implemented it, they haven‟t voted on it, 

Mr. Speaker, to change their choice. They have the opportunity 

to withdraw this legislation. They have the opportunity to do the 

honourable thing, Mr. Speaker, to do the right thing for future 

generations, as this article says, and withdraw this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are members opposite who 

care enough to do it. I think the Government House Leader 

cares, Mr. Speaker. He might be afraid to stand up to some of 

his colleagues, Mr. Speaker. He might not have the will to tell 

the Deputy Premier or the Minister of Advanced Education that 

they‟re wrong. Or he might be afraid of the Minister of the 

Environment, Mr. Speaker. But he should have, he should have 

the courage, Mr. Speaker, to tell his colleagues they‟re wrong. 

He should have enough conviction, Mr. Speaker, to tell them 

that what they‟re proposing is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think the Deputy Premier would listen if the Government 

House Leader told him that because, Mr. Speaker, it only takes 

a few to stand up and say, no, it‟s the wrong thing; it‟s the 

wrong thing to do. And this legislation wouldn‟t pass. So have 

the courage of your own convictions, Mr. Speaker. Stand up 

and do the right thing. 

 

That‟s all we ask of the members opposite, those who don‟t 

agree with this. And I know there‟s a few. You know, we‟re not 

going to identify who they all are. Along with the Deputy 

Premier there‟s got to be one or two others, maybe three, four, 

Mr. Speaker. But the Deputy Premier should lead by example 

and tell his colleagues, no, I don‟t want this legislation. Table it; 

withdraw it. After all, that‟s leadership and he is the leader of 

the class . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re more concerned about the baseball scores and what‟s 

going on in the Blue Jays game than they are about dealing with 

the very important issue in front of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It goes on to say in this article, Mr. Speaker, “It simply isn‟t 

. . .” and I‟m quoting, Mr. Speaker, because I will be using a 

proper name here but it‟s a quote: 

 

It simply isn‟t acceptable that Ms. Heppner seems 

determined to push through changes to three-decade-old 

legislation without properly discussing them with groups 

other than the ranchers who have a stake in protected 

land. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are concerns being brought forward 

repeatedly by citizens of the province, by editorials, Mr. 

Speaker. The news media of our province have very, have very 

serious concerns about this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And they 

want, they all want the government to do the same thing — just 

withdraw the legislation. Take a step back, Mr. Speaker, 

withdraw the legislation. Take a step back, and let‟s have some 

meaningful consultations and try to find a solution to this issue 

that in fact meets the people of the province of Saskatchewan‟s 

interests and needs, as well as the government‟s needs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It goes on in the final sentence, Mr. Speaker, to say: 

 

This is a huge issue for us. We‟re talking about millions of 

acres of land that we consider to be a jewel in the crown of 

[our] Saskatchewan. 

 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5581 

Mr. Speaker, these are, this is an editorial talking about the 

importance of these lands to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me now a letter to the minister 

from the FSIN, signed by Mr. Whitefish, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve not 

had the opportunity to talk about this letter in my few minutes 

of debate here, Mr. Speaker. In the next two, three hours or so, I 

will have the opportunity to probably deal with some of these 

issues in great detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it starts by saying: 

 

In 1984 the provincial government of the day initiated the 

wildlife conservation process by enacting The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. This legislation protects about 1.2 

million hectares of Crown lands throughout the 

agricultural region of the province for the purpose of 

protecting natural habitats that are important to sustaining 

wildlife. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say about the issue of consultation 

and the meaningful consultation that they would expect, that it 

didn‟t occur: 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 

this program. I find these statements extremely troubling 

since no such undertakings have occurred. There has been 

no attempt by your Ministry to enter into a consultation 

process with First Nations people regarding the expansion 

of the sale of Crown lands protected under The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, and this is Vice-chief Lyle 

Whitefish: 

 

Judging from past experience I can only ascertain that 

your deliberate refusal to consult and accommodate First 

Nations people on your Ministry‟s initiatives, including 

the sale of Crown lands protected under the WHPA, as 

well as your Ministry‟s “Results-based Regulatory 

Review,” is a reflection of the policy position that your 

government has taken with regard to the First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. The province has no regard or 

respect for the interests, concerns and the Inherent and 

Treaty rights of the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

Furthermore, it appears your government views the 

Inherent and Treaty rights of First Nations people as a 

hindrance to Premier Wall‟s “growth agenda” and that the 

government will proceed by attempting to ignore the 

provincial Crown‟s constitutional and legal obligations to 

the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

Since the FSIN was not involved in any consultations, I 

am requesting a detailed explanation of how your Ministry 

purportedly undertook to consult with First Nations prior 

to the decision being made to expand the sale of Crown 

land protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

Rather than a vague reference, I am seeking a response 

that includes a listing of all the meetings your Ministry 

held with the First Nations and the dates such were held, 

which First Nations and their leaders or representatives 

who attended such meetings, what their responses were, 

how these were incorporated into the report your Ministry 

used to make the decision, and how your Ministry reported 

back to the First Nations on your decision. I also request a 

copy of such report. 

 

I trust that the report will be forwarded to my office given 

that this sale of Crown lands gravely affects the Inherent 

and Treaty rights of First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is signed by Lyle Whitefish, Office of the 

Fourth Vice Chief of the Saskatchewan Federation of Indian 

Nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I share the grave concerns that have been brought 

forward by the Wildlife Federation, Nature Saskatchewan, 

Ducks Unlimited, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, Mr. Speaker. School children in the city of Regina 

have phoned. They have left messages, Mr. Speaker, concerned 

about the fact that these lands, these pristine lands that belong 

to them and every other citizen of the province of Saskatchewan 

will and can be sold, will and can be sold, Mr. Speaker, without 

them having a meaningful say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Act that we have in Saskatchewan was 

brought forward because it provided a level of transparency and 

protection that was the envy, the envy of environmental and 

conservation groups in North America. Mr. Speaker, it was the 

envy because it required a meaningful debate in this Legislative 

Assembly prior to any land being sold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t an NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government that brought this legislation into place, it was the 

Conservative government of the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. But that 

very piece of legislation was protected and upheld by 16 years 

of NDP government, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it is a 

piece of legislation that is the envy, the envy of wildlife 

conservationists and protection organizations across North 

America. 

 

And why is it? It‟s because any changes get open and 

transparent debate in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan through their 

representatives have the ability to have a say each and every 

time a piece of land is being considered for sale. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very serious issue to many 

people in this province. And I don‟t think the government is 

taking this issue as serious as the people of Saskatchewan are. 

Mr. Speaker, what‟s really occurred here is the back door has 

been opened to sell protected lands at any time the government 

so wishes to do it. It can easily change a regulation, it then gets 

gazetted, Mr. Speaker, but at that point it‟s already done. 

There‟s no ability for anybody to raise an issue or complaint 

prior to its implementation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the government, there are a 



5582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

number of very senior members of the government sitting over 

there that know full well what this change means. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this very change has dire consequences for the future 

of protected lands in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, people have a right to be 

concerned. People have a right to be concerned, and they have a 

right, Mr. Speaker, they have a right to care because currently 

this land is owned by every citizen of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are pieces of land that are protected that are 

very meaningful to some individuals and to some groups 

because they were donated for the sole purpose, Mr. Speaker, of 

protection. They were donated by landowners to the Crown — 

meaningful pieces of legislation donated to landowners or by 

landowners to the Crown in exchange for a promise that that 

land would be protected by their government for future 

generations. And, Mr. Speaker, this change takes that away. 

This change allows the government without meaningful debate, 

without their relatives or their representatives to have a debate 

in this house about whether that land should change hands. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, why is that fair? Why would anybody think 

that is fair? If I donated a piece of land for protection to the 

Crown with an undertaking it would be protected, I would 

expect it to be protected. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had individuals 

contact us with that very concern. They donated land that they 

spent their own money to buy, land that may have been in their 

family for generations, but because of its unique value, they 

wanted it protected. And why wouldn‟t they want it protected, 

Mr. Speaker? They gave it to the Crown. They gave it to the 

Crown for the sole purpose of future generations, for their 

children‟s children. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to sell that land off is a betrayal of a trust 

between that landowner who gave the land and the rest of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. When the government 

betrays a trust like that, Mr. Speaker, why would people trust 

them? Why would people believe what the government tells 

them when they won‟t even live by promises that their 

government made? 

 

Now you can say those promises were made by past 

governments but, Mr. Speaker, the government is the 

government. It is the people‟s representative. It doesn‟t matter 

the flavour of the government or the stripe of the government or 

who the government is, the government is there to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan. In all that it does, it should always put 

the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan first. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is what people are concerned about. 

 

I have a letter here, Mr. Speaker, to one of my colleagues, and it 

says: 

 

Dear Pat, 

 

Peter and I emailed to protest earlier to Premier Wall and 

the Minister of the Environment as a result of the reading 

of The StarPhoenix today. Then as a member of Nature 

Saskatchewan, I was horrified to receive this email. And I 

urge you and all opposition members to please do your 

utmost to stop this legislation which would allow the sale 

of designated wildlife habitat protection . . . land to be 

sold at the discretion of the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

We write concerning the government‟s statements that the 

conservation stakeholder organizations were consulted 

about the Crown land sale program, in particular the sale 

of land designated under the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. 

 

Both the Ministers of Agriculture & Food and 

Environment have publicly stated wildlife habitat 

protection lands will not be sold. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the second individual who is in a 

letter saying that they were promised by the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Minister of the Environment that these 

lands wouldn‟t be sold, that they wouldn‟t sell these lands. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see these very lands being transferred 

from a transparent, publicly held and controlled piece of 

legislation to regulations so the minister can sell the land at her 

discretion, after verbal promises had been made that no such 

sales would occur. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a serious issue. It is 

always a very serious issue when a minister of the Crown tells 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan one thing, then 

undertakes to do something else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a serious concern and the people of this 

province deserve better. They deserve better, they‟re entitled to 

better and, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons alone this 

government should withdraw this legislation. Mr. Speaker, how 

do you have two ministers of the Crown go about the province, 

travel about the province and tell people, no we won‟t sell this 

very land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, then go 

and change the legislation to do that very thing? Mr. Speaker, 

how can a government say they won‟t do something then 

change legislation to do that very thing, ever have any integrity, 

Mr. Speaker, ever have any credibility. Mr. Speaker, and why 

wouldn‟t the people of this province be concerned? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read that again: 

 

Both the Ministers of Agriculture & Food and 

Environment have publicly stated wildlife habitat 

protection Act lands will not be sold. We can assure you 

[it goes on to say in this letter] that no meaningful 

consultation regarding the sale of Crown lands has 

occurred with Nature Saskatchewan. On occasion we 

were told some details of the land sale program, but this is 

not consultation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again we have another individual from Nature 

Saskatchewan writing a letter saying that there was no 

consultation even though, even though, Mr. Speaker, they said 

there was. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes talking about 

what is the driving force behind this legislation. Why does the 

government feel so compelled to pass this legislation in this 

session? Well I‟ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. Because they 

know it‟s not good legislation. They know it‟s poorly thought 

through legislation. They know it‟s not good public policy, Mr. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5583 

Speaker. And they want to do it well in advance of a provincial 

election, hoping most people will forget about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you know it‟s not good public policy, you 

know it‟s not good legislation, and you know it‟s not in the 

interest of the majority of Saskatchewan people, well then, Mr. 

Speaker, if a government does it, they‟re acting in their own 

self-interest and not in the interest of the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that in itself is shameful. That in 

itself is shameful. 

 

So why is the Premier so intent in pushing this Bill through in 

this session, Mr. Speaker? We have but three days left, Mr. 

Speaker, and he is absolutely determined this Bill will pass. We 

are told he‟s told wildlife organizations that he‟s going to ram it 

through regardless what. He‟s going to ram it through 

regardless what. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see that. We‟re sitting here tonight when 

over three months ago — well over three months ago — the 

official opposition asked that we not sit this evening. That‟s fine 

that we‟re sitting. This is an evening we normally sit, Mr. 

Speaker. But it shows the level of co-operation this government 

expresses with the official opposition and with the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There‟s no regard for 

anybody‟s interest but their own, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s fine. 

They can do that. The majority has the right to govern, Mr. 

Speaker. And we‟ll be here every hour we need to be. And we‟ll 

be here happily and proudly representing the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But why does the Premier feel so compelled to ram this 

through? Well I‟ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll tell you why. 

Because they have gone and promised to a few of their friends 

that they will get land that they have for years leased in a sale. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not necessarily a bad thing, but 

there‟s a process that can be done today in the current 

legislation. 

 

Why would everybody be suspicious when you feel you have to 

change the legislation in order to do what you could do today? 

Well I‟ll tell you why. I‟ll tell you why. Because people care 

about these lands. They weren‟t consulted and they care. And 

people care about being consulted as well. 

 

If they‟re not consulted, they‟re suspicious. And why wouldn‟t 

they be? Why wouldn‟t they be suspicious, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker, they should be suspicious because we heard they were 

consulted, and then we hear group after group — it‟s Nature 

Saskatchewan, Wildlife Federation, Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Ducks Unlimited, and it goes on 

and on and on — who said they weren‟t consulted. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a pattern forming here that we hear in this 

Assembly about the great consultations that have gone on, and 

then after pushed and after we check, those consultations never 

occurred. There‟s a vast difference from sending a letter telling 

people what‟s going to happen than consulting them and asking 

them what should happen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province today, the 

Premier of today promised the people of Saskatchewan that his 

government would be more open, honest, and accountable than 

any government before it. Yet the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan are feeling they‟re getting far less than what was 

promised. There is no transparency. There is no consultation. 

There is no accountability. And Mr. Speaker, that means they 

made a promise they simply didn‟t keep and, Mr. Speaker, they 

had no intent to keep. It‟s getting worse every single day. It‟s 

getting worse every single day. 

 

The proposed changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

will allow the Premier and his Environment minister to sell off 

protected lands without consulting anybody. They don‟t have to 

consult anybody before they can sell off land that have been put 

under protection by the people‟s representatives for future 

generations. They can just go and sell it without any 

consultation at all. 

 

The Premier and his minister say, well trust my judgment. But 

why would they trust their judgment, Mr. Speaker? Why would 

they trust their judgment on this issue when they haven‟t 

consulted people when they said they would? Now, Mr. 

Speaker, what guarantees do the people of Saskatchewan have 

that the Premier will not break that promise as well? Well they 

don‟t, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t have any promises, Mr. 

Speaker. They don‟t have any guarantees that the Premier will 

not, will not break his promise. 

 

There are close to 3 million acres of land that are currently 

protected by this legislation. Mr. Speaker, that‟s land owned by 

all the people of this province. People care about that land and 

they care about it for a number of reasons. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we know the ranchers who currently lease the land care about 

that land too. We‟re not saying they‟re not good stewards of the 

land. We‟re not saying they haven‟t looked after the land. And 

we‟re not saying they don‟t care about the land. 

 

The only person that says these people haven‟t been good 

stewards of the land is the Minister of the Environment in trying 

to create a false fight, trying to create a fight where there isn‟t a 

fight to be had, Mr. Speaker, because we all agree that they 

have been great stewards of the land. That‟s not the issue. 

 

What this does is takes total accountability away from the 

government. It allows a minister to unilaterally and individually 

decide what‟s in the best interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan without bringing it before the House, Mr. 

Speaker. Is this the unprecedented accountability the Premier 

promised the people of Saskatchewan? I doubt it. I doubt it, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think that it lacks significant 

accountability. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan deserve better. 

 

You have a Premier who goes before the people of 

Saskatchewan on November the 7th, 2007, and says, I‟m going 

to provide the most open, transparent, and accountable 

government in the history of this province. And what do we get 

in exchange? We get a government that passes legislation and 

takes away transparency and accountability and leaves the sole 

decision on the sale of important, environmentally protected 

lands to a single minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have grave 



5584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

concerns about the government‟s ability to manage anything 

these days, Mr. Speaker. They‟ve seen the deficit increase 

beyond belief. Debt is rising more rapid than it did under the 

Devine administration in the 1980s. Mr. Speaker, they can‟t 

settle collective agreements with their employees. They can‟t, 

Mr. Speaker . . . They put forward legislation to interfere in the 

construction industry in a way that significantly hurts many 

workers in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Who 

does it help? It helps out-of-Saskatchewan construction 

companies, Mr. Speaker. That‟s who it helps: people that don‟t 

pay their taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But that‟s what the government‟s all about, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

about helping those who have been their supporters and 

provided significant financial resources to their campaigns in 

the past, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s shameful. You should govern 

for all the people of the province of Saskatchewan all the time. 

You should consider the interests of all the people in everything 

that you do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it requires meaningful consultation to do 

that. And we haven‟t seen those consultations from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Keep talking. Get it on the record. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the members say, get it on the 

record. There‟s a key point here, Mr. Speaker. The outcome‟s 

always determined by the majority but there should have been 

meaningful consultations prior to promises being made, 

promises being made that the people of Saskatchewan were not 

aware of when they elected a government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they should have known the agenda of the 

government when they elected them. And the government said 

one thing before an election and another after the election, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s the problem here. They talk about being the 

most open, transparent, accountable government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Yates: — They‟re anything but. They‟re absolutely 

anything but. And, Mr. Speaker, they can cheer as they didn‟t 

consult in Bill 80. They can cheer as they didn‟t consult on The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. They can cheer as 

they didn‟t consult on numerous things, on the chiropractors, 

Mr. Speaker, on the cancellation of the kidney transplant, on the 

cancellation of the children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. Many, 

many things this government has said they would do, they 

haven‟t done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite made many promises they‟re 

not keeping. But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, they need to 

step forward on this piece of legislation today, take a step back, 

withdraw this legislation. They can do it right now, Mr. 

Speaker, and we can all go home within a half an hour. Just 

withdraw this legislation right now and you can all go home 

tonight. You can take the night off. I think it‟s in your best 

interests to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you want to be open and transparent and 

accountable, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t bring forward bad 

legislation. When organizations and the people of 

Saskatchewan say, withdraw it, you withdraw it. Mr. Speaker, 

they had that opportunity tonight. Just admit you made a 

mistake. Withdraw the legislation. The Government House 

Leader can stand up right now and say, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

going to withdraw this legislation. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Labour has done that. It doesn‟t hurt that bad. He‟s done it. He 

survived. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation isn‟t good for the people of 

Saskatchewan. It doesn‟t live up to the government‟s 

commitment to be open, transparent, and accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a letter campaign has been started entitled, “Brad 

Wall government passing a bill to sell off Crown wildlife 

habitat lands — express your opposition!” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that groups spontaneously have started a 

letter writing campaign and literally thousands of people have 

participated in this letter writing campaign should tell the 

government that the legislation they have before the House 

that‟s going to sell off Crown protected land, wildlife habitat 

protected land that is owned by every single man, woman, and 

child in this province, land that they care about, Mr. Speaker, 

and the land that should not be sold off. 

 

This government can do the honourable thing now and 

withdraw the legislation. Mr. Speaker, they can do the 

honourable thing. But will they? I don‟t believe they will 

because, Mr. Speaker, they can talk about nice terms like being 

open, transparent, and accountable, Mr. Speaker, but that 

doesn‟t mean they are. It‟s simply words, simply words. 

They‟re simply words, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re not meaningful 

words unless the government lives up to them. Now, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

legislature, I‟d like to introduce someone very special in my life 

— my partner, Ann Riley, seated in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my first wife died of cancer when she was 42 and 

left me with daughters of 15 and 18. And this year my eldest 

daughter is getting married, and that‟s always a special time in 

every father‟s life. But it‟s not quite the same. Mr. Speaker. I 

had to go shopping for a wedding dress the other day, and that 

was good. But you know dads just don‟t have the same sort of 

impact as they do, and Ann has been there helping out, and I 

wanted to publicly thank her for that. 

 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5585 

And I know we always talk about support, and our partners or 

wives supporting us, and I want to thank Ann for being there, 

special support. And particularly tonight . . . I know Mr. Yates 

is a great speaker, and we would all come to listen . . . The 

member from Dewdney is a great speaker — sorry, Mr. Speaker 

— but I think she might be here for me and supporting me. So I 

want to thank her for that and all that she does on a daily basis. 

And thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d just like 

to join with the member and welcome Ann Riley to her 

Legislative Assembly. And it‟s always great to see any time, on 

either side of the House, when you see one of the partners here, 

and the special meaning it has for that member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter that I was talking about goes on to say: 

 

The Government has not properly consulted with the 

public on this very important issue which has the potential 

to cause significant consequence to biodiversity in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If we do nothing as citizens, the legislation will pass, and 

we‟ll have to explain to our children and our 

grandchildren how we how we collectively let this 

happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in this province are concerned. And it 

really is about our children and grandchildren. The choices we 

make today changes the opportunities of our children and it 

changes the opportunities of our grandchildren. And, Mr. 

Speaker, before we make choices that change the opportunities 

and futures of our children and grandchildren, we need to be 

very careful in our consideration, very thoughtful and, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to care. We need to care that they have the 

same opportunities that you and I had when we younger, Mr. 

Speaker, that our children have today and, I think many of us in 

this room, our grandchildren. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, most importantly is their children and their 

grandchildren. Future generations, their opportunities are 

determined by many of the decisions we make today. So we 

need to make those decisions carefully. We need to think them 

through. We need to think about them from a point of view of 

what opportunities does it take away from those future 

generations, not about what our immediate need is today, but 

what we need to care about and consider for those children and 

our children‟s children. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the easiest path is the one of least resistance 

and that‟s one to deal with the obstacle in front of you today. 

Just make the quick and easy choice, make somebody happy 

without considering what the implications are beyond the 

immediate. Mr. Speaker, good decisions and good public policy 

look far beyond the immediate to what the big picture, the 

future is and what the implications are, not today and tomorrow, 

but 10 and 20, 40 and 50 years from now as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why public policy has always been 

developed through meaningful consultation, discussion, and 

debate. And, Mr. Speaker, when that path is not followed, when 

meaningful consultation and debate does not occur, then we 

often end up with what I call poor public policy, and poor 

public policy also includes poor legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a reason why the legislation we have in 

place today called The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act has 

remained largely unchanged for more than 30 years and why 

conservation groups see it as the envy of North America. It‟s 

because a lot of time, effort, and thought went into the 

development of the current wildlife habitat protection Act. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, 30 years this legislation has stood the test of time, 

governments of many stripes, the evaluation of conservation 

groups. It has stood the test of protecting the interests of our 

children and grandchildren and future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

So why do we want to change what has been seen as great 

public policy and the envy of conservation and ecologists across 

North America? That question has never been answered, Mr. 

Speaker. And why would we want today to move forward on a 

piece of legislation that significantly changes the future, the 

future of protecting lands in Saskatchewan? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if it‟s the simple problem that members 

opposite have said about wanting to sell some land to ranchers, 

well then let‟s do it under the current legislation that has the 

protection of the debate in this Assembly. Let‟s not change the 

rules and give unilateral control to an individual. Why would 

we, why would any of the 58 of us that are tasked with the 

responsibility of representing the people of Saskatchewan want 

to do that? Why would we want to do that? 

 

I don‟t hear a logical answer. I don‟t hear a practical answer. In 

fact quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t hear an answer at all. 

Mr. Speaker, the government has failed to make a meaningful 

case as to why they‟d want to change this legislation. And until 

they can make that meaningful case and they can sell it to the 

people of Saskatchewan then, Mr. Speaker, these changes 

should not be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to talk about, on April the 28th, 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news reported that, 

“Wildlife groups and environmentalists in Saskatchewan are 

upset with the government plan to remove more than 1.2 

million hectares of land from the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act,” according to Darrell Crabbe, the executive director of 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, an organization that 

represents more than 30,000 people across Saskatchewan. 

 

He stated that “Those properties are owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan . . .” by every man, women, and child in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So when were they 

consulted in this process prior to the government determining 



5586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

that they would remove these lands from protection and sell 

them off at the whim of the government? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I happen to be privileged to be a grandfather 

of a wonderful young man, the absolute envy of my life. My 

grandson, Liam, is probably the most meaningful person in my 

life. There‟s nothing more important than being a grandparent. I 

can tell you I became a grandparent at 40, and I wasn‟t excited 

about being a grandparent at 40, thought I was too young to be 

a grandparent. And I thought, you know, many things would not 

work out for my daughter, was going to be a single parent and 

raising a child when she was just a child herself, right? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, my daughter went on to 

finish university and has multiple degrees now, and a wonderful 

opportunity in our province, Mr. Speaker. But she cares and my 

grandson care about this Act. And they care about the 

protection of land, Mr. Speaker, because they want those 

pristine lands there for my grandson, his children, Mr. Speaker, 

and for all the children of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we don‟t take the steps to protect those sensitive lands, Mr. 

Speaker, who will? Nobody. That‟s why people elect a 

government. They elect a government to represent all the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, if we don‟t 

take the steps to protect those lands, who will? . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I hope Bill would 

try because maybe it would mean he‟s considered his position 

on this legislation and will actually vote with his conscience, 

Mr. Speaker, not the way he‟s told to vote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Darrell Crabbe says that these lands “. . . are 

owned by [all] the people of Saskatchewan, and I just don‟t 

think most people . . . want to see them sold off.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Crabbe, as indicated, represents the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, more than 30,000 people in the province. 

And he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: “It‟s a very sad day when 

the dollar plays a bigger role than our future generations [do].” 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s reported on CBC news, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that: “It‟s a very sad day 

when the dollar plays a bigger role than our future generations.” 

Mr. Speaker, that says a great deal — a sad day when the dollar 

plays a bigger role than our future generations. That says a great 

deal about this government and about the importance they put 

on something as significant to the people of Saskatchewan as 

wildlife habitat protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

Despite the minister‟s tepid responses that the decision to 

sell off wildlife habitat protection lands isn‟t about 

monetary things, [Mr. Speaker] the unprecedented 

financial mismanagement by the Premier‟s Saskatchewan 

Party government is exactly why the people of 

Saskatchewan don‟t trust anything the Wall government 

tells them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s reported on CBC. Mr. Speaker, those are 

direct quotes from April 28, 2010. Mr. Speaker, I want to just 

reiterate that, say it one more time for the record: 

 

The unprecedented financial mismanagement by the 

Premier‟s Saskatchewan Party government is exactly why 

the people of Saskatchewan don‟t trust anything the Wall 

government tells them. 

 

That‟s as reported by CBC on April 28, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on May 10th, 2010, just a week ago today, a week 

ago today, Mr. Speaker, a letter was written to the Minister of 

Environment and copied to the Premier from George O‟Bertos, 

formerly the land resource management specialist for the 

Department of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, I read a few quotes 

from that letter, Mr. Speaker. But that letter told us and 

explained for us why these lands were put into protection. 

 

Mr. O‟Bertos has over 30 years of expertise in land 

administration, and he felt compelled to write the Premier and 

the minister urging the Wall government to reconsider what he 

sees as a very harmful Bill to the environment of Saskatchewan, 

to the protection of land in our province, to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and not in the interest of future 

generations. This was a career civil servant who spent 30 years 

working on the protection of the land of our province. 

 

He goes on to say that one of the main criteria used in this 

determination was that any lands with this designation would 

have little suitability for agricultural use. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

most of the Crown lands that fall under this Act have either 

unproductive soils, excessive stones or topography, have 

extensive wetlands or are subject to flooding, etc., and therefore 

have minimal agricultural value. What‟s the value of selling 

land that is largely unsuitable for agriculture? 

 

He goes on to say, it‟s a backwards step. “It‟s a backwards step 

at this critical time and the loss, the hard battles that many of us 

along the numerous conservation organizations have fought to 

gain legislation to protect these very lands.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an individual who cares a great deal about 

the protection of our lands, but not for himself, Mr. Speaker, but 

for future generations, for our children, Mr. Speaker. He cares 

about a program that is viewed by conservation groups across 

North America as being the very best there is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

We saw how short-sighted the Premier‟s decisions were 

to eliminate funding for the West Nile mosquito program, 

the municipal partnership, Dutch elm disease program in 

the province. It was not until after the opposition grilled 

the Sask Party government that the minister admitted she 

had not consulted with municipalities prior to doing and 

removing their funding to control the diseases from 

spreading, nor had she given any intelligent thought as to 

how the buffer zones would be monitored. 

 

It‟s no wonder the people of Saskatchewan are concerned. The 

Premier and his ministers have not thought through the very 

programs that they‟re bringing forward, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s the same with this piece of legislation. The 

consequences have not been thought through. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we still have the opportunity for the government to do 

the right thing, to take a step back, Mr. Speaker, take a step 

back and withdraw this legislation. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5587 

Mr. Speaker, the letter goes on to say many things but it has an 

overarching and compelling theme. Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that‟s important if you‟re going to have a program 

dealing with wildlife habitat protection is you have an ability to 

have compliance and enforcement, monitoring, Mr. Speaker. 

There‟s no discussion at all about how these things would be 

undertaken in the new legislation, Mr. Speaker. It‟s virtually 

impossible to do it if you don‟t own the land. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

There‟s little doubt that the majority of wildlife habitat 

protection land sold in the parkland and northern 

agriculture areas will be quickly resold to another owner. 

There are already large blocks of wildlife habitat 

protection Act lands that outfitters have attempted to 

obtain for their own exclusive use. 

 

How would you restrict this when the land is privately owned? 

 

Mr. Speaker, his third point concerns the natural ability of these 

lands to help alleviate inherent flooding problems downstream: 

 

A few years ago there was $1 million in damage caused 

by flooding in the RMs of Arborfield, Bjorkdale, 

Porcupine Plain, and Hudson Bay where heavy rains 

caused many of the bridges and culverts to be washed out. 

The same damage occurred along the lake, 

Lenore-Fishing Lake watershed area, which ended up 

being a huge cost to our provincial coffers. Much of the 

problems are a result of the loss of natural upland 

retention areas and wetland drainage. By losing control 

over the natural habitat on our Crown lands, we run the 

risk of only adding to these flooding problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. O‟Bertos‟s fourth point is that many of these 

wildlife habitat protected lands are not developed for 

agricultural use because they are still covered by bush. He said: 

 

These lands provide valuable habitat for wildlife, 

especially large ungulates which require winter thermal 

cover, browse, calving areas, and migration corridors 

between their winter and summer ranges such as between 

the Pasquia/Porcupine provincial forest. How would you 

retain the necessary protection of these valuable habitats 

when they are in private hands? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fifth point is a shared concern of both the 

public, the opposition. And it relates to the so-called ecological 

assessment tool as described by the minister which she says will 

help her ministers determine how the lands would be 

reclassified for sale. 

 

What field staff in either lands branch or Saskatchewan 

Environment has the personnel and specific qualifications 

and experience in lands resource management to override 

the previous decisions made by highly qualified and 

experienced staff?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re questioning the very ability of current staff 

to make decisions that override the previous assessments that 

have been made. It goes on to say: 

 

No one is questioning the merits of private ownership, but 

the public is right to question that both the motives and the 

implications of the proposed changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nobody‟s against private ownership of the lands, 

Mr. Speaker. These lands are currently owned. They‟re owned 

by all of the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s not an issue of 

ownership or private ownership, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an issue 

about what‟s right and what‟s in the best interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan, and should the broader public interest 

override individual interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of greater accountability from the Wall 

government, the Minister of Environment has accused members 

of the official opposition, environmental groups, and concerned 

citizens from across the province that we aren‟t for the changes, 

that we must be against private ownership. 

 

But we‟re not against private ownership, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

just a bogus issue and has nothing to do with what the real issue 

is for the people. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute now about the failed 

consultations with First Nations and Métis people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. The minister‟s comments to the 

media have proven to be misleading, as groups such as the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and the FSIN have publicly 

come forward and very publicly spoken out against this Premier 

and the Saskatchewan Party government on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. The sad reality is that the Premier and his minister 

have stonewalled any attempts by environmental groups to meet 

with ministry officials to discuss Bill 132. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have open, transparent consultations. We 

don‟t have any meaningful consultation, Mr. Speaker. And for 

that very reason, we should take the opportunity to take a step 

backwards, withdraw the Bill, and start over. Start over with 

meaningful consultations on behalf of all the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, only when that occurs, can we 

move forward with a Bill that would be supported by all the 

people of our province, Mr. Speaker, be supported without, 

without the negativity that now exists in many, many corners of 

this province about this very Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was not until the eleventh hour that the minister was forced to 

apologize for saying consultations had taken place when they in 

fact had not, and they hadn‟t consulted with anyone whom she 

suspected might disagree with the Premier‟s philosophy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a special to The StarPhoenix on May the 6th, 

2010, Joan Soggie writes: 

 

Thanks to the foresight of previous governments, we can 

live in a place that still has room for wild animals. Even 

20 or 30 years ago, we understood that small sanctuaries 

were not enough, that plants and animals need some 

undisturbed space to thrive. 

 

The letter also says: 

 

It is not likely that my grandchildren will ever see a 



5588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

burrowing owl in this area, for instance. Other species are 

just hanging on by a thread. With each passing year, 

sightings of long-billed curlew, loggerhead shrike, and 

even badgers become rarer. Meadowlarks are dwindling 

in numbers as overgrazing or cultivation destroys their 

nesting ground. 

 

Given the beleaguered state of wildlife, and our growing 

awareness of the benefits that . . . [occur] from 

biodiversity, it is hard to understand the current 

government‟s proposal to sell millions of acres of 

protected Crown land. 

 

Joan Soggie is not alone in her conviction that her Premier has a 

responsibility to keep these lands in public hands and protect it 

for future generations and to preserve the biodiversity in our 

province. Mrs. Soggie said it perfectly when she wrote: 

 

I had hoped that the Saskatchewan Party would manage to 

strike a balance between individual and community 

rights, between social responsibility and economic 

freedom. The proposal to sell our Crown lands fails on all 

counts. 

 

It puts expedience ahead of necessity, exchanging 

short-term gain for long-term pain. We all need to contact 

the premier, the environment minister and our MLAs, and 

urge them to act on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 

and drop this plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one of many, many, many letters that 

have come forward from Saskatchewan people about this issue. 

And Mr. Speaker, these people are not . . . These are ordinary 

people who care. These are people who elected a government 

and believe their government should act in their interest. And, 

Mr. Speaker, why is the government not acting in their interest? 

That‟s the question they have. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, an article on NewsTalk CJME website from 

May 6th, 2010 reads, “The province is trying to sell off some 

environmentally protected land in the next couple of weeks. But 

wildlife groups are wondering why the government is in such a 

hurry.” 

 

Why is the government in such a hurry? Good question. Can the 

Environment minister tell us? Well she hasn‟t attempted to tell 

us so far. Why is the Premier in such a hurry to ram this 

legislation through? Why won‟t they take the meaningful step 

of withdrawing this legislation, going back and undertaking 

meaningful consultations on behalf of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and then determine what their future 

course of action is? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a simple question. It doesn‟t mean a great deal. It 

doesn‟t mean you fail. It doesn‟t mean you fail if you in fact 

take a few minutes and take a step back and decide that you‟re 

going to do some meaningful consultation and bring in a Bill 

that makes sense, a Bill that makes sense, Mr. Speaker, next 

year. Mr. Speaker, what‟s wrong with that? 

 

This government doesn‟t have to be so insecure. It doesn‟t have 

to be so insecure that it‟s afraid to say we didn‟t do what we 

should have done and we need to do it. And we‟re going to, 

we‟re going to be brave. We‟re going to step forward, and 

we‟re going to do what we should have done to start with. 

We‟re going to scrap this Bill, and we‟re going to start afresh 

with new consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don‟t have to be afraid of that. In fact we‟d 

applaud them if they did it. They don‟t have to worry. We 

wouldn‟t beat up on them for that. We wouldn‟t give them a 

rough time. We‟d simply say thank you for doing the right thing 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. That‟s what 

any good opposition would do. We‟d say thank you for 

listening to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you for acting 

in their best interest and thank you for doing the right thing. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take the opportunity to thank them 

if they did the right thing. But first, Mr. Speaker, they have to 

do the right thing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have any indications at all the 

government‟s going to do the right thing. In fact every 

indication we have is contrary to that, Mr. Speaker, that they‟re 

going to do just what they want to do regardless of what the 

people of Saskatchewan have indicated; regardless of what the 

various stakeholder groups have talked about and indicated, Mr. 

Speaker; regardless that we have today environmental 

protection legislation, conservation programs, Mr. Speaker, that 

are the envy of every jurisdiction in North America, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Despite that, this government‟s just deciding they‟re going to 

unilaterally change all that. And for what reason, Mr. Speaker? 

For what reason? They haven‟t consulted people. They haven‟t 

been told that it‟s necessary to do, Mr. Speaker. So why are 

they moving ahead like this? Well that‟s a question that many 

of the people in this province, Mr. Speaker, are asking about 

and they care about, Mr. Speaker. They care. Mr. Speaker, the 

CJME website goes on to say why the government is in such a 

hurry. People are wondering — right? — why the government‟s 

in such a hurry: 

 

. . . opponents like Darryl Crabbe, executive director of 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation want more time to talk 

about the plan. “I can without reservation tell you that the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation was never consulted 

prior to its showing up at the legislature,” he says. 

 

The Premier‟s actions have threatened the democratic process in 

this province when genuinely concerned individuals and 

stakeholders are forced to march down to the legislature to get 

some answers and accountability from this Premier. Mr. 

Speaker, what this says very clearly is the people of this 

province have grave concerns. Their representatives in 

conservation groups have grave concerns. By the letters that 

have been sent in, Mr. Speaker, many people in this province 

have grave concerns. 

 

So then why, Mr. Speaker, is the government deciding to plow 

ahead with this without any thinking through the processes, 

without any regard to what, with any regard to what the people 

of Saskatchewan were saying, Mr. Speaker. Why would the 

government decide that they want to do this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have an article from the R Town News, Mr. 

Speaker, that appears in thousands of copies of newspapers 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5589 

across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This particular one is 

from the community of Wolseley. But, Mr. Speaker, this article 

is again from Darrell Crabbe, the executive director of 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

printed in literally thousands of newspapers across the province. 

And its headline is “Dismantling the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it again goes in great detail to outline the concerns 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, through their 

wildlife conservation groups, are bringing forward. They care 

deeply about the protection of these lands, Mr. Speaker, and 

they see absolutely no need for the government to rush forward. 

Mr. Speaker, these organizations are taking the time and effort 

to try to convince their government, Mr. Speaker — and I want 

to say that very loudly and very strongly, Mr. Speaker — to 

convince their government that they should in fact reconsider 

their position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has over the last several weeks 

not paid a lot of attention to the concerns raised by others about 

this legislation. Rather they‟ve been very dogmatic in their 

approach to . . . we‟re going to ram this through — good, bad, 

or ugly. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation is both 

bad and ugly. It‟s bad in many ways for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, and its consequences over the 

long-term can be very ugly for the well-being of protected 

lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why won‟t the government take the time to take a 

step back? That‟s the real question that we all need to examine. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the government‟s failed to consult on this 

Bill as it did with many, many other important issues in the last 

two and a half years. It failed to consult on changes to 

chiropractic funding, failed to consult on the closure of the 

kidney transplant unit, University of Saskatchewan Hospital, 

Mr. Speaker. It failed to consult on many issues, Mr. Speaker, 

said many things before an election, did many different things 

after the election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before the election, the Provincial Building Trades 

Construction Council were told that there would be no changes 

if they were elected government. Lo and behold, just weeks 

after, Mr. Speaker, we see the introduction of Bill 80. We see 

the introduction of legislation that dismantles the construction 

industry and the construction trades unions in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And who benefits from that? Well not Saskatchewan 

contractors because they weren‟t consulted either, we‟re told. 

But who benefited, Mr. Speaker? Well out-of-province 

contractors can and maybe many others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read into the record an article, now that 

I have my glasses and can actually read this article. Again it‟s 

written by Darrell Crabbe, and it‟s entitled “Dismantling the 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act”: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation continues to have 

[grave] concerns surrounding the recent Legislation 

aimed at dismantling The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, 

the legislation that was created almost 30 years ago and is 

still considered to be one of the most visionary 

conservation programs ever developed in North America. 

The over 3 million acres presently protected in the Act 

would now be controlled under regulation and would be 

able to be sold or changed at the discretion of the . . . 

minister. Under WHPA, any lands that were removed or 

changed were required to be debated in the Legislature 

and allowed for public scrutiny. 

 

Under the new legislation there would be no transparency. 

In addition, the newly passed Conservation Easement 

Legislation that the Saskatchewan Government would 

place on most of the . . . [unsold] parcels gives the 

Minister the power to remove or change the easement 

without public knowledge or recourse. 

 

“The combination of a lack of consultation and the 

aggressive time line on this bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many 

important questions unanswered,” states Darrell Crabbe, 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation. “We need the minister to table this 

Legislation until all the variables can be properly 

addressed.” 

 

Saskatchewan Wildlife . . . sees a “no net loss” agreement, 

as has been the policy of every Provincial Government 

since WHPA was introduced; changes to create public 

transparency; the establishment of a Conservation Lands 

Fund and the continuation of protection of properties 

under wildlife habitat protection . . . legislation; as the 

most pressing issues and is prepared to work with the 

Government towards this goal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an organization, again, that represents more 

than 30,000 members and 121 branches across Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, there are numerous concerns, numerous concerns 

about this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan need answered. And without those answers, Mr. 

Speaker, there will be concerns about this legislation for many, 

many years to come. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read an article from the Leader-Post of 

April 26, 2010. It says: 

 

Proposed changes to Saskatchewan‟s Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act (WHPA) clear the way for some parcels of 

land to be sold. 

 

But Saskatchewan Environment Minister Nancy Heppner 

said the “vast majority” of land under the act would 

continue to be protected. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s easy to say. That‟s very easy to say, Mr. 

Speaker, but it doesn‟t mean a thing because today under the 

current Act it‟s all protected, Mr. Speaker, and any changes need 

to be debated. In the future, the minister can unilaterally change 

whatever she wants without debate, without consultation, and not 

. . . with no interest, Mr. Speaker, to what the people of 

Saskatchewan care. And they don‟t have a mechanism to have a 

say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say: 



5590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

WHPA covers about three million acres of Crown land — 

some of which is leased by ranchers who use it for grazing 

or haying. 

 

As part of the Saskatchewan Party government‟s new 

approach, Heppner said all of the land protected by WHPA 

is to be assessed to determine its “ecological value.” 

 

Heppner said that a “very large chunk of land” will be 

retained by the Crown and remain under the protection of 

the act. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t remain under the protection of the 

Act. It‟s in regulation now. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a misleading 

statement because no longer is it protected by the Act and no 

longer do we get to debate it in the House and no longer is it 

transparent and no longer can we force a meaningful consultation 

before land is sold, Mr. Speaker. So there isn‟t the opportunity to 

hold the government accountable because they can simply, by 

regulations, sell any land they want to sell, and the opposition 

doesn‟t even find out about it till after it‟s already been sold, Mr. 

Speaker. So how is that transparent and open? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also goes on to say: 

 

But if the amendments proceed, the government will be able 

to sell off parcels of WHPA land deemed to have a “low” 

ecological value. 

 

Further tracts of land will also be cleared for sale, but there 

will be conservation easements attached. Easements will 

stipulate that the land must be used in a specific way. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as a former land specialist for the government 

says, you can put any easement you want on it because if there‟s 

no enforceability of it, it means nothing. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

a very serious concern by an individual, to spend his life 

evaluating this land, assessing this land for its ecological value and 

fighting to have it protected on behalf of all the people of 

Saskatchewan both now and into the future. Mr. Speaker, these 

are grave concerns that people of Saskatchewan share and that 

viewpoint is important today and tomorrow and for many 

generations to come that this land is properly protected and 

properly shared with future generations, with our children and 

grandchildren. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

“When you look at a rancher who has been leasing Crown 

land for generations in some cases, for decades, they want 

to be able to buy the land but it‟s under wildlife habitat 

protection. They . . . [shouldn‟t] be changing the use of 

that land, they just want to be able to purchase it,” 

Heppner said Monday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current legislation gives a mechanism for that 

land to be purchased. So why is the minister afraid to use 

current procedures and policies in order to see that land 

purchased? What is she afraid of? Why wouldn‟t she simply 

bring a Bill that designated that land for sale and, Mr. Speaker, 

land of equivalent ecological value to put back into the wildlife 

habitat protection lands? Mr. Speaker, it‟s been the practice for 

the last 30 years. And sell the land. Why wouldn‟t she just do 

what every other government for the last 30 years has had to 

do? Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s because this government is 

ideologically driven, different than every other government in 

the past. And, Mr. Speaker, the right to future generations in the 

protection of wildlife habitat protection is not as important to 

this government as it has been for past governments. 

 

For more then 30 years these lands have been protected in an 

appropriate and caring manner in the province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, people of Saskatchewan would like it to be continued 

to be protected that way. And they‟re telling their government 

that. But their government isn‟t listening, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s 

time their government started to listen to the people of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say: 

 

“In a situation like that, (it depends) on where that piece 

of land falls within our modelling. If it falls under the 

category of sell with conservation easement, we would be 

able to sell it to that rancher.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that could be done today. So why do we 

need new legislation to do that? Only because the minister 

doesn‟t want to have the scrutiny of this Assembly every time a 

piece of land is sold. Mr. Speaker, this Assembly has the right 

to that scrutiny. We‟re elected by the people of Saskatchewan to 

represent the people of Saskatchewan. We have the right to 

have that consultation, that scrutiny before any of the people‟s 

land is sold. 

 

For more than 30 years, subsequent governments have upheld 

that principle despite and regardless of their stripe, Mr. Speaker, 

for more than 30 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “But Environment critic Sandra Morin said the 

NDP opposition is concerned that land could be sold or 

removed from the habitat protection Act with little public 

scrutiny.” Of course I‟ve repeated that many times tonight. Mr. 

Speaker, it goes on to talk about the fact that it can be done by 

regulation and be completed prior to us even having knowledge 

of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation has significant implications for the 

future. Mr. Speaker, there is significant protected land in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I have a list of the hectares 

protected, Mr. Speaker, and it is a significant, significant 

amount of land. Mr. Speaker, this is land that Saskatchewan 

people, through their representatives, for more than 30 years 

believed should be protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a program put in place called the 

Saskatchewan representative areas network, Mr. Speaker. And 

it was put in place in 1997, Mr. Speaker, and it was put in place 

as a policy framework to move forward with protecting lands in 

our province, Mr. Speaker. It talks about the Saskatchewan 

representative area network program was launched in 1997 with 

approval of the area network final action plan. The plan sought 

to conserve representative and unique examples of 

Saskatchewan‟s varied and diverse landscape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it targeted a 12 per cent target. It is a commitment 

included in Saskatchewan‟s biodiversity action plan. Now, Mr. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5591 

Speaker, it‟s a laudable target, Mr. Speaker, to protect 12 per 

cent of the land for future generations, for the people of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a well-thought-out plan. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s all for naught if you just have a government come 

in and decide they‟re going to sell off land without a reason, 

Mr. Speaker. It is all for naught. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Bill we have before us has one purpose 

and one purpose only, and that‟s to sell off wildlife habitat 

protected land. But it doesn‟t have the courage of the 

convictions it should have, Mr. Speaker, to bring the debate to 

this legislature each and every time you‟re going to sell land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it can be done today. It can be done appropriately 

with debate in this House. But why is the government afraid to 

debate the issue in this Assembly? Why is the government 

afraid to make its decisions or choices publicly available for 

debate by the elected representatives of this Assembly? That is 

what our democracy is about, Mr. Speaker. And a government 

that hides or runs from its obligations to be open, transparent, 

and debate the issues in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a 

government that does that, Mr. Speaker, doesn‟t deserve to be 

the government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think in 2011, the people of this province 

are going to say just that. And it‟s not going to be about this 

issue alone, Mr. Speaker, but this issue contributes to it, 

contributes to it. Any government that doesn‟t want to consult, 

that runs from consultations, hides from the people who they 

are responsible to govern, and doesn‟t undertake meaningful 

consultations is not going to be a government very long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government that promised to be the 

most open, transparent, and accountable government in 

Saskatchewan‟s history. Instead we get a government who isn‟t 

consulting, who‟s running from its decisions, doesn‟t want to 

debate things in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And why is that? 

Why is that? Is this a government that‟s so insecure in itself that 

it‟s afraid it can‟t win an open and accountable debate, Mr. 

Speaker? Or is it afraid that it may have to be accountable to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, 

either one of those issues is primary to our democratic system. 

So why aren‟t we going to have that meaningful debate every 

time a piece of land is sold? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I have shared a great deal 

of concern about this Bill, and we have a great deal more 

concern to share, Mr. Speaker, but we haven‟t seen one iota of 

concern or debate or sharing of information by the government. 

They have been as unwilling to debate this legislation as they 

have been unwilling, Mr. Speaker, to consult with the public 

about this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don‟t want to consult with the public. They 

don‟t debate this legislation in this House. They just want to 

bring forward a Bill and say, we‟re going to ram it through 

regardless, regardless, Mr. Speaker, of what any potential 

outcome is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not what we would like to see. It‟s not what 

the people of Saskatchewan would like to see. It‟s certainly not 

what environmental and conservation groups in our province 

would like to see, Mr. Speaker. It‟s certainly not what the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations would like to see, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s not what the Wildlife Federation would like to 

see, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not what the future generations would like 

to see. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, future generations aren‟t going to get to see 

the opportunities we have today to experience these pristine 

lands, Mr. Speaker, because they‟re going to be privately 

owned, Mr. Speaker. They‟re going to be sold off, Mr. Speaker, 

and not going to be owned by the people of Saskatchewan as 

they are today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we would like to see this legislation 

withdrawn. We‟d like to see an agenda to move forward in 

co-operation with the people of Saskatchewan, my colleagues in 

the legislature, and we‟d like to be able to have a meaningful, 

open debate and consultation prior to a Bill that the government 

is locked into in such a way that they‟re not able or not willing 

to debate it, amend it, change it. Mr. Speaker, even with all of 

the issues that have been brought forward by many, many 

environmental groups, Mr. Speaker, by many, many citizens of 

the province, Mr. Speaker, they‟re still not prepared to change 

it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that over the next couple of hours 

we‟ll have the opportunity to examine in detail some more of 

the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, 

it is absolutely, absolutely important to understand that group 

after group has come forward and said there have been no 

consultations. Mr. Speaker, it‟s Nature Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. It‟s the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. It‟s Ducks Unlimited, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and they‟ve all said the exact same thing. The 

statements made by the minister in the House that meaningful 

consultations had occurred, or any consultations for that matter 

had occurred, are absolutely, absolutely misleading, Mr. 

Speaker, because they have said categorically one after another 

that no consultations had occurred. Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

very disappointing, very, very disappointing to hear that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just read into the record the 

minister‟s comments on consultation in the House, Mr. Speaker. 

“This Act also creates . . .” and this is a quote from the Minister 

of Environment on March 8, 2010, when she was speaking to 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It says: 

 

This Act also creates a Crown land ecological assessment. 

This will allow government to evaluate and identify 

important ecological values and know how best to protect 

them. This has been developed in consultation with a 

wide variety of stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, 

Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited Canada, the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, then group after group writes 

us letters and say, that didn‟t happen. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about first about amendments to The 



5592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and The Conservation 

Easements Act from a letter written by Fourth Vice-chief Lyle 

Whitefish from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

But she just said that they were consulted, and he says this: 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 

this program. I find these statements extremely troubling 

since no such undertakings have occurred. 

 

To repeat, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that. “I find these 

statements extremely troubling since no such undertakings have 

occurred.” Mr. Speaker, I have the minister saying they 

consulted with a wide variety of stakeholders such as the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Nature Conservatory of 

Canada, Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited Canada, the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Mr. Speaker, the 

representative of the FSIN said no such consultations occurred. 

Mr. Speaker, that is of grave concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear the same thing from other organizations. 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Mr. Speaker, said the exact 

same thing, that they weren‟t consulted. Nature Saskatchewan 

said the exact same thing, Mr. Speaker, that they weren‟t 

consulted. Well, Mr. Speaker, if all these groups weren‟t 

consulted, why were we told in this Assembly that they were? 

Why were we told as members of this legislature that 

consultations had occurred that Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation say didn‟t occur; Saskatchewan Federation of Indian 

Nations say didn‟t occur; Nature Saskatchewan say didn‟t 

occur; Ducks Unlimited say didn‟t occur? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we were told in this Assembly that they had 

occurred. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s probably the gravest concern 

of all, that as members of this Assembly we need to be factually 

told information by the government and by the ministers of the 

Crown. Not to do so, Mr. Speaker, is a matter of privilege. A 

matter of privilege, Mr. Speaker. A matter of privilege we could 

raise in this House because we have a minister saying she did it 

and then we have letters from each of the groups saying it 

wasn‟t done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s a matter of privilege and it‟s of very grave 

concern to this Assembly. A very grave concern to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan because we need to be told the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. We need to be told the truth. We base our 

decisions, the people of Saskatchewan base their decisions on 

what their government tells the people. We need to know the 

facts. We need to know the reality of what we‟re dealing with. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have the right to know because we‟re 

elected by the people to represent them and to hold the 

government accountable. There is a role for the official 

opposition, a meaningful role. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we need to have a meaningful 

debate as to why we were, why we were told one thing and the 

reality is another. And, Mr. Speaker, that debate needs to occur 

in this Assembly. It‟s important to the people of Saskatchewan 

to know that if a minister tells them something that it in fact 

represents the facts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward on this legislation with 

all these groups saying they weren‟t consulted and the minister 

is saying they were, that alone should be sufficient reason for 

the government to take a step back, withdraw this legislation, 

have the debate, have the consultation that they said they had 

and they obviously didn‟t have with the various stakeholders, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues in their expression 

of concern on this debate, on this issue, on this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, have raised these concerns. And there‟s a reason we‟re 

all raising them. Because as members of the legislature, as the 

people‟s representatives in this Assembly, we have a right to be 

told the facts. And when we ask a question, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a right to know that what we‟re being told is the truth, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, if we can‟t have confidence that it 

is, Mr. Speaker, then we have to question everything we‟re told. 

Every single thing we‟re told, we have to question. Mr. 

Speaker, we don‟t want to do that. We don‟t want to do that. 

We would rather have some reliability in what we‟re being told. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to have confidence in what we‟re 

being told, and the people of Saskatchewan have to have that 

confidence. But we‟ve heard from the Wildlife Federation, the 

FSIN, Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited that they don‟t. 

They were told not . . . They weren‟t consulted, even though we 

were told they were. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is about as serious a concern as a 

member of this legislature ever can have. And, Mr. Speaker, at 

some point we would expect the minister to stand in this House 

and to apologize to all members of this Assembly. We would 

expect that from a minister. A minister of the Crown should 

say, I‟m sorry, Mr. Speaker. And in saying that she‟s sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, we can accept that, we can . . . People make mistakes. 

People make mistakes, Mr. Speaker, but you should own up to 

them and you should move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we will have many, 

many questions about in committee. We have many hours of 

debate before we‟re going to get to committee, Mr. Speaker, but 

we will have many hours of questions in committee as well 

because, Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t yet heard an explanation as to 

why. 

 

Why does the Premier want to ram this through? Why doesn‟t 

he want to take a step back and do meaningful consultations? 

Why doesn‟t he want to gain the confidence of the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations; the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation; conservation Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; Ducks 

Unlimited? Why doesn‟t the Premier want to gain their 

confidence by taking a step back, do the meaningful 

consultations he should‟ve done prior to bringing this 

legislation in, and act in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, what‟s the rush? The land will be 

here next year and the year after and for many, many years to 

come. So what‟s the rush? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if particular landowners want to buy particular 

parcels of land, as I‟ve indicated many times, there‟s an avenue 

to deal with that. There‟s a meaningful way to deal with that in 

this Assembly by simply bringing forward a piece of legislation 

dealing with that particular issue, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a very 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5593 

simple process, been used many times by many previous 

governments. 

 

But there‟s also a reason why this government or this legislation 

has, for more than 30 years, protected, protected wildlife habitat 

lands in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and why 

it‟s important to continue to protect that land, Mr. Speaker. And 

it‟s why conservation groups have said that this legislation and 

its protection has been the envy of conservation organizations 

right across North America, Mr. Speaker. We should be, we 

should be proud of the fact that we in Saskatchewan worked 

very hard to put in place a protection regime of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, that protected pristine wildlife habitat lands in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. We should be very proud of that. 

 

And we should be very proud of the fact that we also have 

worked very hard to continue that protection for many, many 

years, regardless of the stripe of government, Mr. Speaker. In 

fact this was brought in originally in 1984 by a Conservative 

government, Mr. Speaker, who had the foresight and 

forethought, Mr. Speaker, to understand that the protection of 

this land for future generations was of all of our concern, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know in 1984, the Conservative government 

took the time to say these important lands needed to be 

protected for future generations, for our children. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was a good decision then, and subsequent 

governments have made the same decisions, Mr. Speaker, and 

worked very hard to protect the land for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as the clock ticks on here, I have yet to hear 

a single member opposite show any real concern for the fact 

that meaningful consultations weren‟t done, for the fact that we 

were told that the consultation have occurred but they haven‟t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all we need to do is do the honourable thing, take 

a step back, withdraw the legislation, start all over. Now the 

Government House Leader could stand in his place right now 

and say, on behalf of the government, I withdraw that 

legislation. He could. We‟re waiting for him to do just that. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know he doesn‟t agree with this 

legislation because, Mr. Speaker, he himself values this land. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all he needs to do is do the honourable thing 

and stand up and speak. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have several hours in which to continue 

this debate and discussion. We have yet to see a member of the 

government express an opinion, other than the minister, other 

than the minister who told us she consulted with everybody and 

consulted with nobody. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re disappointed 

with that. And disappointment‟s probably a weak word because, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s absolutely wrong that we as members of this 

legislature are told one thing and find it not to be true. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have one of my colleagues who wants to 

speak very badly to this legislation prior to making a decision 

about moving it to committee and asking specific questions. I 

believe the critic for the Environment would like to spend a 

couple or three hours asking or discussing this issue. 

Unfortunately we have only about an hour and 15 minutes left 

this evening. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as soon as my colleague would indicate 

she‟s ready, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take my seat and allow the 

Environment critic the opportunity to share her concerns and 

the views that have been expressed to her by many of the 

people across the province of Saskatchewan as to why this 

legislation should be withdrawn, why the government should do 

the right thing, why the government should put the people of 

Saskatchewan first, Mr. Speaker, and not their own self-interest 

on this particular issue. So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will take 

my seat and allow my colleague to enter the debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Hickie): — The Chair recognizes 

Ms. Morin, the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a delight for me to 

be able to enter in the debate about The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, not because I‟m enjoying the fact that I get to 

speak about an Act that is going to be making such substantive 

changes to the province with respect to protection of wildlife in 

the province, but because I‟m really pleased to be able to share 

the concerns that have been brought forward to me as the 

opposition critic for Environment with respect to this Act and 

many other things. But given that we‟re specifically talking 

about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll keep my comments narrow to 

the Act at hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as has been alluded to in many other speakers that 

have spoken before me, the lands that were protected under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act were protected in the ‟80s. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, every government of every term wants 

to ensure that they are leaving a legacy, Mr. Speaker, and that 

legacy of course that they want to leave is of a positive nature. 

 

Now some governments are successful in leaving positive 

legacies. Some unfortunately are not. This was definitely one of 

those positive legacies that was left to the people of 

Saskatchewan by the then Conservative government under 

Grant Devine and under the portfolio of the Environment critic 

at that time, which was Colin Maxwell. They certainly had the 

foresight to know that if one didn‟t protect these lands under the 

Act in the manner that it is currently protected, that those lands 

would then become vulnerable to the habitat that exists on those 

lands and/or destroyed, Mr. Speaker. So there was a foresight at 

that time already to know that that was something that was 

going to be a very important thing to do. 

 

Now Colin Maxwell, who was the Environment Minister at that 

time, said that . . . and unfortunately I don‟t have the quote in 

front of me, but he said that it‟s very important for the 

environment to be protected. It‟s something that‟s bigger than 

politics, Mr. Speaker. It‟s something that is a responsibility of 

government to do. And they saw that as their responsibility and 

therefore did that. And as I said, it was definitely a positive 

legacy from the Conservative government at that time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what are we seeing from the current Sask 

Party government? Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite different. We are 

seeing a legacy of potential ruin in terms of various wildlife 

species in the province, Mr. Speaker, because their habitat lands 

will become vulnerable or can potentially become vulnerable 

through the sale of these lands, if not properly scrutinized. 

 

[21:15] 

 



5594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, no one is saying that the current stewards of 

those leased lands are not going to continue on with the good 

stewardship that they are currently undertaking, Mr. Speaker; 

that‟s certainly not the case whatsoever. 

 

But what is of concern, Mr. Speaker, is by removing these lands 

out of the Act itself and simply putting them into regulations, 

which means then that those lands do not have to follow a 

serious scrutiny before they are sold, Mr. Speaker, causes it to 

become then the decision making, quite frankly, only of one 

person necessary, and that would be the Minister of 

Environment. But it becomes a decision-making process of a 

very, very, very narrow set of eyes, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s of 

great concern to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, and 

that‟s certainly of great concern to the members of the 

opposition. 

 

We favour the legislation, the lands to remain protected under 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act because therefore it would 

undergo a greater scrutiny. There would be more debate on 

whether those lands should be sold. You will have more 

opinions, Mr. Speaker, more input. And anytime there‟s 

important decision-making processes that happen within the 

province — whether it‟s these lands to be sold or any other 

important decision-making processes that happen in 

Saskatchewan — the more scrutiny that is done, the more sets 

of eyes that look at that, that process and what is being 

undertaken, the better the decision-making outcome usually 

should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the fact that it wouldn‟t go through the same scrutiny that it 

would currently go through under legislation is of deep concern 

to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, as I can attest to 

from the amazing, enormous amount of correspondence, emails, 

phone calls, not to mention people stopping me on the street or 

various events I attend around the province. Mr. Speaker, it is 

unbelievable how many people are concerned about this 

particular Bill and are concerned about the fact that these lands 

will no longer be protected under legislation. People are fully 

aware of the fact that these lands can be sold at minister‟s 

discretion, at the Minister of Environment‟s discretion. 

 

People are aware of the fact also that there‟s another Bill that‟s 

going through the legislature at the same time that the Sask 

Party government is wanting to ram this Bill through, and that 

of course is The Conservation Easements Amendment Act as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And what that Bill does is, if someone wants 

to purchase some land and the minister decides to okay that 

land purchase — but wants to attach a conservation easement to 

that land purchase in order to say that the lands must remain 

protected in a certain manner with respect to what that 

conservation easement spells out, Mr. Speaker — that purchaser 

of that land with a conservation easement attached to it can then 

make application to the Minister of Environment yet again to 

have that conservation easement removed under The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act that is being rammed 

through the legislature right now as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what in effect can happen is, someone can purchase a piece 

of land with a conservation easement attached it, make an 

application to have that conservation easement removed. It 

again falls to the purview of the Minister of Environment. And 

here‟s the kicker, Mr. Speaker. 

The kicker is that when the Minister of Environment decides to 

remove that conservation easement, it is not court 

challengeable. That‟s what it says in the Bill that the Sask Party 

government is putting through right now as we speak, Mr. 

Speaker. The Bill states that it is not court challengeable. And, 

Mr. Speaker, needless to say that is of great concern, great 

concern in conjunction with the fact that the Sask Party 

government right now wants to put through a Bill that will 

remove the 3.5 million acres of land that is currently protected 

under the wildlife habitat amendment Act into regulations 

where it, yet again, becomes the minister‟s discretion. 

 

So we have two Bills right now, Mr. Speaker, that coincide with 

each other that are of great concern. We have The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act which takes all the land that is currently 

protected in legislation and puts it into regulations. And then we 

also have The Conservation Easements Amendment Act which 

again allows the minister to make a decision to remove a 

conservation easement. And once her decision is made that she 

is removing that conservation easement, it is not court 

challengeable according to the language that‟s in the Act put 

forward by the Sask Party government. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

is of great concern, of great concern. 

 

And I just want to read you the language that‟s in the Act 

because it was so shocking quite frankly to myself and others 

that discovered this, that it caused the whole issue of wanting to 

remove the protected lands under The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. It caused that desire by the Sask Party 

government to become more nefarious than it was originally, 

Mr. Speaker, because if at least there was a conservation 

easement attached to the land that‟s being sold, then at least 

you‟d know that the land is still going to undergo the same level 

of stewardship that it would have previously. But once it was 

discovered that the minister again had discretion to remove that 

conservation easement and then it not being court 

challengeable, that‟s when the original notion of removing the 

lands under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act became even 

more nefarious, Mr. Speaker. So I just want to read to you from 

Bill No. 131, which is The Conservation Easements Amendment 

Act where it says. “The minister‟s decision to approve or reject 

an application pursuant to this section is final and conclusive 

and no proceedings by or before the minister may be restrained 

by injunction, prohibition or other proceedings or are removable 

by certiorari or otherwise by any court.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so as I said, this is of great concern in conjunction 

with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course it is being reflected in the correspondence that I‟m 

receiving, the correspondence the Premier‟s receiving, and the 

correspondence the Minister of Environment is receiving 

because a lot of the correspondence that I‟m receiving, of 

course, Mr. Speaker, is being carbon copied to me from the 

correspondence that‟s being sent to the Premier and to the 

Minister of Environment. 

 

So I want to just acknowledge some of the concerns that have 

been raised with me from the various stakeholder organizations, 

many of which, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, were named by the 

Minister of Environment in her second reading on this Bill. In 

her second reading on The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, she 

said that she had contacted various stakeholders and then began 

to name off some of them, Mr. Speaker. And some of them 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5595 

were . . . For instance she said she contacted Nature Sask. She 

said she contacted the Nature Conservancy of Canada. She said 

she contacted the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. She said 

she contacted Ducks Unlimited, and then she named a few 

others. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I decided to go through the list. I decided to 

phone all the organizations and find out if they were contacted, 

Mr. Speaker. And interestingly enough, from the entire list that 

she gave, and I believe that it was approximately seven different 

organizations or seven or eight different organizations there was 

only one, Mr. Speaker, there was one organization, one 

organization that she had named in her second reading speech 

on Bill 132 that said that they had been contacted and 

consulted. The other organizations said that they were not 

consulted and were deeply distressed by the fact that this Bill 

was moving forward in the format that it is because they were 

not consulted. And had they been consulted, Mr. Speaker, they 

would have told the minister quite a different opinion than what 

the minister believed is to be the case. 

 

Now one of those organizations that she said she contacted, 

interestingly enough, was for instance the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. So, Mr. Speaker, on April 29th, 

the FSIN wrote a letter to Minister Heppner and I believe, yes, 

the federation also cc‟d Premier Brad Wall and also cc‟d many 

others in this letter, Mr. Speaker, including myself. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the letter from the FSIN says it‟s speaking 

to the amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and 

The Conservation Easements Act, and I‟m going to quote from 

this letter: 

 

In 1984 the provincial government of the day initiated the 

wildlife conservation process by enacting The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act . . . 

 

In November 2008, the Ministry of Agriculture 

introduced the Agricultural Crown Land Sale program 

that provided financial incentives for lessees to purchase 

their leased land from the provincial Crown . . . Delbert 

Wapass, responded to this program through 

correspondence to the Minister of Agriculture Bjornerud 

on November 19, 2008. This letter detailed the concerns 

that the First Nations people have with regard to the 

Crown Land Sale Program . . . 

 

The program will reduce the amount of accessible lands 

available to the First Nations people who possess Treaty 

rights to such available land through Treaty Land 

Entitlement and Specific Clams agreements. I wish to 

sternly express that such program hinders the First 

Nations people in Saskatchewan to exercise their Treaty 

and constitutional right to hunt, fish, trap and gather on 

such lands. What is more perplexing, is that such program 

excludes First Nations who possess such rights to these 

lands, from purchasing such, which is contrary to the 

Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (NRTA), 1930. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 

this program. I find these statements extremely troubling 

since no such undertakings have occurred. There has been 

no attempt by your Ministry to enter into a consultation 

process with First Nations people regarding the expansion 

of the sale of Crown lands protected under The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s fairly clear. The FSIN has been unwavering 

in their position that they have not been appropriately consulted 

with respect to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. He goes on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Judging from past experience I can only ascertain that 

your deliberate refusal to consult and accommodate First 

Nations people on your Ministry‟s initiatives, including 

the sale of Crown lands protected under the WHPA, as 

well as your Ministry‟s “Results-based Regulatory 

Review”, is a reflection of the policy position that your 

government has taken with regard to the First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. The province has no regard or 

respect for the interests, concerns and the Inherent and 

Treaty rights of the First Nations people of Saskatchewan. 

Furthermore, it appears your government views the 

Inherent and Treaty Rights of First Nations people as a 

hindrance to Premier Wall‟s “growth agenda” and that the 

government will proceed by attempting to ignore the 

provincial Crown‟s constitutional and legal obligations to 

the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this couldn‟t have been worded any clearer than 

that. It is absolutely crystal clear how the 74 First Nations who 

were represented through this letter by the FSIN feel about this 

piece of legislation and as to whether or not they were 

appropriately consulted, Mr. Speaker. It couldn‟t be clearer. He 

goes on to say: 

 

Rather than a vague reference, I am seeking a response 

that includes a listing of all the meetings your Ministry 

held with the First Nations and the dates such were held, 

which First Nations and their leaders or representatives 

who attended such meetings, what their responses were, 

how these were incorporated into the report your Ministry 

used to make the decision, and how your Ministry 

reported back to the First Nations of your decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was only a few days ago when I asked the 

Minister of Environment to table the invitation that was sent out 

to the stakeholders, when the minister says that she originally 

started consulting people on this Bill in June of 2009. I asked 

the minister to table the list of stakeholders that were invited. I 

asked the minister to table the agenda for that meeting. I asked 

the minister to table other important documents that came from 

that meeting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what have I heard from, what have I heard from the 

Minister of Environment so far, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely 

nothing. Nothing, Mr. Speaker. If the Minister of Environment 

is being truthful about the fact that these consultations took 

place and about the fact that there were numerous stakeholders 

invited who were given appropriate information about the 

legislation that we‟re seeing in front of the legislature right 

now, why is the minister not going to table that information 



5596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

when it‟s requested of her, Mr. Speaker? Why is she not coming 

clean with the people of Saskatchewan as to who was invited, 

what the agenda was, and how it was worded in terms of the 

invitation, as to what was going to take place at that meeting 

from that invitation in June of 2009? Why won‟t she table that, 

Mr. Speaker? Do you know why? 

 

[21:30] 

 

I‟ll tell you why I think she won‟t do it, Mr. Speaker. Because 

from all of the correspondence I have, from all of the letters 

I‟ve received, from all of the emails I‟ve received, and from all 

of the phone calls I‟ve received, I‟ve not heard many people say 

that they‟re going to substantiate what she says, Mr. Speaker. 

And it‟s quite the opposite. I‟m hearing quite the opposite. 

They‟re telling me that yes, they received a letter. 

 

Matter of fact, I have it in my possession, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟ve read the letter numerous times because I keep thinking, 

well maybe I missed something, Mr. Speaker. But guess what? I 

didn‟t miss anything and neither did the stakeholders who 

received that invitation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was no notion of those lands, the 3.5 million acres, there 

was no notion of those lands coming out of the protection of 

legislation and ending up in regulations so they can be at the 

discretion of the Minister of Environment to do so at she sees 

fit. There was no notion of that in that invitation, Mr. Speaker, 

no matter how many times I read it and no matter how many 

times the stakeholder organizations that received that letter read 

it, Mr. Speaker. There was no notion of it. 

 

So the minister is not being truthful when she says that the 

people who were invited knew about the content that was going 

to be discussed at those meetings and what was discussed at 

those meetings. And if she wants us to believe otherwise, then 

she should do what I requested. As the opposition critic of the 

Environment for the province of Saskatchewan, I have the right 

to ask the minister to table documents, and she has not 

complied with that request, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Order. I 

understand that in the heat of discussion and debate sometimes 

language is used that‟s inappropriate. And the member referred 

to the untruthfulness of the minister. That is unparliamentary 

language, and I would encourage the member to be very careful 

about using that kind of language and apologize for the 

previous use. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You‟re right. In the 

heated debate it‟s difficult sometimes to bite one‟s tongue, but I 

promise to make a better attempt at doing so going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to refer to a press release, a media 

release, from May 11th, Mr. Speaker. And this one is from the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Mr. Speaker, another one of 

those organizations that the minister claims had full knowledge 

of what the Sask Party government was going to do and that 

minister also claims was appropriately consulted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, from their press release, I‟m just going to 

read a few of the excerpts as well: 

 

“The combination of a lack of consultation and the 

aggressive time line on this Bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many 

important questions unanswered,” states Darrell Crabbe, 

Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation (SWF). “We need the Minister to table this 

Legislation until all the variables can be properly 

addressed.” 

 

Then the news release goes on to say, “The SWF sees a „no net 

loss‟ agreement, as has been the policy of every Provincial 

Government since the WHPA was introduced . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this speaks volumes. This speaks volumes. These 

lands were protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

in ‟84, in 1984, under the Conservative government of the 

Devine Tories at the time. 

 

Any changes that have been made to those lands in terms of 

sales have been subject to a no net loss policy, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s an important feature that the Sask 

Party government seems to not want to talk about when the 

minister gets up and rails about the fact there were lands sold 

previously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there were lands sold previously, but there‟s 

two major differences. The lands that were sold previously were 

under legislation and had to be consulted in terms of those land 

sales before they happened. And the second one, Mr. Speaker, 

is a no net loss policy. Any lands that were sold were then 

equally replaced, Mr. Speaker, if not increased. Those are two 

major differences compared to what the Sask Party government 

wants to do now. 

 

They are not talking about a no net loss policy. They are not 

talking about replacing any of the lands that they intend on 

selling. And, Mr. Speaker, there will be no scrutiny to those 

lands that they want to sell. There will be no scrutiny to lands 

that the Sask Party government want to sell because it will be 

simply at the discretion of the minister because the lands are 

being removed from the legislation and are being put into 

regulation. And so therefore people won‟t find out about the 

lands being sold until after they‟ve been sold, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the Sask Party wants to rail on about the fact that there 

were lands sold under previous governments, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest they check the facts, Mr. Speaker, because the facts are 

quite different from the story that they want to spin on this, Mr. 

Speaker. Quite different. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s take a look at Nature Saskatchewan 

and what Nature Saskatchewan had to say. By the way, Mr. 

Speaker, Nature Saskatchewan was yet another one of the 

organizations that the Minister of Environment claims to have 

contacted when she says that they were all consulted with 

respect to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this letter was written on April 27th and it states: 

 

We can assure you that no meaningful consultation 

regarding the sale of Crown lands has occurred with 

Nature Saskatchewan. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5597 

It goes on to say: 

 

The government has not properly consulted with the 

public on this very important issue which has the potential 

to cause significant consequence to biodiversity in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We look for your assistance in stopping the passage of 

this legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the author of this letter is Gary Seib, who is 

the general manager of Nature Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I ask you, does this sound like a 

stakeholder organization that feels that it was appropriately 

consulted, that feels like it was consulted at all, given that he 

says that we can assure you that no meaningful consultation has 

taken place? Yet again, Mr. Speaker, we see the minister saying 

one thing and we‟re seeing something quite different from the 

stakeholder organization that the minister claims to have 

contacted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are other letters that I want to quote 

from as well, Mr. Speaker. And one of them is addressed to the 

Minister of Environment. And it talks about again the proposed 

changes to The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They don‟t know what they‟re doing. 

 

Ms. Morin: — You‟re right. 

 

I am writing you in regards to my deep concern over your 

proposed changes to the critical wildlife protection act. I 

was the land resource management specialist for the 

Department of Agriculture lands branch at the time these 

lands were being determined for designation under this 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an individual who has a depth of knowledge 

on this subject far greater than many of us have, Mr. Speaker, 

far greater than many of us. And this is an individual who is 

taking the time to write to the Minister of Environment 

expressing his concern. He goes on to say: 

 

Because of my expertise in this field, I was chosen to 

work directly with the provincial wildlife biologist in 

determining which lands were designated as wildlife 

habitat protection Act lands. 

 

My area of responsibility was mainly in the parklands and 

northern grain belts of Saskatchewan where many of 

these lands are located. My submission to you is therefore 

based on this area only. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

Your ministry must surely be aware the value of 

preserving natural habitat and wetlands, and how the loss 

of these is extremely detrimental to our environment. For 

the sake of the citizens of our great province and for our 

future generations, we‟re asking you to rethink your 

position on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this gentleman is writing passionately from the 

experience that he has as an expert in the field, in terms of how 

those designations were reached for the lands that are currently 

protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. But, Mr. 

Speaker, one can see through his writings that he is not just 

speaking for himself, Mr. Speaker. He is speaking for the sake 

of the citizens of the province and for future generations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that unfortunately is something that the Sask Party 

government has absolutely no regard for. It‟s where can we 

make a quick buck today to balance off our fiscal 

mismanagement and let the chips fall where they may for the 

future generations, Mr. Speaker. That seems to be the attitude of 

the Sask Party government. 

 

And why do I think that, Mr. Speaker? Because there have been 

more than enough people that have either written letters, sent 

emails, and phoned the Sask Party members opposite or have 

taken the time to come to the legislature and express their 

concern. Mr. Speaker, and the Sask Party government has done 

nothing, nothing to change this proposed legislation. We‟re not 

seeing any amendments come forward. We‟re not seeing any 

acknowledgement that there should be changes made, Mr. 

Speaker. What we‟re seeing from the Sask Party government is, 

that we‟re going to ram through this legislation. We don‟t care 

who‟s complaining . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask members to, if they 

want to continue their debate, private debate, to go behind the 

bar, allow the member from Regina Walsh Acres to speak. I 

recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 

heard a comment from across the way that, that they would like 

me to keep it down. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not going to keep it 

down when they don‟t want to listen to what‟s being said in 

terms of the people of Saskatchewan and what the people of 

Saskatchewan are telling me and asking me to do on their 

behalf, Mr. Speaker. I will not, I will not be quiet, and I will not 

lower my voice when it comes to protecting the interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee you that. 

So he goes on to say: 

 

Let us not take a backwards step at this critical time and 

lose the hard battles that many of us, along with the 

numerous conservation organizations, have fought to gain 

legislation for the protection of these lands. I admonish 

you not to take for granted that what you see today will be 

here tomorrow if your proposed legislation passes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a lengthy letter; it‟s three pages. And 

I‟m certainly not going to take the time of the House to read 

everything he has in his letter, but I do want to pull out a few 

key points, Mr. Speaker. And some of those key points are 

simply this. And this, Mr. Speaker, is a key point that is raised 

many, many other times, Mr. Speaker, from a lot of the other 

correspondence I‟m getting, and that is simply how . . . This is 

what he says, “How would you monitor and inventory the status 

of the lands in the future years after the purchase so it complies 

with the conservation easement?”  



5598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the concern that has been raised 

over and over and over again. The government currently is not 

doing a good job in terms of monitoring the lands that currently 

have conservation easements attached to them, Mr. Speaker. 

I‟ve now been presented with a few examples, very sad 

examples, Mr. Speaker, where lands with conservation 

easements attached to them have not been appropriately 

monitored, and by the time someone makes a complaint, Mr. 

Speaker, the damage has already been done. The wildlife that 

existed there or the biodiversity that existed there is no longer 

available because the land has been so badly damaged.  

 

So at that point then, what is the decision? Well we may as well 

sell the land because it‟s no longer useful in terms of retaining 

the protection of the habitat that existed there previously, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly this is not in all the cases where 

conservation easements are attached to lands that lessees have. 

But there are some examples, Mr. Speaker. And these are the 

examples, Mr. Speaker, that one has to ensure are protected. So 

he asks a very valid question about how these lands will be 

monitored when they have conservation easements attached to 

them. 

 

He also goes on to say: 

 

What field staff in either lands branch or Sask 

Environment has the personnel and specific qualifications 

and experience in land resource management to override 

the previous decisions made by highly qualified and 

experienced staff? How would the field staff of today 

determine or accurately define which lands have greater 

or which have lesser ecological value than what we 

originally placed on those lands when they were 

designated wildlife habitat protected lands? 

 

[21:45] 

 

He asks another question, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The assignment of Crown leases to qualified purchasers 

of the private land associated with these leases, as well as 

assignments to family members wanting to continue 

farming, has never posed a problem. What is the reason 

that this transaction is no longer suitable? 

 

Mr. Speaker, again another extremely valid question to ask. 

There has never been an issue with the lessees of land. There 

has never been an issue with generational transfers of those 

leases, Mr. Speaker. So why is it that the Sask Party 

government is in such a desperate hurry, such a desperate hurry 

to ram this legislation through this session? 

 

Why is the Sask Party government in such a desperate hurry to 

ram this legislation through despite the numerous organizations 

and individuals that have contacted them expressing the fact 

that they do not feel that this is appropriate to take those lands 

that are currently protected under the Act out of that protection 

and put it into regulation? Why is the Sask Party government so 

determined to push this legislation through despite the fact it is 

clearly not in the best interests of the majority of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker? 

And furthermore, why is the Sask Party government so 

desperate to push this undesirable and contentious legislation 

through when this land, the 3.5 million acres that are currently 

protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, belongs to 

the people of Saskatchewan? That‟s who the owners are. The 

owners of this land is every man, woman, and child in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They are the current owners of the land. 

They have a right to know which lands might potentially be 

sold. And they have a right to know why those lands are desired 

to be purchased and by whom, Mr. Speaker, before the land 

purchase takes place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So why is the Sask Party government so bent on pushing this 

legislation through when the landowners, who are the people of 

Saskatchewan, are expressing their concern and don‟t want this 

legislation to proceed? 

 

So he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The WHPA lands include some of the best wildlife and 

conservation land in the province which helps protect our 

environment and provides a valuable source of recreation 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Allowing these lands to be 

sold is, in my view, the most regressive step your 

government could make. I strongly urge you to reconsider 

your position. 

 

Now this letter, Mr. Speaker, is signed by George O‟Bertos who 

is a professional agrologist, Mr. Speaker. So I submit to you, 

this letter is something that the Minister of Environment should 

be heeding and that the Minister of Environment should take 

under careful consideration, and therefore should not proceed 

with the legislation that is currently before the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

my colleagues. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members, two guests. 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is Beverley Ross, who is a 

constituent of Saskatoon Centre, and Jan Harty, who is a 

constituent of Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Both Beverley and Jan are very active in the community. I 

know Beverley volunteers with a number of organizations and 

is involved with many different activities. Jan operates a small 

business in Saskatoon throughout the city and both are great 

people, good friends, and very pleased that they can be here this 

evening. 

 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5599 

Believe it or not, it‟s Beverley‟s first visit to the legislature and 

she‟s enjoying her time here taking in the sights and listening to 

the speeches. So it‟s great that she‟s able to be here this 

evening. I would ask all members to join me in welcoming Jan 

and Beverley to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

now move forward to another news release that was submitted 

on May 17th, and this one comes from the National Farmers 

Union. And it goes on to say, and it quotes: 

 

“The National Farmers Union is concerned with the 

government‟s haste, lack of consultation, and inadequate 

concern for the future of both wildlife habitat and 

generations of farmers and ranchers,” said NFU president 

Terry Boehm.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the National Farmers Union has a unique 

perspective on their concern with respect to the changes to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, and I want to, I 

want to elaborate on some of those concerns that the National 

Farmers Union has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Environment, Hon. Nancy Heppner has 

apologized for the lack of public consultation. A few 

follow-up meetings is woefully inadequate when the 

future habitat of 3.5 million acres is at stake. The 

Government‟s proposed solution of conservation 

easements that can be removed at the whim of the 

Minister of Environment, introduces the potential for 

abuse. 

 

Goes on to say: 

 

“Citizens of Saskatchewan need to know who wants to 

buy, at what price, and for what purpose, before any 

Crown land sales are allowed,” he added. 

 

Now this is a quote again from the NFU [National Farmers 

Union] president, Terry Boehm. Now he‟s saying exactly what 

many others are saying in their correspondence to me, and that 

is that because the land belongs to every man, woman, and child 

in Saskatchewan, because the land belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan, not to the Sask Party government, they want to 

know who wants to buy the land, what price they‟re getting the 

land for, and for what purpose they want to purchase the land, 

Mr. Speaker. Now you know what? That does not seem like an 

unreasonable request, Mr. Speaker. The owners of the land 

want to know what those three factors are before they take into 

account whether or not they want to see permission for that land 

sale to proceed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So and as I said, that doesn‟t seem unreasonable, Mr. Speaker, 

given that the land is serving a specific purpose and that 

purpose is to protect the wildlife and the ecodiversity that exists 

on that land, Mr. Speaker. Now the release goes on to say: 

 

Crown land sales must stipulate that when the land is 

resold, it must remain in the sole hands of Saskatchewan 

farmers and ranchers, or be repurchased by the Crown. 

 

Again we see an organization that is expressing its concerns, 

but its concerns of course are about how are those land sales 

potentially going to affect the farmers and ranchers of the 

future, Mr. Speaker. So what I found even more interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, is the next quote. And the next quote really drew my 

attention for a simple reason. It‟s because the next quote is by 

the National Farmers Union youth president, Kalissa Regier. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m of the firm opinion that when our youth 

speak, we should stand up and listen, Mr. Speaker, because they 

are the future of Saskatchewan. They are the ones who are 

going to be directly impacted by any decision-making processes 

that happen in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. The changes to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, we may not see the detriment 

that that may cause in the next few years, Mr. Speaker. We may 

not even see that in my lifetime, Mr. Speaker. But you know 

what? It will certainly come to fruition in terms of what our 

youth are going to experience, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when our youth speak, Mr. Speaker, this is something we 

should be paying incredible attention to, especially when our 

youth is actually paying attention to what‟s happening here in 

the legislature of Saskatchewan and to the Bills that are coming 

forward in this legislature. I‟m impressed enough by the fact 

that we have youth in this province that have concern for what 

is going on in this building because obviously they have many 

other things that they can be distracted by, Mr. Speaker. And 

speaking from my own youth, I was duly distracted. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the quote that we have in this release from 

NFU youth president Kalissa Regier is this: 

 

“Access to land is seen as one of the largest barriers for 

young farmers and ranchers today. With farm debt over a 

staggering $60 billion, Crown land leases offer one of the 

only affordable options for new farmers. Changes to this 

Act could represent yet another obstacle for future 

farmers” . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, yet another perspective and yet another concern, 

another real concern about why this Act is so problematic and 

why this Bill should be pulled, Mr. Speaker, and why the Sask 

Party government should not continue ramming this legislation 

through in this session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the news release goes on to say: 

 

“For the sake of our wildlife habitat, the environment, 

rural communities, and future young farmers and 

ranchers, the Minister of the Environment must withdraw 

this hastily conceived legislation,” concluded Boehm. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that was, that‟s fairly clear as to what the 

position is of the National Farmers Union, which is interesting 



5600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

because now we‟ve heard from a number of different 

organizations. We‟re hearing from these organizations that are 

expressing great concern and saying, we want to see this Bill 

tabled or we want to see this Bill go away. We want to see this 

Bill killed, in other words. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that when I was 

reading a quote by the Minister of Environment in another 

newspaper publication, and in this one the minister says, “We 

actually didn‟t have any calls yesterday for the legislation to be 

pulled, and so we‟re going to be carrying on with our time line 

. . .” This is from the Minister of Environment. This is her 

quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at the time that she was interviewed in this particular weekly 

in Saskatchewan, this newspaper weekly, she said that they 

hadn‟t had any calls or she hadn‟t had any calls with respect to 

the legislation, the desire for the legislation to be pulled. So she 

says we‟re going to continue on with our timeline. 

 

Well you know what‟s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is 

that since this interview — unless of course this interview 

happened at a later date — but since this interview the minister 

has been told on numerous occasions in emails and 

correspondence, she‟s been told over and over and over again 

that people want to see the legislation pulled or tabled, Mr. 

Speaker, until full and comprehensive consultations take place. 

 

But what has the minister decided to do? Well let me tell you 

what the minister has decided to do. Because only on Saturday, 

May 15th in the Leader-Post, the spokesperson for this Bill on 

Saturday — I don‟t know if the Minister of Environment is no 

longer allowed to speak for herself or wasn‟t available at the 

time; I‟m not sure — but the spokesperson for the Sask Party 

government, when asked about the demand by the FSIN to halt 

Crown land sales on First Nations traditional territory, what did 

the government respond? We don‟t agree with that approach. 

We will continue to move in this direction. And that was the 

natural resources minister, who was the one responding to the 

request by the FSIN. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can see that this Sask Party government 

has absolutely no desire to table legislation or pull the 

legislation or even make any type of amendments whatsoever to 

the legislation. We‟re going to ram this legislation through and 

it just doesn‟t matter. The Sask Party government is just 

absolutely bent on ramming this legislation through. 

 

Which brings me to another situation, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

that when the Minister of Environment realized that, oops, you 

know, there seem to be a lot of people that are not very happy 

with this legislation, don‟t seem to be very happy with the 

Minister of Environment as a lot of the letters and emails are 

harshly worded as to how they feel the minister has been 

handling the situation, Mr. Speaker, so what happens then? 

Well the Minister of Environment decides to call together a 

very hasty workshop on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It was within a 

week that the workshop was organized by the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

And you know what the Minister of Environment, what she said 

at that point? The Minister of Environment said at that point 

that, you know, they appreciate everything they heard, but they 

will be moving forward with the Bill. But they‟re open to 

talking about it afterwards. Now, Mr. Speaker, that‟s a little like 

me telling my daughter, don‟t walk around with a full bowl of 

milk for, you know, your cereal in the morning, and then her 

telling me — you know what? — we‟ll discuss this after I‟ve 

spilled the milk all over my carpet, Mr. Speaker. That‟s akin to 

the same thing. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Why would you want to talk about something after the negative 

effect has taken place? Why would you not want to talk to the 

stakeholders and the people that are raising those concerns and 

take those suggestions and make those changes prior to the 

negative effect of the legislation that you‟re wanting to ram 

through taking effect, Mr. Speaker? It makes no sense 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, another stakeholder group that has obviously 

an incredible reputation in terms of their level of expertise and 

the work they‟re doing in the province of Saskatchewan with 

respect to all issues of concern with respect to the environment 

is, of course, the Saskatchewan Environmental Society. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on May 13th, the Saskatchewan 

Environmental Society wrote a letter to the Minister of 

Environment. And, Mr. Speaker, this letter was also cc‟d to the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, so no one on the Sask Party government 

side can claim that they‟re not being appropriately informed or 

being appropriately contacted with respect to the concerns that 

they are wanting to raise because the Minister of Environment 

is receiving this correspondence. The Premier himself is 

receiving this correspondence, and yet there are no changes 

being made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a matter of fact, the organizations that met with the Minister 

of Environment on May 8th when they came to the workshop, 

I‟ve been told, were told by the Premier himself that . . . The 

Premier said that the Sask Party government is not backing 

down and will consult afterwards. So not only is the Minister of 

Environment saying that they‟re not backing down and that 

they‟ll talk about it afterwards, but obviously this comes at the 

direction of the Premier himself because the Premier himself is 

saying that they‟re not going to pull the legislation but they‟re 

willing to talk about it afterward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the incredible lack of 

judgment, lack of good judgment that the Premier of this 

province possesses, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re seeing countless 

examples of the decision-making processes as the Sask Party 

government is making that are questionable. We see countless 

examples of the decision-making processes that the Sask Party 

government is making that have not had due process or 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re also seeing that all of 

these things tie back to the office of the Premier himself, Mr. 

Speaker, and his absolute lack of good judgment when it comes 

to doing things on behalf of the people of the province and not 

just a few select people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He is supposed to be governing for the entire province, Mr. 

Speaker. He is supposed to be governing for the good of the 

majority of the province, Mr. Speaker, and we are not seeing 

that, Mr. Speaker. We are not seeing that in the short time, in 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5601 

the three years that this government has been elected, Mr. 

Speaker. We see poor judgment — bad judgment after bad 

judgment after bad judgment. And now, Mr. Speaker, on a daily 

basis we‟re hearing of more and more nefarious ongoings with 

respect to the decision-making processes that are happening on 

the Sask Party government side. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll stay tuned because, as I said, we can‟t 

keep up with the amount of contact that we‟re receiving from 

the people of Saskatchewan right now, but we vow to do our 

very best to make sure that everything is investigated 

thoroughly and that we do due diligence as the opposition 

members representing the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and their best interests, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll ensure that 

we can do the very best job that we can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in the letter from the Saskatchewan Environmental 

Society to Minister of Environment on May 13th, I want to 

quote again: 

 

Your government‟s plan to sell off portions of this land is, 

in the judgment of our non-profit organization, not in the 

public interest. These areas of native grassland, aspen 

parkland and wetland need to be preserved. 

 

And they go on to talk about the amount of lands that are 

currently protected and the fragmentation of those lands 

potentially if there is sales of those lands happening, Mr. 

Speaker. And then they go on, to quote: “More importantly, 

conservation easements are only as effective as the quality of 

the programs under which they are monitored and enforced.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, here we see yet again another stakeholder 

organization that has expertise to be able to speak on the issue, 

Mr. Speaker, and again expressing concern about the fact that 

the Sask Party government is saying don‟t worry folks; any of 

the land that is sold outside of the lands that are going to be sold 

without a conservation easement attached, those lands, you 

know, they‟re still going to have a conservation easement 

attached to them, so you know the wildlife and the land — how 

should I say? — the environmental concerns for that land will 

be maintained under conservation easement. But as is expressed 

here again, those conservation easements are only as effective 

as the quality of the programs under which they are monitored 

and enforced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we‟ve not heard anything from the Minister of the 

Environment that she is going to make any improvements 

whatsoever or increase staffing in the Ministry of Environment 

or even has the budget to do so, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

effectively monitoring and enforcing the lands that will then 

have conservation easements attached to them, Mr. Speaker. 

Now right now, Mr. Speaker, those lands are at least protected 

because they‟re under legislation. Once the minister has sold 

them with a conservation easement attached to them, it becomes 

that much more difficult in terms of ensuring that those lands 

are protected the way they should be with the entity, the person, 

or the group that has purchased them. 

 

Now they go to say: 

 

Given the value of wildlife habitat lands, we prefer to see 

an approach taken that requires the passage of a bill in the 

provincial legislature, whenever lands are being removed 

from protected status. We also support a policy of no net 

loss. In other words, if crown lands are removed from 

protected status, they should be replaced with other crown 

lands with high ecological value that are protected, so that 

the total of 3.5 million acres is not diminished, but in fact 

over time is increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so again we see the whole issue of when there is a 

decision for lands to be sold . . . Of course they would like to 

see those lands remain in legislation so the proper scrutiny 

could be done before the lands are sold instead of being told 

after the fact that the land has been sold, and you can come and 

talk to us now but it‟s too late anyways. But so what they‟re 

saying is, is that if any of the lands are sold that are currently 

under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, that there should be 

a policy of no net loss . . . which again, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not 

hearing anything, anything of the sort from the Premier of 

Saskatchewan or the Minister of Environment with respect to a 

no net loss policy. It‟s non-existent, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

non-existent. They are simply going to sell whatever lands they 

want to sell, without a conservation easement attached to it, 

with a conservation easement attached to it, with absolutely no 

notion of replacing those lands through a no net loss policy. 

 

Now he goes on to say, in this letter . . . Sorry, not he, they go 

on to say in this letter: 

 

In closing, we urge you to table your current amendments 

to the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. The changes you 

are embarking upon, once instituted, will largely be 

irreversible, and should thus be more carefully 

considered. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker: “In closing, our strong preference 

continues to be to see the current legislation before the 

Assembly tabled while further consultations are undertaken.” 

Mr. Speaker, this letter by the Saskatchewan Environmental 

Society was written by Jocelyn Orb, who is the president, and 

by Allyson Brady, who is the executive director. And, Mr. 

Speaker, again there is no vagueness about this letter, Mr. 

Speaker. They are very clear as to what their concerns are. 

They‟re very clear as to what they want to see the Premier of 

the province and the Minister of Environment do with this 

legislation. 

 

And yet again we see neither one, the Premier nor the Minister 

of Environment, heeding what an organization that has 

expertise on the issue is saying, Mr. Speaker. Once again we 

see it being dismissed and being further ridiculed by being told 

— you know what? —well you can talk to us afterwards. Well 

you know what, Mr. Speaker? That‟s too little too late. 

 

Now I have another letter here, Mr. Speaker, and this is again to 

the Minister of Environment. And I was cc‟d on this email, Mr. 

Speaker. And I just want to quote a few lines from this letter as 

well. So it says: 

 

Dear Ms. Heppner, 

 

I reside in Martensville and have written you in this 

regard previously although I have not been favoured with 

your response. 



5602 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see that even when people are contacting 

the Minister of Environment that they‟re not even granted the 

respect by receiving a response, Mr. Speaker. Now that in itself 

is very shameful, extremely shameful. She goes on to say: 

 

It is my understanding that by removing these protected 

areas from WHPA, these lands could be sold and their 

protection classification changed without any public 

consultation or debate in the legislature. Further, I 

understand that you have confirmed that over 300,000 

acres out of the 3 million acres taken out of the Act‟s 

protection may be sold once you ram Bill 132 through by 

the end of May as you have indicated is your intention. 

 

In fact, although your May 5th, 2010, release speaks 

extensively of the protection of conservation easements, I 

am horrified to learn that wildlife habitat lands may be 

sold without conservation easements attached and that 

subsequent changes made to The Conservation Easements 

Act put forward by your government makes it impossible 

to challenge you on any decisions made respecting 

easements. 

 

This speaks exactly to what I spoke to at the beginning of my 

comments on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that the concern of having 

the protected lands removed out of legislation and moved into 

regulations is concerning enough, but when you combine that 

with the other piece of legislation before the Assembly which is 

The Conservation Easements Amendment Act where the 

minister has sole discretion to remove a conservation easement 

and it‟s not court challengeable, makes this much, much more 

nefarious than previously, Mr. Speaker. She goes on to say: 

 

I am certain that you will agree that conducting a series of 

workshops after the introduction of Bill 132 cannot in any 

way be constituted as legitimate and respectful 

consultation. In fact on this serious and far-reaching issue, 

you and your government have displayed complete 

disregard for any genuine public consultation efforts, 

providing instead the usual and predictable knee-jerk 

reactions to any bad press that might arise. 

 

This is a huge decision that should not be taken lightly, quickly, 

or in secrecy, all of which seem to be the case here. She goes on 

to say: 

 

The land that is protected under WHPA is not yours to 

sell. I will remind you again that this land in its entirety is 

owned by the people of the province of which myself and 

my two adult children are three. We are all the owners of 

this land, and we must all be provided the opportunity and 

in fact be encouraged to share in the determination of 

whether this land should be sold and the conditions that 

might be attached to this sale. I am asking you to 

withdraw Bill 132 . . . 

 

Pretty clear request again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m asking you withdraw Bill 132 until proper and full 

public consultations with all interested groups and parties 

have been satisfactorily concluded. The land isn‟t going 

anywhere. What is your rush? The decision of whether or 

not to sell this land is not yours to make without the 

benefit of that input from the over 1 million people who 

own it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, this letter was written by a woman 

from Martensville which is actually in the constituency of the 

Minister of Environment. And the author of the letter, Ann 

Smith, is very clear in what she is asking the minister to do, and 

that is not to proceed with the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see that . . . Well let‟s put it this way. 

Every day in the newspaper there is something about The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. Either it‟s a report being done 

on a news press release that‟s gone out or it‟s a letter to the 

editor or it‟s a write-up about something to do with The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

[22:15] 

 

But one of the most interesting things I‟ve found in the 

newspaper recently, Mr. Speaker, is the PR [public relations] 

campaign that has now been launched by the Ministry of 

Environment, obviously at the direction of the Premier and the 

Minister of Environment. And it‟s an ad that shows a couple of 

cute, little deer and it says, for now and for the future. And it 

talks about, our goal is to protect conservation ecological values 

in Saskatchewan‟s southern Crown land. Amendments to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and The Conservation 

Easements Act will — and then it goes on to say — ensure the 

continued protection of over 90 per cent of WHPA land, either 

through continued ownership by the Crown or by the use of a 

conservation tool called a Crown conservation easement. 

 

It talks about introducing penalties for breaking the terms of a 

conservation easement. And it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

because they talk about that, you know that there are still going 

to be lands that are going to be protected either through the 

Crown ownership or through conservation easements. Nowhere 

in here does it talk about the fact that the minister can remove 

those conservation easements and that it‟s not court 

challengeable. 

 

Nowhere does it talk about the fact that, despite the fact that 

they‟ve increased penalties for breaking the terms of a 

conservation easement, that there is likely not going to be 

someone to monitor and enforce the increase of the penalty that 

the Sask Party is now touting in their PR campaign to try and 

sell this to the public, despite the fact the public knows exactly 

what‟s going on, and it‟s quite contrary to the spin that‟s being 

put in this ad that‟s in the paper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I said, if the government wasn‟t in trouble, the Sask Party 

government wasn‟t in trouble with this piece of legislation in 

terms of the amount of feedback it‟s received from the people 

of Saskatchewan, they would not be resorting to taking out ads 

in newspapers as a public relations campaign to try and sell 

their legislation and make it sound much less nefarious than it 

actually is, Mr. Speaker. They‟re trying to cast a positive light 

on the issue, when clearly people in Saskatchewan have 

educated themselves and know full well that that‟s not the case. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I also want to quote from another email I 

should say, that was sent out — no, letter, sorry — a letter that 

was sent to Saskatchewan First Nations tribal councils. And this 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5603 

letter, Mr. Speaker, is sent by the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations Fourth Vice Chief, Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish. 

And what he says here is: 

 

In a letter dated April 22, 2010, the Minister of 

Environment invited the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations as representative to a briefing on The 

Conservation Easement Amendments Act, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, and the Crown land ecological 

assessment tool which is otherwise known as CLEAT. 

There was no attempt to send the same invitation to the 74 

Saskatchewan First Nations. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason I want to read from this particular 

letter to the First Nations tribal councils is because when we 

were in committee the other evening with respect to budget 

estimates, I asked the minister about a cut that was made on the 

budget line and asked her about the fact that it‟s now hindering 

the FSIN from doing the work that they were doing on behalf of 

the First Nations with respect to issues with the Ministry of 

Environment and furthering discussions with the Ministry of 

Environment in representing the 74 First Nations. 

 

And I thought it was very interesting that the minister said a 

number of times in budget estimates that when she had 

organized this workshop that the FSIN was invited. Now she 

wanted to make sure that I understood that, she was very clear 

on the issue that this did not cover off the obligation for the 

Sask Party government with respect to duty to consult. What 

was even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, was the minister‟s 

dismissive tone about the fact that she claims that the FSIN 

chose not to attend the meeting. And that‟s exactly the word 

that she used, Mr. Speaker, that the FSIN chose not to attend, 

and was very dismissive about the fact that it was the FSIN‟s 

decision that they chose not to attend. 

 

Well what this is going to show you, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

what took place when the FSIN received that invitation and 

why they were not able to attend. And there‟s a big difference 

between the word chose not to attend and were not able to 

attend with proper authority, Mr. Speaker. So I‟m going to go 

on to read here: 

 

As you‟re aware, on March 8, 2010, the Chiefs of 

Saskatchewan adopted a model consultation and 

accommodation procedure and law that prescribes the 

manner that the Saskatchewan First Nations are to be 

consulted and accommodated with respect to any 

government activity that impacts on the inherent and 

treaty rights. The procedure and law state that the Chief 

and council are the point of engagement and possess a 

right and authority to participate in any consultation and 

accommodation activity on behalf of their First Nation. 

 

Furthermore, in accordance with this procedure, any 

attempt to bypass the Chief and council members will not 

be deemed to be consultation or accommodation as 

pronounced by the courts. According the model procedure 

and law, the FSIN may only engage in consultation and 

accommodation discussions when the leadership of First 

Nations agree to delegate that responsibility to the FSIN. 

The FSIN has not been delegated this responsibility, 

therefore the Ministry of Environment must engage the 74 

Saskatchewan First Nations directly on this matter. It is 

for this reason that the FSIN did not participate in this 

briefing session on May 6, 2010.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that it had nothing to do with 

choice, that the FSIN didn‟t simply choose not to attend the 

workshop that occurred on May 6th with the other stakeholder 

groups, some of the other stakeholder groups that attended. But 

they did not have the mandate to represent the 74 First Nations 

at this meeting, Mr. Speaker. Because the meeting was so 

hastily called, they were not able to get that mandate from the 

74 First Nations in order to speak on their behalf as the 

representative organization for the 74 First Nations. 

 

So what has to happen now, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party 

government is, they are bound to in terms of proper 

consultation, they are now bound to contacting each and every 

one of the 74 First Nations to ensure that the proper consultative 

process has taken place, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

news flash for the Premier and the Minister of Environment is 

this: that consultation is supposed to take place prior to the 

legislation being passed, not after the fact which is something 

that we‟ve seen previously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve seen Bills 5 and 6 rammed through by this government. 

And what happened when it was taken to the United Nations for 

the concerns by the individuals that are directly impacted by 

those Bills, Mr. Speaker? The ILO [International Labour 

Organization] under the United Nations said that those Bills 

were not properly consulted in terms of the stakeholders that it 

would most directly affect, therefore both of those Bills should 

be set aside and the process should be started over again, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s what the United Nations is saying about the 

changes to The Trade Union Act and the changes to the 

essential services Act, Mr. Speaker, or the essential services 

legislation. They‟re saying that both of those pieces of 

legislation should be scrapped, and the whole process should be 

started over because the consultation did not occur before the 

Bills were passed. 

 

Well I cannot believe for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Sask Party government is not heeding what the United Nations 

said about those two pieces of legislation and are willing to 

repeat the same mistake all over again with this piece of 

legislation. They have not done proper consultations with 

stakeholder organizations, and moreover, Mr. Speaker, they 

have not yet contacted the 74 First Nations that they are bound 

by law to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can see yet again that despite the fact that 

it is being verbalized, it‟s being written to the minister, it‟s 

being written to the Premier of the province, they are not 

heeding the good advice that they are receiving, and they are 

just maintaining the course of going ahead with the legislation, 

whether it‟s something that is in the best interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan or not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to also read from another email that 

was sent. And this email was sent after this couple had sent a 

letter to the Premier. So the letter that was sent to the Premier, 

they did receive a response from the Premier, and this was on 

March 15th of 2010. The response from the Premier says that 

the letter has been forwarded to the Minister of Agriculture and 



5604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

the Minister of Environment to make them aware of your 

concerns. I‟m sorry, I‟m quoting from the letter, Mr. Speaker, 

“. . . to make them aware of your concerns, and Minister 

Heppner will be responding to you further on our government‟s 

efforts to protect our province‟s biodiversity.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, so at least, at least there‟s a change in this 

situation, Mr. Speaker, as I read in the previous email where the 

Minister of Environment‟s own constituent said that she had 

written to her in this regard previously and had not been 

favoured with a response. We‟re seeing that this couple from 

Estevan that wrote to the Premier were at least given a response 

and that the Premier said that he‟s going to forward the 

concerns to the Minister of Environment to ensure that she has 

that information. 

 

So what is the email that was sent to me? The email that was 

sent to me, with the Premier‟s response letter attached to it, 

from this couple from Estevan says this, “We do not feel that he 

has addressed our concerns,” being the Premier: 

 

We do not feel that he has addressed our concerns or done 

any consultations with interest groups by the way he has 

responded to our letter. There was approximately 240 

letters that were sent to him that are Saskatchewan 

Wildlife members, a group that should be consulted for 

input.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I can‟t even claim to have received the 240 letters 

from the Saskatchewan Wildlife members myself. But I don‟t 

doubt for a minute that this couple would not be claiming that 

they know of 240 letters that were sent to the Premier from 

Saskatchewan Wildlife members. And again we‟re seeing that 

even that doesn‟t have any impact on the Premier‟s 

decision-making process or that of the Minister of Environment. 

 

They go on to say in the email: 

 

We do not want land sold, then finding out after the fact. 

We want to be notified and have the government 

accountable to Saskatchewan residents for this valuable 

resource. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, thank goodness the hour is 

moving on here because I‟m having to talk louder and louder 

because the members opposite honestly don‟t want to hear what 

the people of Saskatchewan have to say on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. They want to, they want to shout me down, Mr. 

Speaker. They don‟t want to hear what people from 

Saskatchewan have to say. Because why? Because they‟re 

going to go through with this legislation anyway, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They don‟t care what the people of Saskatchewan have to say. 

They don‟t care what the First Nations of Saskatchewan have to 

say. They don‟t care what the environmental organizations of 

Saskatchewan have to say, Mr. Speaker, because they‟ve 

already made it clear. The Premier has already articulated that, 

the Minister of Environment has already articulated that, that 

they are proceeding with this legislation no matter what anyone 

says, Mr. Speaker, no matter what anyone says. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again when we look at . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. The time having 

reached 10:30 p.m., this House stands adjourned until 1:30 

tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5575 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5593 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5584 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5598 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


