




















































Hansard: April 29, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 53C  THURSDAY, APRIL 29, 2010, 6 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5279 

 April 29, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 18:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order, order. It now 

being 6 o‟clock, the Assembly now resumes. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion by the 

Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it is a pleasure to rise this evening to make comments on 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

has been a fair bit in the news the last few days about this Act 

and there has been a great deal of concern raised right across the 

province by many citizens who are concerned that the 

government is making changes. 

 

I think first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, that there isn‟t any, 

hasn‟t been any consultations done. And secondly, I think the 

lack of consultation is a big concern but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

also that the changes that are being put forward, what kind, why 

they‟re being put forward I guess first and foremost, but also 

that people across the province truly have been ignored when it 

comes to the consultations and when it comes to changes that 

this government is putting forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess first and foremost we need to have a look 

at how and why this Act was put forward. And originally we 

can all remember a number of years ago during the ‟80s when 

there was talk about endangered species, species at risk and 

whether it was animals that were at risk that their habitat was 

being changed and lost for a variety of reasons, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And people really banded together and felt that we 

have an obligation as, really, citizens of the province, not only 

to care for and respect all species and all areas of the province 

but to make sure that they were maintained for future 

generations to enjoy. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there isn‟t any one of us that doesn‟t 

know the diversity of wildlife in our province and also when we 

get into plants some of the rare flowers, the rare plants that are 

endangered, that are at risk of being lost. Mr. Speaker, many 

people have turned their mind to this over the years and spent 

many, many years in fact making sure that habitat was 

protected. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the ‟80s this Bill was brought 

forward and at that point in time it was more looking at 

endangered species. But as we began to realize that as human 

beings and residents of the province we were changing more 

and more of it, in the ‟90s more land was added to this Act and 

its name was changed to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

because it didn‟t only deal with endangered species but it dealt 

with all species that are resident in the province of 

Saskatchewan, natural to the province of Saskatchewan, and 

that we want to remain here for all to enjoy, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So there‟s always that fine balance. There‟s that fine balance in 

between industry and development, human habitation but also 

making sure that we provide for nature and wildlife across the 

province. And that‟s really what this Act did, what it does, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a rationale for the schedule, 

as we refer to it. And it‟s a listing of all the lands, the legal 

description of all the lands and properties in the southern part of 

the province, south of the NAD [northern administration 

district], Mr. Speaker, that are protected and that are contained 

in this Act. But they‟ve always been kept within the legislation 

and housed in the legislation for a number of reasons. First and 

foremost I think many people viewed it as a commitment and a 

visible commitment to wildlife and to make sure that these 

lands were maintained. 

 

And many people may wonder, well what difference does it 

make where they‟re listed, where these protected lands are, 

where the list is housed and how it‟s kept. But for anyone that 

has dealt with this issue, they will know that when the legal 

description of the land is contained in the legislation — or it 

doesn‟t matter, whatever articles are in an Act of this province 

— to make changes to that Act it has to be brought into the 

legislature during session where there‟s an opportunity for all of 

the members of this House to scrutinize, to look at it, to ask 

questions so that we‟re all comfortable with the changes that are 

being made and what‟s being proposed and, if we‟re not, to 

offer viable solutions that also address the concerns of citizens, 

address the intent of the Act to protect wildlife and protect 

habitat for wildlife, and also allow the government to be able to 

achieve their purposes, Mr. Speaker, if that‟s the will of the 

House. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the Act, and this is in 

one of the binders that are from the House here, Mr. Speaker, so 

I won‟t be flipping pages too far, but this is what the wildlife 

habitat Act is. It‟s a fairly substantial document but, Mr. 

Speaker, probably only about the first eight pages are actually 

the Act and the rest is a very detailed schedule of this 3.4 

million acres that is protected across our province for wildlife. 

 

So I get back to again, why is it kept in the legislation? I think it 

signifies the importance that the province of Saskatchewan puts 

on wildlife and puts on wildlife habitat, and the protection of 

that raises it to a higher level. And, Mr. Speaker, it also 

provides for accountability, that if there is a reason that some of 

this land is to be removed from the Act . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 

there may always be circumstances that may come up where 

there needs to be a review of certain areas needs to be looked at. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, by keeping the schedule within the Act, it 

ensures that the government is held accountable for why they 

are removing land, why are they removing designated wildlife 



5280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

habitat from the Act because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have to 

bring it to the House. There has to be questions asked. They 

provide the explanation as to why they‟re making the changes. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if any of the government ministers 

feel strongly enough about this whole issue, well then what they 

need to do is to be able to stand and be accountable to the 

people of this province because that‟s who they work for, and, 

Mr. Speaker, explain, explain the rationale that‟s why they‟re 

making the changes. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing quite 

clearly that this has not been done. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act was tabled in the fall, late 

in the fall, and during the last couple of months we‟ve all gone 

through it and had a look at it and looked at the various 

changes. And it speaks to doing an ecological assessment on the 

wildlife lands. Mr. Speaker, not long after this Act was tabled I 

was at home and I was going . . . I was on the computer and was 

going through a number of websites. One for the Department of 

Agriculture is one that I look at every so often and it has land 

descriptions and you can go through on the Department of Ag 

website and look at various municipalities and parcels of land. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was a number of things that I 

noticed. 

 

First and foremost, on the listing of lands in one particular RM 

[rural municipality] that I was checking out, under the land 

description which it will say occupied, agricultural, lease, or 

vacant — it gives a quick description of what the land is — but 

under a number of them it said, under review. And this was a 

few months ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So then I started 

wondering, well why is the land that was previously listed as 

critical wildlife land now listed as under review? So I started 

looking at an RM map, started looking at a number of other 

maps and websites and then went back to the legislation and 

started looking at it. Well obviously the ministry has begun the 

review of Crown land already. 

 

So looking at the legislation started to be . . . look at it a little 

more carefully and made a few phone calls. And I have to say 

by this time we were hitting where the minister was making her 

second reading comments in the House and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there have been a number of Bills that have come 

through this House where we have heard complaints over and 

over again that there has not been consultations or by any 

means adequate consultations. In fact many groups feel that the 

government has just come out to them and dictated, said, this is 

what we‟re doing. That government calls that consultations but 

groups in the community and stakeholders have been quite 

upset with the process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we got to second reading of The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and the making of consequential 

amendments to other Acts, I was interested when the minister 

made her comments. She talked about the Act creates a Crown 

land ecological assessment and it will allow the government to 

evaluate and identify important ecological values and know 

how best to protect them. And then in her comment she said this 

has been developed in consultation with a wide variety of 

stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks 

Unlimited, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association, and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities. 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard that and I thought, well good. 

The government is finally beginning to realize that you need to 

have discussions with citizens when you‟re making major 

changes, and while they may not always agree with you, they at 

least need to understand why you‟re making the changes. And 

they will be maybe not agreeable with it, but they will be 

accepting of the changes if they understand the rationale and 

what you‟re trying to achieve with this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I started to do some phone calls then, and 

when I talked to a number of the stakeholders I found out a 

number of things. First off, many of the groups, well all of the 

groups in fact, felt that they had been invited to one technical 

briefing — and that‟s what they referred to it as, Mr. Speaker; 

they said that it was more of a technical briefing — but that 

they had not heard anything since. There had been . . . They had 

been invited to a meeting where the department had laid out the 

process that they would use and the tool that they would use for 

the ecological assessment. And they said it was a technical 

briefing of the process and the tool, but that it in no way delved 

any deeper into the legislation or the intent or what direction the 

government was going with this, and that there‟d been no 

follow-up. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was over a year ago, and in the 

meantime of course you always hear little bits and pieces of 

information kind of floating around. And at the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, their annual convention, all of the people 

that were at that convention sat down and wrote letters to the 

Premier of this province expressing their concern with the 

changes that were being proposed to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. And, Mr. Speaker, they got back a form letter 

basically to all the people that I talked to. They did get an 

answer back and it says: 

 

Our government will continue to protect land with 

conservation attributes, important subsurface minerals and 

land that is located in proximity to major water bodies or 

having other public or economic values beyond 

agriculture. 

 

And it gave them a website to visit and also forward the letters 

to the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many of these people received more detailed 

letters back from the Minister of Environment and she made the 

comment in the letters that . . . Now I may have my letters 

mixed up, Mr. Speaker, because there was a couple of them that 

went back and forth at that time. But one thing that caught my 

eye, in fact a number of . . . Well sorry, Mr. Speaker, let me 

finish off one thing. Many people received letters from the 

Minister of Environment and felt that she had addressed a 

number of the issues, but still avoided the topic as to why this 

was being done and why the land and the schedule were being 

removed from the legislation. 

 

So that‟s begun a number of, raised a number of concerns with 

many people and rightly so, I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Because as I‟ve gone around speaking to people over the last 

while, I‟ve often referred to the explanatory notes that came out 

along with Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And 

these will give a brief description in kind of clear English as to 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5281 

what the changes are being proposed, what the current, current 

provision is, and why the changes being provided or proposed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[18:15] 

 

And I guess there‟s one area that jumps out at me, when it talks 

about in 3(a) that (c.1), the schedule which is the actual listing 

of the lands, when it gives an explanation for this being 

removed from the Act, and the explanation is that: 

 

This amendment repeals the Schedule listing designated 

lands. [It removes it from the legislation.] The province is 

positioned to adopt a new strategic approach to evaluate 

and manage ecological, social and economic values on 

Crown land in the surveyed area of Saskatchewan and 

ensure protection of critical features while enabling sale of 

the land. This new approach includes assessing the 

ecological attributes of all Crown land with an initial focus 

on land in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act (WHPA). 

This information will be used to determine which lands 

may be sold, sold with a conservation easement or retained 

by the Crown. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I may be being a little picky here, but I 

would say any of us as human beings, if I asked you to write a 

list, if I asked any of us to put a list of items, make a list of a 

groups of items, we will always put our priority first on the 

thing that appeals to us the most. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we are dealing with The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act set up to preserve and protect habitat for 

wildlife, but the priorities and the way it‟s listed by the 

government is the lands may be sold, sold with a conservation 

easement, or retained by the Crown. 

 

The priority here in my view is to sell the land. That‟s what‟s 

listed first. It‟s the highest priority for the government. That‟s 

the way I view it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If I had have been writing this legislation . . . For one thing I 

wouldn‟t be doing this but if I had have written the list I would 

have written, being it‟s the habitat protection Act, would you 

not have the priority of protecting land and keeping it within the 

Crown for wildlife, then looking at what would be sold with a 

conservation easement? And what may be sold would be your 

third priority. But, Mr. Speaker, this is entirely different. It‟s 

entirely backwards. So it raises a number of red flags. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of other areas in here that 

prompted me to ask some written questions of the minister. And 

there was a point in the explanatory notes that the wildlife 

habitat protection regulations will be prepared for the spring of 

2010. These regulations will designate lands that are protected 

under the Act. This amendment includes enabling provisions 

that allow for future regulations that set out terms and 

conditions for the management of designated lands. 

 

Well I understand how this works, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

legislation needs to be passed before the regulations are 

developed and released, for sure. But I would assume that there 

is some work going on towards establishing regulation. Because 

when you‟re putting together a piece of legislation and making 

changes to this magnitude, you also have to have in mind as 

you‟re working through it, the details that will be needed to put 

the legislation in play and to make sure that it operates the way 

you have foreseen it or want it to or have directed it to be 

operational. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, getting ready for committee — because I 

mean this Bill will end up in committee, and we‟ll have an 

opportunity to sit and ask questions — I asked a number of 

questions of the minister to get ready for committee. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would assume by the comments in the explanatory 

notes and by seeing on the website over the last number of 

months that this land is under review and has been under review 

for a number of months. I know that there was a technical 

briefing almost a year ago where stakeholders were shown the 

tool that would be used to do the ecological assessment on the 

Crown land, beginning with the land in WHPA. 

 

So my question to the minister was, what value or attribute or 

rating has been given to each of the lands contained within the 

schedule of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act? You know, 

how have you rated it? What‟s the new rating that‟s attached to 

this land that you are removing from the schedule? 

 

I also asked about the tool that was being used to do this 

assessment and the criteria that was used within the tool to do 

the assessment on this land. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ended up 

getting back a non-answer. Well I kind of got brushed off, I 

guess, was the annoying part. Because we know in this House 

that with a written question, you can either answer it, order it, or 

. . . now I‟ve forgotten the third one . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Convert it for debate. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Oh, convert it for debate. That‟s what it is. It‟s 

always that third one I forget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So anyway I get an answer back that says, well these are 

questions you should be asking in committee. You know? Well 

for one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no guarantee this 

Bill will go to committee. I mean there are ways it may bypass 

committee completely. You know, this work should have been 

done by now. If you are looking and committing in the 

explanatory notes to have the regulations in place by the spring 

of this year, the assessment must have been done. If the 

websites for the department have listed these lands as under 

review for the last number of months, obviously the review is 

taking place and should have been done. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was information I was looking 

for so I could be prepared when we go into committee to 

discuss this Bill — that I would not be asking for additional 

information in committee, that I would have that information 

and be ready to go, to maybe even streamline the process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that was dealt with I assume today in the 

House, so we will let it go. But, Mr. Speaker, it really is 

difficult to be able to do the job and answer questions that 

constituents are asking when we can‟t receive information. And 

this was technical information, Mr. Speaker. It had nothing to 

do with the ideological issue of whether this schedule of land 

should be kept in the legislation or moved to the regulation. It 

was purely the scientific tools that were being used for the 



5282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

assessment, and how each piece of this land was rated with that 

new assessment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was quite clear and it was information that 

would have helped me and my colleagues prepare for 

committee and asking questions in committee. But it wasn‟t 

very forthcoming from the minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, over the past number of months as I‟ve been 

speaking to folks, they have been quite upset that this is being 

put forward and quite upset that they . . . Well actually, Mr. 

Speaker, they were a little surprised at how quickly the 

legislation was moving. And they expected that because it was 

going to be reassessed — there would be a reassessment — the 

various groups would come back in, they would have an 

opportunity to view how the new reassessment or ecological 

assessment tool worked, how it would be applied to various 

pieces of land, how accurate that was. They felt they would 

have some input into how that was working. 

 

So far that has not been done. They felt once they had worked 

their way through the process of the new ecological assessment 

that then they would look at how this would move forward. But 

they felt they would be involved in it because, Mr. Speaker, 

whether you‟re talking about the Cattlemen‟s Association, 

whether you are talking about ducks, whether you are talking 

about the Wildlife Federation, Nature Conservancy, Nature 

Saskatchewan, these are all folks who have dedicated a great 

deal of time — and money, in many cases — to protecting 

habitat, to protecting wildlife, and to promoting a healthy, 

well-balanced Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they felt that their opinions were valued and 

that their opinions would contribute to a better piece of 

legislation, better ecological assessment on these lands. So they 

were expecting to be involved but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

didn‟t happen. 

 

And when people heard that the legislation was in the House, it 

was in second reading, that the government was anxious to have 

it moved forward and there‟s been comments tossed across the 

floor: well it‟ll pass no matter what; we‟ll push it through. 

That‟s fine. We all understand how the process works but the 

government also needs to understand that there are many people 

across this province that are concerned and have spent, as I said, 

a great deal of time, energy, and money working on these issues 

and promoting a vibrant, I guess, ecology in the province of 

Saskatchewan when it comes to the wildlife and the plant life 

and the beauty that we all know is present in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s also very important, whether it comes to 

hunting and fishing, which is a huge revenue generator for 

many areas of the province, or whether it comes to the tourism 

sector, it‟s important also . . . And these are things that have 

been promoted. And it‟s kind of ironic that here we are, we‟re 

passing through the House marking a hunting and trapping . . . 

what the heck is it called, the Bill? Oh, heritage day, sorry. And 

then on the other hand we‟re removing access to much of the 

land and possibly destroying a lot of the heritage that‟s actually 

out there when it comes to this whole sector of our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this actually . . . It‟s raised an awful lot of 

concern over the last number of days and weeks. And it‟s, I‟m 

sure, not going to go away, but I‟m glad it‟s become a more 

public issue. Because people need to be involved and they don‟t 

need to be six or eight months from now realizing that the 

changes have been made and frustrated that they didn‟t have an 

opportunity to voice their opinion. 

 

Hopefully we can . . . The minister I understand has agreed to 

have some meetings over the next week to have some further 

discussions, and I hope they go well, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s 

important that people do have their say on these Bills and the 

changes that are being proposed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I did get some information despite the 

minister not sending it to me. I received some information on 

the ecological assessment tool that‟s being used and it comes on 

a couple of charts — and I‟m sure there‟s much more to it than 

what I‟ve received — but it‟s Crown lands ecological 

assessment criteria and parameters. 

 

And it‟s quite a large chart. I only printed off half of it this 

evening. I didn‟t bring in the full charts with me because 

they‟re fairly large. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mean I need to 

go through this more and make sure I have a better 

understanding of how the ratings are achieved and what actually 

is taken into account. But it talks about the criteria and it speaks 

to: composition has a 65 per cent weighting; spatial 

characteristics, 25 per cent weighting; and parcel context which 

is 10 per cent. 

 

And when it gets into the variables, it‟s much what we would 

expect to see, I would assume. Natural cover includes wetlands, 

how that ranks. Enduring features, that has a ranking. 

Intactedness which is also a subsection. Species at risk, game 

species diversity, fish distribution diversity, species diversity, 

and non-game plant and animal — there‟s also various 

attributes that go with that, and rankings. 

 

Also when we get into size and shape of the land, also 

neighbour parcel distance, parent to other conservation lands so 

I would think that‟s going to be a big part of the reassessments 

that are done. But when we get into the table 2 and this has a 

nice little acronym called CLEACP [Crown lands ecological 

assessment criteria parameters], Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When we get to the risk criteria in the variables, there‟s a 

number of headings under here and it speaks to agricultural 

capability, potential gravel and sand, existing and potential pit 

mining, existing subdivisions and potential recreational lands. 

And then it has a number of subheadings: distance to water, 

construction potential based on elevation range, proximity to 

existing urban centre, proximity to existing subdivision, 

proximity to existing provincial park. And then also existing 

and potential gas . . . or oil and gas development, that has a 

rating attached to it. Risk of acreage development, that has a 

number of ratings attached to it. And also existing and potential 

wind farm development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this raises a huge amount of questions. And I 

know that it has amongst others who have viewed this tool that 

is being used and how the ratings are compiled and how 

accurate they are. So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s also a number of 

questions in the letter that accompanied the, I guess, brief 

outline because I‟m sure the ecological assessment tool, this 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5283 

CLEACP, has a great deal more paper to it than the two or five 

sheets that I have. 

 

[18:30] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there‟s also a line in the kind of cover letter 

that came with this and it says: 

 

The province intends to evaluate the ecological attributes 

of all of its Crown land holdings in southern 

Saskatchewan, beginning with those lands currently 

managed through The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

So if this is going to be applied to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act and all of the lands listed in this schedule that‟s 

attached currently to the legislation for very good reason, and it 

is in the intent of the minister and the government to reassess all 

lands, is it also the intention of the government to go through 

this same process and offer all lands for sale after they have 

been reassessed? Does that put at risk the Great Sand Hills? 

Does it put at risk other areas that we know are unique parts of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Well now the minister says no. Well that‟s nice but, you know, 

all of these stakeholders received a letter not even a year ago 

from the minister saying WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act] lands would not be sold. 

 

So do you know what? We don‟t put an awful lot of faith in 

that, Mr. Speaker. And I wouldn‟t bet the farm on it because 

this government seems to have changed its mind over and over 

again. And we can go back right to pre-election where the 

Premier said there was no need, and the Minister of Health, 

there was no need for an essential services Act. And that was 

the first, one of the first things they did when they came to 

power was put it in place. 

 

The Premier also said that he wouldn‟t sign TILMA [Trade, 

Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] but, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m sure there‟ll be lots of backslapping and handshaking 

tomorrow over at Government House when they sign TILMA 

tomorrow. They have gone back on their word in a number of 

places. And these are just some, some large and public incidents 

where there has been, their word has not been . . . probably the 

pen they signed it is worth more than their word is, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s not a good reputation to have when you‟re 

in government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is many, many questions that go with 

this Act. I hope the minister, when she denied answering my 

questions has the information ready for committee because 

those will be the first things that I‟m looking for when we are 

looking at how this piece moves ahead because it is important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also I know they have talked many times 

over the past days that the whole reason they‟re doing this is 

because ranchers deserve the right to own the land that they 

have been good stewards of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟d also like to know how many pieces have 

been requested and what kind of requests there are for WHPA 

lands, and what the breakdown will be, what the rating is for 

each of these pieces of land contained in the Act — how they 

have been rated, how those ratings have been achieved, and 

where the cut-offs are, Mr. Speaker. What will be land, what‟s 

the rating you need to achieve to be considered critical and be 

retained within the Crown? What‟s the rating that needs to be 

achieved to be sold with a conservation easement? Who will 

enforce the conservation easements? And what ratings are 

needed for land to be considered not important to wildlife and 

habitat across this province? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions, well a huge 

amount of questions, that need to be answered. And I truly hope 

that when the minister meets with some of the stakeholders that 

she has committed to that they have some productive meetings 

and are able to work out some solutions that people across this 

province will be much more comfortable with, and that we 

really sit back and take notice and have a look at this legislation 

and realize that, as the current residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we do not have the right to do as we will without 

consideration for other species and for what will be left for 

future generations, Mr. Speaker, to enjoy. It‟s a responsibility 

that we have, and we need to make sure that we take it 

seriously. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to rise 

and make additional comments to the proposed changes to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll request that it be moved to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak briefly this 

evening on The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 

And I‟ve listened to a considerable amount of debate on this 

Bill in this Chamber over the last little while, and I‟ve listened 

to the minister, particularly in question period, on this Bill and 

answering questions about the Bill. And today I was interested 

to hear her, maybe prior to question period, maybe during 

introduction of guests, to offer to speak to groups that the 

ministry and minister had held out that they had already spoken 

to about this legislation in advance consultation. And that was 

quite remarkable, Mr. Speaker. Very remarkable. 

 

The other remarkable feature of this debate, besides the 

backtracking of the minister today on what consultation has 

taken place, is the use of the term fearmongering to respond to 

concerns expressed by the opposition, either in our speeches in 

second reading or the questions that are asked in question 

period in respect to the legislation. And I can understand why a 

government can think that that would be a successful tactic, that 

they bring forward legislation — they say, nothing to see here 

really, makes a lot of sense; don‟t know why we didn‟t do this 

before — and any criticisms that come from the opposition of 

course are suspect because they either don‟t understand, trying 

to make political hay out of the government‟s policy initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s interesting when other parties who the minister would 

not accuse of fearmongering repeat the same concerns that 

you‟ve heard from the opposition, both in these speeches in 

second reading and in question period. And I want to refer just 

briefly to an editorial, I think in today‟s StarPhoenix, Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix, entitled “Short-sighted of gov‟t to sell protected 



5284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

land.” And I‟ll open with a quote that represents the first three 

or four paragraphs of the editorial: 

 

The provincial government‟s plan to remove from under 

the protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act 

nearly three million acres of Crown land smacks of 

short-term thinking and political expediency that‟s 

detrimental to all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

And despite Environment Minister Nancy Heppner‟s 

claim that the move, which she wants to make by the end 

of May and would see about 10 per cent of the land sold to 

ranchers whose families have leased it for generations, 

“isn‟t about monetary things,” her decision remains 

puzzling. 

 

Even in a large province that boasts 43 per cent of 

Canada‟s arable land, the removal from wildlife habitat 

protection chunks of land that amounts to twice the size of 

Prince Edward Island, is cause for consternation. 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as a 

responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

Now I suppose to be consistent with the language she uses 

when members of the opposition express their concern or raise 

questions about the legislation, Mr. Speaker, I suppose she 

could accuse, the minister could accuse the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix of consternation mongering. But I think this is a 

genuine concern on the part of the editorial board, seeing a 

dramatic, radical change to the approach to the environment in 

respect to millions of acres of Crown land in the province. 

 

The editorial goes on to state that wildlife protection and 

conservation groups, First Nations leaders, and others are quite 

right to be concerned about the legislation, and concerned in 

part because of its scope and its possible consequences, but also 

concerned because they have largely been left in the dark. As 

speakers have pointed out, and I think it‟s become abundantly 

clear, not very clear because of the minister‟s original 

explanation that this Bill had followed upon consultation with 

these groups because it had become abundantly clear, as the 

debate has developed, that this consultation has not indeed 

taken place. 

 

And the Saskatoon The StarPhoenix goes on to say, “It simply 

isn‟t acceptable and Ms. Heppner seems determined to push 

through changes to three-decade-old legislation without 

properly discussing them . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, and it isn‟t acceptable, Mr. Speaker Now when we 

say, I mean the opposition say, it‟s not acceptable, well the 

minister says, fearmongering. But I don‟t think that the editorial 

board of The StarPhoenix is particularly interested in promoting 

the cause of the New Democratic Party opposition. Here I 

believe the editorial board of The StarPhoenix is interested in 

promoting the cause of the environment and conservation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think their language around the unacceptability of the 

push through of this legislation, which if any legislation require 

public hearings at this point, Mr. Speaker, this legislation cries 

out for them, cries out for them, Mr. Speaker, because that 

consultation hasn‟t taken place. There is broad-based concern. 

We‟re learning that. We saw that in the galleries today, Mr. 

Speaker. And if there are misunderstandings, as the minister 

would say, the air could properly be cleared by hearings on this 

legislation and the reluctance of the government to discuss its 

legislation in public, with the public, in areas such as this is 

alarming. 

 

The editorial goes on to say, and I quote again: 

 

As Darrel Crabbe, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation aptly notes: “We just think that the 

future generations of Saskatchewan would be better served 

if there was full consultation with everybody and the 

original protection was left in place. 

 

“This is a huge issue for us. We‟re talking about millions 

of acres of land that we consider to be a jewel in the crown 

of Saskatchewan.” 

 

And then the editorial goes on to speculate as to the actual 

motivations of the government for bringing in this legislation. 

Their speculation is a little bit different than the speculation, I 

think, on the part of the opposition to the motives and 

motivations of the government in bringing in this legislation. I 

actually believe that The StarPhoenix is being a little generous 

in what it attributes as the motivation behind this legislation, but 

this is what the editorial says: 

 

For a government that‟s heading into an election next year 

in a province whose economy shrank by 6.3 per cent in 

2009 and is struggling to keep its spending in line with its 

diminished revenues, any source of revenue — especially 

when it‟s tied closely to making some of its rural support 

base happy — might seem attractive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so The StarPhoenix attributes the reasoning for 

this legislation as another quick cash grab, a quick flow of cash, 

another trip to the children‟s piggy bank by a government that 

has maxed out its credit cards, Mr. Speaker. And that may very 

well be right. It‟s certainly arguable, and The StarPhoenix 

makes the point very succinctly. Later The StarPhoenix goes on 

to say, and I quote, and here they are quoting Brent Kennedy of 

Ducks Unlimited: “„We‟re not convinced that they have the 

means to be able to accurately define which lands have greater 

or which lands have lesser ecological value,‟ suggests Brent 

Kennedy, Ducks Unlimited‟s manager of provincial 

operations.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so people who are involved in this area or whose 

lives are and working lives and vocations and avocations, Mr. 

Speaker, are taken up with concern about conservation and 

protection of wildlife and of land very much doubt the 

government‟s ability, which the minister seems to have no 

doubt about, to decide which lands have greater or lesser 

ecological value. And the history of this legislation shows the 

government‟s unwillingness to consult those groups and ask 

those question, Mr. Speaker, which gives a concern about how 

the legislation will actually be implemented in the future given 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5285 

the reluctance of the government to speak to Ducks Unlimited 

or the Wildlife Federation in any meaningful way. 

 

[18:45] 

 

Finally The StarPhoenix editorial concludes with the following 

quote: 

 

The call by Ducks Unlimited and other conservation 

groups for the Saskatchewan government to develop a 

wetland policy to conserve and restore wetlands in the 

province has gone unheeded. This even though wetlands 

are crucial to protecting water supplies, reducing effluents 

from washing into lakes and rivers, and recharging 

groundwater supplies. 

 

Instead, the Environment minister is acting to . . . [fully] 

erode the protective legislation already in place. No 

wonder those who take a longer view of the province 

beyond its four-year election cycles are concerned. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, I think — in a very sober, rational, 

clear-headed way — raises the concerns of people in 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the environment and 

conservation, and it raises the concerns of the opposition which 

the minister would pejoratively describe and diminish and 

dismiss as fearmongering, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don‟t think so, with respect. I think the concerns expressed by 

The StarPhoenix and by the individuals quoted within that 

editorial representing the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and 

Ducks Unlimited are valid concerns. I think they need to be 

listened to. I think they need to be aired. I think there needs to 

be far more discussion than the Minister of Environment has 

been willing to have on this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and we 

will continue to push for that discussion. This debate will 

continue, but for the moment, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 132. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 105 — The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

this evening to speak to Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

There are a couple notable things about the Act and a couple 

notable things about the minister‟s second reading speech 

which took place on November 16th, 2009. One notable thing 

about that second reading speech is its length, Mr. Speaker, or 

its lack thereof. The second notable thing about the minister‟s 

speech is its timing. Now first of all I might first speak to the 

length of the speech, the brevity of the speech. 

 

Essentially Bill 105 is an extension of the ability of SaskEnergy 

— the Crown corporation supplying natural gas — an extension 

of its debt limit and increase of its debt limit from the current 

$1.3 billion to $1.7 billion. And what the minister was doing on 

November 16th, 2009, is in effect — because the legislation has 

to be changed to increase the borrowing powers of Crowns — 

was in effect increasing the secure line of credit that the 

government has against the assets of SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. 

And so the government was applying to the legislature for a 

$400 million secure line of credit against the assets of 

SaskEnergy, and that application for a $400 million line of 

credit took mere moments. It‟s difficult to say how few because 

the time indications are further apart than that, Mr. Speaker. But 

it took a couple of moments to rise in the legislature and for the 

minister of the day to move second reading of The SaskEnergy 

Amendment Act, 2009 and apply for a $400 million secure line 

of credit. None of us, Mr. Speaker, I expect, would be 

successful in getting a $4,000 secure line of credit with the 

brevity that the minister managed to get in his second reading 

speech on this Bill. 

 

It reminded me of a phrase that lawyers are advised to keep in 

mind when going to appeal court, is to be prepared, be there, 

and be gone. And whether or not the minister was prepared, he 

was there briefly, and then he was gone very quickly, Mr. 

Speaker. And there is in the second reading remarks by the 

minister an explanation about economic development and 

partnerships and really not a very fulsome description of what 

the government wants to do with a $400 million line of credit 

against assets of SaskEnergy. 

 

But we know, Mr. Speaker, we know, Mr. Speaker, that already 

the government, on the debt levels that they are allowed under 

current legislation, that the government has already taken $1 

billion out of the Crowns and are willing to take, in some cases, 

every cent of income as a dividend, Mr. Speaker, which is not 

as bad as some of the behaviour we saw at the end of the 

Devine administration where dividends were taken in excess of 

200 per cent in one year of the income of the Crowns. But 

certainly the trend line is there, Mr. Speaker, and cause for 

concern. 

 

But very little discussion about why, but given what has 

happened and the way the debt, some debt has been shifted 

from the government to the Crowns, given that action that we 

have seen recently, one might understand why the amendment 

is before us, and you might understand why the minister didn‟t 

want to spend a lot of time talking about the government‟s 

motivations for it. So that goes to the brevity of the minister‟s 

second reading comments. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak briefly to the timing. 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, the minister rose on November 16th, 

2009, to move the second reading of The SaskEnergy 

Amendment Act, 2009. Now in the previous spring, the Sask 

Party government had brought in a budget in which they 

predicted growth in the province at over 2 per cent. We have 



5286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

learned now that in fact the provincial economy contracted by 

over 6 per cent, that the economy is the now the same size it 

was in 2005. In other words, not only did the boom end under 

this administration, the Sask Party government. The boom has 

been completely reversed, and we are now back to the size of 

the economy back in 2005, Mr. Speaker. I mean we wish this 

was still next year country. Now it‟s becoming year before the 

year before the year before last year country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But on November 16th, 2009, those were still heady days. 

Those were days still when it wasn‟t quite clear that the 

government‟s predictions that potash sales would be record 

sales despite all indications to the contrary, that it wasn‟t quite 

clear that the government was grossly overspending its 

revenues and irresponsibly so. It wasn‟t clear that there was no 

surplus because that budget, Mr. Speaker, you will recall, was 

on the face of it a surplus budget. The government was going to 

bring in more revenues than it expended. 

 

A few days after November 16th, 2009, the true picture 

emerged. A few days after November 16th in 2009, we received 

the quarterly reports on the actual state of the province‟s 

finances, and it became clear that in fact it was not a surplus 

budget. It was a deficit budget, and it looked like it was going to 

be a $1 billion deficit budget. 

 

Now the public did not know that on November 16, 2009. The 

opposition suspected something along those lines, Mr. Speaker, 

but did not know. But I dare say, the minister responsible for 

Crown Investments Corporation of the day, that minister knew 

what was coming in a few days. And so I think the timing is 

illustrative. The timing is illustrative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of the Environment will bring her Bill in in 

December and claim that she brought it in in the fall and there 

was lots of time for consultation. This is a Bill that was brought 

in in November, Mr. Speaker. It was brought in a little bit 

earlier in the fall sitting and it was brought in, I suspect, 

because . . . It would have been quite a different debate, I think. 

It would have been a little harder for the minister to say with a 

straight face, I want a line of credit on the assets of SaskEnergy 

for $400 million, and it has to do with economic development 

and partnerships and not about the fact that the government of 

which I am a member is running a $1 billion deficit, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

She was saved from that embarrassment by the timing of when 

this was done. But now all this is in the light of day. These 

utilities are owned by the people of Saskatchewan. We have a 

circumstance, at least we do so far, Mr. Speaker, where the 

government cannot increase the debt limits without a debate in 

this legislature. And now of course it‟s a majority government, 

and they will eventually get the increase, Mr. Speaker, but at 

least it is applied to some public scrutiny. 

 

And that‟s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, because we have seen in 

the United States, recently with Enron where the management 

of electricity — and actually to the danger of the health and 

lives of people in California — was completely mismanaged. 

And it was sort of brought to attention the importance, this 

importance of the Crowns. They‟re important for a number of 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, but this importance of the Crowns, that 

there is required by legislation to be some sort of transparency 

around these issues of debt and of equity and of dividends and 

debt to equity ratio, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was brought to mind because of statements that were made by 

the current Minister of Crown Investments Corporation, not the 

minister who provided second reading on this Bill. There‟s been 

a cabinet shuffle since then, Mr. Speaker, as we know. 

 

But when we were discussing debt in this Chamber and it was 

pointed out by members of the opposition as is the case and as 

you can see from the budget document . . . I think page 62 

describes the increase in debt over the next few years. That‟s 

going to result from the policies of this government. 

 

As we were discussing that, the current Minister for Crown 

Investments Corporation said, well that‟s Crown debt, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s Crown debt, clearly not appreciating that Crown 

debt is public debt. And the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation thinks that if you can somehow shuffle 

off, as this Bill might do, shuffle off debt from the operating 

debt of government, off onto the Crowns, then it‟s not there 

anymore, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not public debt anymore. And that‟s 

one of the reasons why we had such dividend equity-stripping 

from the Devine administration as well. It‟s not government 

debt. Government debt‟s about as big as it can be. Now, now, 

it‟s only Crown debt and that‟s not public debt. Well it is. 

 

[19:00] 

 

And it would be laughable, it would be only laughable if it 

came any other government member. But when it comes from 

the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments Corporation, 

it‟s scary, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly. 

 

Maybe not as scary as later comments that the minister made in 

respect into Crown debt and to equity stripping and these issues 

of increasing Crown debt as this Bill does, when she said that, 

well all this, all this dividend payments out and increase of debt 

in, accomplishes, all it accomplishes is it increases the value of 

the Crowns. Now that, that is, that is Enron in a nutshell, Mr. 

Speaker. That is Enron in a nutshell — more debt, more value. 

 

That was what brought that company down and did extreme 

damage. I mean, remember the last financial meltdown. I guess 

you always remember the last financial meltdown by how much 

damage was done to the North American economy by Enron 

and by that meltdown, Mr. Speaker. And that was all about 

moving debt to assets, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s what the current 

Crown Investments Corporation minister, this week, this week 

held out to the people of Saskatchewan in response to questions 

from the opposition. The members think it‟s laughable, and 

members from the government think it is laughable. And I said 

it is laughable at one level, but it‟s not because of where it came 

from, Mr. Speaker, because it came from the minister 

responsible for, amongst other things, the financial health of the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. That‟s where it gets scary. 

That‟s where it gets concerned.  

 

And you know again, the members opposite may want to talk 

about fearmongering, but you know, sometimes, as in the 

previous Bill that I discussed, it turns out that it‟s not only us 

that are concerned. There are other people that are concerned. 

You wouldn‟t know that if you only listened to the government. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5287 

You wouldn‟t know that if you rushed through things the way 

the government wants to rush through them, Mr. Speaker. We 

do know that because there‟s a requirement for debate and 

there‟s a requirement for discussion in respect to this type of 

legislation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate that the existing debt limit 

on SaskEnergy has not been increased since 1992, that there is 

an arguable case for increasing the debt limit. But we feel that it 

is our responsibility. It is unquestionably our responsibility to 

look with some jaundiced eye about the attitudes that are 

expressed by the previous Crown Investments Corporations 

minister who referred to the need for creative financing. 

 

And I know some members opposite think my Enron 

comparison is a little bit stretched. But, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

what the leaders of Enron, the smartest guys in the room, that‟s 

what they prided themselves on — creative financing. And 

that‟s what the previous minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation prided this government on, that it was capable of 

coming up with creative financing. And the current minister 

who doesn‟t seem to be able to keep separate the concepts of 

debt and value, well those cause some concern. 

 

So we would like to see some seriousness on the part of the 

government in respect to the issue of debt, in respect to the 

issue of deficit. We hope to see that soon. People of 

Saskatchewan need to see it very, very soon, Mr. Speaker. We 

know this last budget, the budget before this most recent 

budget, was a deficit budget. This budget‟s a deficit budget. The 

government says the next budget will be the deficit budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the government debt is going to keep going up. The Crown 

debt is going to keep going up. And we need a government that 

doesn‟t laugh at people‟s concerns about debt or try to dismiss 

the debt because of where it happens to be placed and what you 

can call it, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what we need from the 

government, and that‟s what there seems to be very little 

prospect of. 

 

And I could, if I was inclined to, further point out the parallels 

between this conduct that we‟re debating now and the conduct 

of a previous administration, the Devine administration, Mr. 

Speaker. But I am not going to do that. I know that there are 

other members who want to enter the debate, and to allow them 

to do so, I will conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter tonight into the debate on Bill No. 105, An Act to amend 

The SaskEnergy Act. As we know, this Act will, or this Bill will 

make it possible for SaskEnergy to increase its debt limit from 

the current 1.3 billion level to 1.7 billion. 

 

I think the first thing that sticks out for me is thinking about the 

financial management — or mismanagement actually is 

probably a more appropriate word — by this government, a big 

concern for me. If I was an individual who was spending more 

money than I was taking in, I think my financial adviser would 

probably recommend that increasing my credit card limits 

probably wasn‟t the best idea around, that I should probably 

think about getting my spending to a sustainable level and 

working at ensuring that I‟m not spending more than I‟m taking 

in on a daily or a yearly basis or daily basis for that matter, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Crowns are a key part of our economy here in 

Saskatchewan. The health of an economy, you need a good 

mixed economy to ensure your economy or your province hums 

along. That includes a mix of Crown corporations, private 

enterprise, and co-operative ventures. I think you need a good 

mix of those. And Crown corporations historically in 

Saskatchewan are a huge part of our culture. We have Crown 

corporations because governments recognized that we all 

collectively had a role to ensure that basic services were 

provided to all people in Saskatchewan. That‟s the history of 

Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. And one of the benefits 

of having Crown corporations is ensuring that rates for those 

basic services, for natural gas, for electricity, for all those kinds 

of things are possible for all of us to pay. 

 

You know, just about a short seven months ago or so, I was on 

the doorstep in Saskatoon Riversdale, and this I think isn‟t just 

in my own constituency but I heard it . . . There wasn‟t a day 

that went by when I was on the doorstep in Saskatoon 

Riversdale that a constituent would raise with me the difficulty, 

the fact that the cost of living, it was getting harder and harder 

to make ends meet. We have people who were actively — with 

rising rents, rising utility rates — people were actively making a 

choice between paying their rent or their utility bill or putting 

food on their kids‟ tables, prescription drugs, needed 

prescription drugs. There are people today. . . because utility 

rates are going up, are actively not taking their necessary 

medications. This is a reality. 

 

The cost of living is going up in Saskatchewan, and part of that 

is the cost of utilities, that our Crowns should be able to provide 

us a service for Saskatchewan people. And the benefit of a 

Crown corporation should be to ensure that we can all afford 

those necessities in life. And like I said, not a day went by 

during that campaign that I didn‟t meet someone who was 

having a very difficult time. And these are seniors on fixed 

incomes, but these are working people too, people in paid 

employment who are finding it very, very hard to make ends 

meet as well. 

 

So I think we‟ve seen this government strip equity from the 

Crowns so they need to borrow more money because the 

Crowns can‟t afford to invest in their infrastructure like they 

should be able to. This is definitely an issue. Basically the 

government right now is running a billion-dollar deficit and ran 

a billion-dollar deficit last year and is using the Crowns as a bit 

of a cash cow to hide the deficit and hide debt. 

 

But one of the things they‟re also doing is ideologically we see 

that this government isn‟t a big proponent of Crown 

corporations. They might say that oh no, we won‟t touch the 

Crowns; we support the Crown corporations. But bit by bit, 

they chip away at the Crown corporations; thus they‟re no 

longer sustainable. And so they become less valuable to people 

in Saskatchewan if you‟re chipping at them bit by bit. And we 

know ideologically where this government stands. 

 



5288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Right now we‟re in the middle of the privatization of a treasury 

Crown, SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network]. This 

is a public broadcaster that ironically enough was introduced by 

their own party in 1990, the Grant Devine Conservatives. Even 

at that time, the Grant Devine Conservatives put ideology 

behind good public policy. They put ideology aside and 

established SCN, which is a vehicle for Saskatchewan 

storytelling, which developed into a key component to the film 

and television industry here in Saskatchewan — a critical, a 

critical player in the film and television industry. 

 

So the privatization, the privatization of Crown corporations is 

happening right now, and so this is chipping away at Crown 

corporations because this government does not believe in 

Crown corporations. As I said Bill 105, an Act to amend 

SaskEnergy is directly tied to this government‟s ideology when 

it comes to not supporting Crown corporations. We‟ve also 

heard today the member from Martensville talking about we 

believe in landownership as if the opposition does not. 

 

So my disagreement would be that we shouldn‟t put ideology in 

front of good public policy. I am a social democrat and very 

proudly a social democrat, but I like to think that I‟m also 

incredibly pragmatic. And I think that, again, good public 

policy like the Crown corporations should not be pushed aside 

because of ideology, and that‟s what we see with this 

government, that ideology seems to trump everything else. 

 

A little bit dry here tonight, Mr. Speaker, it‟s . . . So again I just, 

the point of Crown corporations is to make sure to ensure that 

Saskatchewan citizens have access to those necessary utilities, 

whether it‟s turning on our lights or running our water or 

picking up the telephone so we can communicate with one 

another. Our Crown corporations are a critical part of our 

economy here. And aside from being able to provide good 

services to Saskatchewan people at affordable rates or at least 

they‟ve been affordable in the past but with rising debt rates, 

this is a huge concern. 

 

But Crown corporations are also, they‟re having head offices 

here in Regina . . . actually does a wonderful job of ensuring 

that there are good jobs here in Regina where people are 

employed and are contributing to their community, paying 

taxes, are active citizens in their community, and are supporting 

local businesses. So Crown corporations, aside from ensuring 

that we have good public services, also help feed the economy 

as well. 

 

So perhaps this government might wish to characterize this Bill 

as just a bit of housekeeping as I have to note that the debt limit 

hasn‟t been revised since the Act was first brought in, in 1992. 

But the reality is this government has mismanaged our finances 

in epic proportions, epic proportions. We have record revenues 

in this province, more than $10 billion last year and this year, 

and they‟re having to make cuts. They‟re cutting services 

without consultation, important services. And you know what? 

It‟s always good for government to assess what it‟s doing. But 

you know what? When you assess, when you‟re undertaking an 

assessment, you‟re going to change something in government. 

It‟s usually a good idea to speak to the people impacted by 

those changes or actually have some idea about what those 

changes might mean. 

 

And this government has a track record, a track record. I‟ve 

only been in this Assembly since, well, October 21st, and do 

you know what? I have seen time and time again over the last 

several months how this government has not consulted with all 

kinds of people — with the board of SCN, its independent 

board before it decided to privatize SCN; with the domestic 

violence outreach program in Saskatoon. Whether it was Bill 80 

last year or Bills 5 and 6, there is no shortage of examples 

where this government has failed to consult. 

 

And one needs to consult if you want to make good decisions 

and to make good public policy that‟s in fact connected to 

people‟s reality. You need to talk to people too who just . . . We 

all have people we like a little bit more than others or for whom 

we have a bit of an affinity. But the reality in government, we 

serve everybody in this province. I don‟t just serve New 

Democrats. I serve the people of Saskatoon Riversdale, and I 

serve the whole province. And I feel that it would be incumbent 

on me that I would need to speak to all stakeholders, not just the 

ones that I happen to like. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So this government has been remiss in making sure that when 

it‟s making changes to legislation or deciding to enact a new 

legislation that they haven‟t spoken to people impacted by 

public policy. And I think that that‟s one of the things that lends 

people‟s . . . There‟s a lot of disillusion with politics and with 

politicians and with government, and I think part of that stems 

from government‟s inability on many occasions to connect with 

people. And this government has done this over and over and 

over again and is just reinforcing the disconnect between 

government and the people on the ground where things happen. 

 

So with respect to Bill No. 105, An Act to amend The 

SaskEnergy Act, I just want to reiterate again that, like I said, if 

I was spending more money than I was making and I decided 

that I thought my credit card rate or my credit card limit should 

increase, I think that people would be telling me, you know, 

you know, I think you should probably get your spending under 

control and before we think about increasing your debt, your 

ability to escalate your debt, because it‟s just going to hurt you 

in the long run. 

 

Man, it is very dry in here tonight, a lot of hot air on the other 

side of the legislature, I think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, again I have to emphasize too, it‟s very important not 

to put ideology before good public policy. And this is 

something that this government has been doing as well: 

ideology before good public policy. And again I have to 

emphasize. I‟m a pragmatic person, and I like to think that you 

talk to the people you need to talk to and make informed 

decisions. And this government has not made informed 

decisions. 

 

So perhaps there is a need, a pressing need for the Crown 

corporations or SaskEnergy to increase its borrowing limit. But 

I have some concerns that until this government learns to spend 

in a sustainable way, in a sustainable way . . . But this 

government needs to learn to spend in a sustainable manner 

because they have a responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan to do so. And we are counting on this 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5289 

government to make wise decisions, which they have not done. 

And we‟ve seen that in this recent budget and back-to-back 

deficits and projected deficits for the next two years and 

projected debt increase. 

 

So with respect to Bill No. 105, An Act to Amend the 

SaskEnergy Act, perhaps this Crown needs to increase its debt 

limit. But I‟m hesitant. I am concerned that this government 

takes debt from . . . assumes the Crown debt is not the people‟s 

debt. This is government debt. This is our debt. This is my two 

daughters‟ debt. This is hopefully my future grandchildren‟s . . . 

I‟m not hoping it‟s my future grandchildren‟s debt. But it is 

generations into the future‟s debt. We‟re still paying for 

reckless spending and poor decisions of the 1980s leading up 

into 1991. We‟re still paying that debt load. So we have to be 

very, very mindful of taking that on again. 

 

I actually remember very, very well when the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] came to power in 1991 after many years of 

Grant Devine‟s financial mismanagement which, by the way, 

this government seems to accelerate the pace at which they are 

mismanaging our finances. But I remember in 1991. The former 

member — two members back — in Saskatoon Riversdale, Roy 

Romanow is a good family friend. And I can remember him 

coming over shortly after winning power in 1991 and saying to 

my father, saying, Rusty, we are in a heck of a mess. This is 

horrible. On the verge of bankruptcy, our province was on the 

verge of bankruptcy because the previous government had 

accumulated a very huge debt. And I still vividly remember that 

to this day. 

 

And actually Mr. Romanow still laments, on very frequent 

occasions, the fact that we all . . . When we sit in this 

legislature, our hope is to do good things for the people of 

Saskatchewan. We might not all have the same way of getting 

there, but I think ultimately we want to do good things. And I 

think Mr. Romanow sometimes feels that his legacy of getting 

the books into good financial . . . or getting the province into 

good financial shape is a fine legacy, but it‟s not the legacy he 

wanted to contribute or wanted to leave for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As a social democrat, you want to do very good things to ensure 

that the abundance of our province is evenly . . . or is spread 

around, that we all have an opportunity to benefit from the 

wonderful things we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so my big fear, in sitting in this legislature, understanding 

that we‟ve . . . in boom times or supposed boom times, well, in 

boom times where we have record revenues, we are still 

increasing debt in this province and making cuts. That, quite 

frankly, is disturbing to me and scary and reminiscent of the 

‟80s and up till 1991. So I worry about that. As a mother of two 

children, I worry about that increasing debt here in this province 

because I want this province to be a good place for my children 

to grow up. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I think we‟ve done the necessary debate 

on Bill 105, and I‟m going to send it to committee where further 

questions will be asked. So I‟ll leave it at that. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion put forward by the Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

that Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act 2009 be read 

the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 105, The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act 2009 be referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Bill No. 120 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 120 — The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s good 

to rise tonight and participate in the debate on Bill No. 120, The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act. Of course this Bill is 

essentially concerned with changes made to make The Fuel Tax 

Accountability Act more flexible in terms of the expenditures 

being planned by the members opposite arising from . . . they 

previously had to be accounted for under The Fuel Tax 

Accountability Act. 

 

What it does is establishes legislative authority to deduct new or 

unforeseen expenditures, if I can quote from the minister‟s 

second reading speech: “. . . new or unforeseen expenditures 

undertaken through that Ministry which are not associated with 

highway investment, such as water and sewer infrastructure for 

the Regina global transportation hub.” 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, I guess I‟ve got three main points I‟d 

like to make in this debate this evening. The first is, that in 

terms of the principle of if you collect the tax on fuel, that it 

should be reinvested in the transportation infrastructure of the 

province. That‟s certainly not something we‟ve got a problem 

with on this side of the House. And in fact it builds upon that 

principle, builds upon legislation that we had brought in 

concerning The Fuel Tax Accountability Act and again, the idea 

that if the tax is collected concerning transportation initiatives, 

that it should be expended upon the infrastructure that comes 

along with it. 

 



5290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Now I know that members opposite have a lot of fancy things to 

say on that score over the years, but it was in fact our 

government, then the NDP Lorne Calvert government, that 

brought that legislation in and which, which you know made 

some very significant investments flowing from that into the 

infrastructure of the province. 

 

The second point I‟d like to make in this debate, Mr. Speaker, 

concerns the global transportation hub and just a few 

observations on that score. It‟s interesting that tonight‟s . . . 

We‟ve seen different members from the Manitoba legislature 

here tonight. We know that they are very involved in a global 

transportation hub initiative. We know that the transportation 

business is hugely competitive. And certainly the work that had 

gone into the global transportation hub plant east of Regina, out 

by Pense, certainly the previous government had a lot to do 

with that, working in partnership with organizations like the 

then Regina REDA [regional economic development authority] 

and the city of Regina. 

 

It‟s interesting, as that work has progressed after the election, 

that one of the measures that members opposite have seen fit to 

undertake is to create a Treasury Board Crown for the global 

transportation hub. And of course this is a government that, 

when they were in opposition, liked to list off the multitude of 

Crowns and decry this as some kind of a plot of some kind of 

red-baiting stripe, Mr. Speaker. But of course it‟s interesting. I 

guess you can file it under the measures that, you know, they 

decried in opposition, but it turns out these are the tools of 

public policy. They seized upon them in government, as 

perhaps the Finance minister might say. 

 

Anyway there is an opposition perspective and then a 

government perspective. I hope I‟m correctly quoting the 

Finance minister. Anyway one of the government perspectives 

has seen the members opposite create a Treasury Board Crown 

to oversee the global transportation hub project. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, in and of itself we don‟t see anything wrong with that. 

That‟s one of the tools in the public policy tool kit that you have 

at your disposal as a government, so in and of itself we don‟t 

see anything bad with that. 

 

Where we will be watching, Mr. Speaker, is regarding the way 

that these vehicles are used to add to debt and to amortize 

things over a greater period of time and particularly as regards 

to the changes that have been made to accounting principles by 

this government opposite in the budget that we‟re currently 

debating the estimates for in this Assembly through committee. 

 

So again the global transportation hub, we think it‟s a good 

project. We‟d certainly invested a fair amount of time, effort 

and resources into it. It‟s something that we hope to see 

succeed. It‟s something that again we‟ll be watching the 

expenditure fairly closely, and we‟ll be watching the 

administration of that project very closely, and it‟s 

self-financing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well now I hear 

the member from Cypress Hills, another person who has 

perhaps undergone something of a conversion on the road to 

Damascus in terms of the virtues of Crown corporations. I don‟t 

know that he‟s seen the light as such, but he is certainly 

chairing this initiative for the provincial government. And again 

we wish him well in the success of this initiative, but we‟ll be 

watching his performance very closely and his expenditures 

very closely as they roll this into a Treasury Board Crown, 

again something that they used to decry to no end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Treasury Board Crowns, you know, there was the opposition 

perspective. Now there‟s the government perspective, and it‟s 

fine and good with the members opposite. 

 

The last point, you know, to recap off the top here or to sum up 

off the top here, Mr. Speaker, the last point concerns the 

manner in which this changes the accounting that had been 

involved in The Fuel Tax Accountability Act. And again that 

concerns the deduction of expenditures that previously had been 

counted in in The Fuel Tax Accountability Act and the ability to 

deduct them out through regulations. 

 

So again on the face of it, you know, making a point around the 

water and sewer infrastructure for the Regina global 

transportation hub, that‟s certainly one thing, Mr. Speaker. But 

again we‟ve seen the pattern with this government where it can 

seem fairly innocuous off the top, but the practice is sometimes 

something else altogether.  

 

So again creating the global transportation hub as a Treasury 

Board Crown and again, removing that from the General 

Revenue Fund realm, changing the definition of what must be 

expended or accounted for under The Fuel Tax Accountability 

Act, we find that to be of interest as well, Mr. Speaker, because 

of course in terms of the manner in which they‟ve accounted for 

these things in other parts of the budget, they‟ve changed it so 

they can amortize it over a greater number of years. And 

they‟ve certainly moved more emphasis upon the Crown 

corporations and the tendency to use them as a cash machine, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So you know, first point, Treasury Board Crown, now good. 

We find that kind of interesting. The other point, that‟s if you 

collect the tax on fuel in terms of travel and transportation in 

this province, that it should be finding its way back into the 

travel infrastructure in this province, we find no problem with 

that. 

 

But the third point, in terms of what is deducted and removed 

from the accounting that has to take place in terms of the 

accountability that was brought into place with The Fuel Tax 

Accountability Act and the report that is filed by that piece of 

legislation with the . . . in the public accounts of this province, 

we‟ll be watching very closely to see that this, in fact the 

proclaimed intent lives up to the way that it‟s actually practised. 

Because again, Mr. Speaker, what these members opposite 

preach oftentimes doesn‟t measure up to the practice in the 

streets. 

 

So on the face of it, if this is something that helps to ensure that 

the fuel tax is expended upon the roads, fair enough. If it‟s 

something that advances the cause of the global transportation 

hub, again fair enough. And if this is something that provides 

for a more accurate accounting of expenditures directly related 

to the infrastructure that is required to promote transportation in 

this province and brings that more correctly in line, again fair 

enough. But you stack those points alongside the practice of this 

government in terms of the fiscal mismanagement, in terms of 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5291 

saying one thing and doing another, alongside the fact that, you 

know, that they‟ve had an opposition perspective — and I‟m 

not just talking about a sort of garden variety, you know, calmly 

stated opposition perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I haven‟t been here as long as certainly yourself has as Speaker, 

not nearly as long, but I have been here a number of years now, 

and I can recall very well the members in opposition decrying 

all these Crown corporations that were choking the 

entrepreneurial spirit of the province of Saskatchewan and what 

a terrible thing this was. And, you know, it‟d be references to 

1932 and the Regina Manifesto and on and on and on with the 

blather, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that when you‟re a government, 

there are a number of public policy tools that you have, and a 

Treasury Board Crown is one of them. So it‟s no small irony of 

course that they‟ve seized upon using a Treasury Board Crown 

to advance the cause of the global transportation hub. 

 

So you know, observing the ironies aside, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll be 

watching very closely for the accountability. We‟ll be watching 

very closely to see that this isn‟t used as some kind of dodge to 

deduct things out of the accountability of The Fuel Tax 

Accountability Act and the reporting attached thereto. So that 

when they say that it‟s primarily about the water and sewer 

infrastructure for the Regina global transportation hub being 

deducted out, that‟s one thing. But of course this has moved 

into . . . it establishes the legislative authority and the 

regulations for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, any time they can move things out of the purview of 

this Assembly and out of the plain view of the public and the 

opposition being able to demand scrutiny and to try and bring 

about accountability, that gives us pause for concern, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think it should give the people of Saskatchewan 

pause for concern that things are moved from the legislative 

purview into the regulatory purview where it can be done in 

secret in cabinet, and the only way the people can get a crack at 

it later is when these things come out in orders-in-councils as 

they are reported after the fact. 

 

So again the members opposite in opposition, they demanded 

accountability in terms of the expenditure. If it‟s collected on 

the roads and on transportation for the fuel tax, it should be 

expended on the infrastructure. That‟s the principle that we 

agree with, and it‟s enshrined in legislation. You know, is there 

an argument to be made that there are certain expenditures that 

perhaps do not properly fall under that? That‟s not an 

unreasonable argument, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s something that, 

you know, when you see a reasonable argument being made by 

people that are proved to be patently unreasonable and for the 

most part untrustworthy in terms of the way these decisions are 

proclaimed on the one hand and carried out on the other, both in 

terms of the things they try to deduct out via regulations and the 

things that they try to expense in terms of the transportation hub 

as a Treasury Board Crown, we‟ll be watching that very 

closely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I don‟t think there‟s much more to be said on this 

Bill at this particular stage of its evolution or its progress 

through the House, Mr. Speaker. S o at this time I would move 

this Bill onto committee and perhaps allow the opposition . . . 

Deputy House Leader a chance to do his thing. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 120, 

The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 120, The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to 

the Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

at this time I move that the House do now adjourn to go to 

committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that the Assembly 

adjourn to move into committees. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to order, this Assembly stands 

adjourned until Monday morning at 8 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 19:38.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5279 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5283 

 Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5285 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5287 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5289 

 Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5289 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5291 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


