




















































Hansard: October 28, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 2A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5679 

 October 28, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Over 

the last number of years, the government has undertaken an 

international engagement project and process where various 

arms of government are attempting to engage the rest of the 

world with our province on an economic standpoint and from a 

diplomatic standpoint as well. 

 

Part of that process has involved inviting members of the 

diplomatic corps in our country, and the consular corps, to the 

Throne Speech and then coordinating tours around that Speech 

from the Throne day, around that week of activities in the 

province. And we had a great delegation to the province. Again 

I‟d like to introduce some of them through you and to you to 

members who are here, and then we‟re going to also reference 

those who had to leave already but who were here yesterday for 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s an honour for me to introduce, seated on 

the floor of the Assembly behind the bar today, the following 

members of the diplomatic and consular corps from Canada. 

 

Bernadette Brown, consul general of Switzerland in Toronto 

and her husband, Mr. Brown, has joined us. Welcome. 

Jean-Charles Bou, consul of France in Calgary; Miguel 

Sandoval Tovar, consul of Mexico in Calgary, and his wife; 

Mohammed Mian, first secretary commercial for Bangladesh; 

Ramon Fosado, consul of Mexico, in Calgary as well; Heather 

Goranson, honorary consul of Norway. I guess she couldn‟t join 

us today. As well as, we had one more . . . Well no, we have 

Larry Schneider, an honorary consul of Mexico and obviously 

no stranger to anybody in this Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, there were a number who had to leave 

due to other meetings and other obligations. I‟d like to reference 

them, if I can, for the record. Yesterday we were joined by as 

well by His Excellency, Richard Turkson, the high 

commissioner from the Republic of Ghana, as well as Her 

Excellency, Miriam Ziv, ambassador of Israel in Ottawa; Dr. 

Chidambaram, principal scientific adviser to the prime minister 

of India; Johannes Verloed, consul general of the Netherlands 

in Vancouver; Harlan Hakim, acting consul general of 

Indonesia in Toronto; Mr. Abul Asri Siregar, assistant to the 

consul general of Indonesia in Toronto. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know members will want to join with me in 

welcoming these guests to the Legislative Assembly today and 

honour their service to their respective countries in the consular 

corps and the diplomatic corps here in Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with our 

Premier in welcoming the diplomatic corps here to the 

Assembly. I also, Mr. Speaker, would like to thank the 

Lieutenant Governor for the wonderful reception that we had 

last night. A number of the delegates here today, we had great 

conversations and look forward to working with you. 

 

Obviously as the Premier says, and I want to reiterate, 

Saskatchewan‟s future really is about working with countries 

around the world. You represent a good component of that. Just 

remember that your words and work that you do every day is 

important to Saskatchewan. And I welcome you here to the 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, I‟d like to recognize 

Terry Parker, executive director of the Building Trades here 

who does extremely hard work for the working people of this 

province, particularly in the construction industry. So I‟d ask all 

members to welcome Mr. Parker to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming Mr. Parker here. I met with him 

shortly after assuming responsibility for the Labour portfolio 

and look forward to a productive relationship in that area, and 

valued the input and advice that was given and would like to 

welcome him to the legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

the rest of the members of the legislature, I‟d like to introduce 

someone in your gallery and that would be my constituency 

assistant, Mary Anne Telfer. She‟s been there and a big part of 

my organization, and thank you very much. And a pleasure to 

have her here because she listens every day and loves question 

period, and today she‟s here to see it live. So thanks for being 

here, Mary Anne. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan to 

present a petition in regards to the deteriorating condition of our 

highways and the safety conditions of those highways too. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 



5680 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Indian Head and Fort Qu‟Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. I‟d like to point out that the income gap between 

the rich and poor continues to grow and now one in five 

children in Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we 

know when government cuts programs, it‟s often supports for 

social services that are cut first. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of Regina, 

Saskatoon, Melfort, Naicam, Eastend, Lanigan, and Guernsey 

and Humboldt. And I have many more throughout the session to 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new Throne 

Speech and still no fix to the grad retention program. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina and the community of Lumsden. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present a petition with respect to the potash industry, 

considering that Saskatchewan has over half of the world‟s 

supply, that Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan are 

the owners of this strategic resource, and deserve to receive the 

maximum benefit from its development, mining, and 

processing. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to publicly demand 

the following terms and conditions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan of any foreign owners bidding to take 

over PCS: to ensure Saskatchewan people receive the 

maximum benefit, a golden share and preferred shares so 

that the public participates in both the corporation‟s future 

decision making and its profitability; public guarantees on 

a strengthened head office presence; support for Canpotex 

and long-term targets for potash production and 

employment; Saskatchewan representation on the board of 

directors; public agreements to ensure no loss of royalties; 

public commitments to meet world-class standards of 

corporate and social responsibility; and an independent 

potash review commission with the power to monitor and 

enforce all of these terms and conditions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks from Langham 

and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Reading and receiving petitions. Did you 

have a petition? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

The Speaker: — Oh, sorry about that. The member from 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of residents, citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are hugely concerned with the financial 

mismanagement of the Sask Party government. They allude to 

the two consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of dollars of 

debt growth, and the historic opportunity for which the Sask 

Party was provided with well over $2 billion in surplus, 

booming resource sector and thus revenues, and where that‟s all 

gone. The fiscal trend line is of concern and negative both to 

families and to communities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the member to go to the 

prayer, please. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by the good folks of Regina 

Rosemont. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in this 

House to bring attention to Breast Cancer Awareness Month. 

Many people across Saskatchewan have been impacted by 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5681 

breast cancer, one of the most common cancers among women. 

I can truly empathize with all of those families dealing with the 

loss of a loved one because I lost my best friend to breast cancer 

— my mother. 

 

We have lost too many mothers, grandmothers, daughters, 

sisters, and neighbours to this illness. It may have the power to 

take away a woman‟s health but it will never be strong enough 

to take away her heart, her spirit, and her love. We are making 

progress in the fight against this illness. Early detection, 

effective treatment, innovative research, and unconquerable 

spirits are turning the tide in the battle against breast cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today like every day, I want to remember my 

mother. I want to remember all of the brave women who have 

been touched by breast cancer. Today we will honour them and 

honour their courage. Together we will stand united against this 

terrible illness because we are ready to hope together, to pray 

together, to endure together, and to survive together. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Agriculture Month in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. October is 

Agriculture Month in Saskatchewan. While other revenue 

generators like potash, uranium, oil, and gas become the focus 

of our economy in recent years, agriculture remains our 

province‟s backbone. Not only does agriculture support 

Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan agribusinesses support the 

world by supplying producers with the goods and services they 

need to succeed. 

 

This year has been a difficult year. The wet weather made 

seeding fall behind in all areas of the province and utterly 

impossible in some. The summer of storms drowned out some 

crops, but through it all our producers showed their 

Saskatchewan resolve and determination. Thankfully the 

weather co-operated with our producers in the fall and there was 

just enough time to get most of the crop off. 

 

The producers of Saskatchewan put in a lot of long, hard hours, 

days, and weeks during seeding, haying, harvest, spraying, and 

calving seasons. These people embody the spirit of 

Saskatchewan. Their dedication to the land and livestock are 

among the many reasons why our province continues to move 

forward. 

 

I‟m proud to say that many of the constituents of Thunder 

Creek are agricultural producers. I‟m honoured to be able to 

represent them in this legislature and truly honoured to call 

many of them my friends. Even though the members opposite 

ignored rural Saskatchewan when they were in government, I 

ask that all members join me in expressing appreciation to the 

hard-working men and women who put food on the table for all 

Saskatchewan families and contribute so mightily to our 

dynamic economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

Political Wardrobe 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, those who put style before 

substance like to say that the clothes make the man. And 

judging from some of the items in his political wardrobe, it 

certainly seems that this philosophy suits the Premier to a T. 

 

Speaking of suits, Mr. Speaker, the Premier donned a special 

one last June to convince everyone he was an action hero. 

Dressed like George Bush on the deck of an aircraft carrier, he 

was christened premier jumpsuit. It wasn‟t his first time 

dressing up as a real right winger, Mr. Speaker. No, he‟s been 

trying so hard to fill the shoes of Grant Devine that he even 

earned himself the name captain lawsuit when he and his super 

Sask Party friends transformed themselves into Progressive 

Conservatives so that they could hold on to $3 million in the PC 

[Progressive Conservative] trust fund cache. 

 

Now just in time for Halloween comes his latest costume, Mr. 

Speaker — Captain Canada. With a maple leaf for a cape 

billowing in the hot air, the Premier stands proudly in his 

potash-pink tights, posing as defender of Saskatchewan‟s 

resource rights. Just one problem, Mr. Speaker. Moments 

before he donned his historic costume, he was dressed as an 

ill-mannered shakedown artist, ready to sell out Saskatchewan‟s 

thousand-year interest in potash for $1 billion from BHP that 

would help him leap over next year‟s election in a single 

payout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have taken the 

measure of this costumed impersonator and they now know he‟s 

cut from the same cloth as the emperor who has no clothes. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Dalmeny Fire Chief Honoured 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

are unsung heroes in all of our constituencies, and every once in 

a while we have the opportunity to recognize amazing men and 

women who give so much back to their neighbours and local 

communities. And it‟s an honour for me to be able to do just 

that today. 

 

Rick Elder is the fire chief for the town of Dalmeny. Rick was 

recently named one of the top 15 firefighters in Canada by 

Reader’s Digest. Firefighters were chosen for this recognition 

based on their courage, caring, and community involvement. 

His story can be found in October‟s issue. 

 

Dalmeny is about half an hour from Saskatoon and the nearest 

hospital. Having dedicated and experienced first responders is 

so important for many of our rural communities. Seeing the 

need in Dalmeny, in 1991 Rick, along with his wife Joanne and 

other volunteers, became those very first, first responders. 

 

Rick‟s position as fire chief is as a volunteer. His dedication to 

his community goes well beyond fighting fires. Upon seeing the 

need for better equipment for grass and field fires, Rick initiated 

the purchase of specialized equipment. He also steps up to help 

with community events and can usually be found at local 

community fundraisers. Rick works full-time in the energy 



5682 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

sector, yet still finds time to work part-time, training others to 

be firefighters. 

 

It is people like Rick who make communities in Saskatchewan 

such great places to live. Congratulations to Rick on being 

named one of Canada‟s best, and thank you for your service to 

your community and to your province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, October is Breast Cancer 

Awareness Month, which presents an opportunity to empower 

both men and women to learn about breast cancer as well as pay 

tribute to past victims of the disease. 

 

On October 3rd, the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 

Regina Rosemont, and I joined Regina participants in the 19th 

annual Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation CIBC Run for the 

Cure. 

 

This event had a record participation with 2,277 participants as 

well as having raised record funds to the total of $448,000. 

Nationally there were 170,000 participants in 60 communities, 

raising a record-breaking total of $33 million. The monies 

raised provide much needed funding which is directed towards 

renowned researchers and clinicians who are contributing to 

groundbreaking progress in breast cancer prevention, diagnosis, 

treatment, and care. 

 

The Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation was founded in 1986 

by a group of volunteers and has become the leading national 

volunteer-led organization in Canada, and has invested $230 

million since its inception to the dedication of creating a future 

without breast cancer. Breast cancer continues to be the most 

frequently diagnosed cancer amongst Canadian women and 

rates second for mortality. 

 

On average 445 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer 

every week, an increase of nine women per week from 2009. 

Over 50 per cent of breast cancers will be diagnosed in women 

between the ages of 50 and 69. In 2010, on average, 100 

Canadian women will die from breast cancer every week. 

 

I would like to ask my colleagues to join with me in 

congratulating the tremendous ongoing efforts of Saskatchewan 

people to protect one of our most precious human resources, 

that being the health of Saskatchewan‟s women. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Statement of Thanks 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This marks my first 

member‟s statement and I would like to take this opportunity to 

thank all those who helped me become the elected 

representative for the good people of Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

First I would like to thank my family for their great sacrifices 

from the day that I sat on the public school board to my seven 

years on city council, and particularly my wife, Christine. Their 

support and inspiration was integral to the success of the 

campaign and my career, and I know that I can continue to 

count on their support as we embark on our new endeavours. 

 

I‟d also like to thank my campaign team. Their dedication and 

wise decisions led to a well-executed campaign. Our success on 

election day is owed to all those who came to volunteer. Their 

work on the doorsteps of Saskatoon Northwest demonstrated 

the optimism that defines today‟s Saskatchewan. 

 

I‟d also like to thank the other candidates for their efforts. By 

contesting this by-election, they showed that democracy is well 

and alive within Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the good people of 

Saskatoon Northwest for giving me the opportunity to represent 

them in this legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Autism Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, October is Autism Awareness 

Month. I‟m going to read several excerpts from a letter that 

appeared in The StarPhoenix October 22nd from Tim Verklan 

on behalf of the board of Saskatchewan Families for Effective 

Autism Treatment, or SaskFEAT. I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan may bill itself as the “Land of Living 

Skies,” but across Canada this province continues to be 

known as “The Autism Wasteland.” 

 

It sounds impressive when you hear about all the money 

being put into autism and all the programs the government 

is running, but ask families across Saskatchewan about 

how well this money is being spent. 

 

People with ASD deserve a provincial autism strategy that 

is supported by evidence-based and proven methodologies. 

It is needed right now. 

 

They shouldn‟t have to settle for inadequate services 

provided by professionals who have no working 

knowledge or experience of this disability and who are 

going to “learn as they go.” 

 

SASKFEAT maintains that until adequate programs are 

available, the money should be provided directly to the 

families so they can hire professional staff. 

 

Our children do not have time to waste while valuable 

dollars are spent creating expensive, ineffective services 

that aren‟t based on evidence and research. Our children 

need the help of proven therapies before they become 

another sad statistic lost in Autism Wasteland. 

 

SASKFEAT is demanding immediate individualized 

funding that is not income tested, until an acceptable and 

proven autism strategy is in place . . . Our families have 

been waiting long enough. 

 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5683 

Mr. Speaker, enough said. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question‟s to the 

Premier, and it deals with an issue that we‟ll be discussing later 

in the day, dealing with potash and the control of potash 

resource in the province of Saskatchewan given the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP [New Democratic Party] opposition 

wrote to Minister Clement. And I want to quote from the letter 

that we wrote and sent to him on August 26th: “I am writing to 

ask for public assurances that the Government of Canada will 

not approve any takeover of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan by a foreign-owned company.” 

 

Could the Premier today admit that the lateness of this debate 

here in the Assembly does not send as strong a message to the 

Government of Canada as it would have if we had recalled the 

legislature and passed this motion six weeks ago? Can he give 

his assurance today that, in passing this motion, he will travel to 

Ottawa to explain to the Prime Minister and other leaders why 

it‟s important that this strategic resource not be sold off to a 

foreign entity today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say, 

through you to the member opposite, a thank you to him and to 

his party for their support of the position of the Government of 

Saskatchewan as we laid out Thursday last. Mr. Speaker, I can 

report to the House some new developments this morning. I can 

report that after a conversation with . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite and 

members on this side of this House will welcome the news that 

in a conversation this morning with Premier Jean Charest, he 

has confirmed that, in addition to support from Premier 

Stelmach in the province of Alberta, Saskatchewan can also 

expect the support of the province of Quebec with respect to our 

position with the federal government. And so that‟s important 

news. 

 

With respect to the debate that will happen a little bit later on 

this day, I think a show of consensus and unanimity is 

important, that this deal — for the various reasons the 

government has laid out with respect to jobs and investment, 

with respect to revenue for the province and the Dominion of 

Canada, and with respect to the strategic position we desire for 

our province and Canada and the world — that the right answer 

for this deal today is no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that 

Premier Stelmach from Alberta is supporting the position of the 

province of Saskatchewan and the position the NDP opposition 

have had for now two months. But I want to ask the Premier 

another question. Given the story on the front page of the 

Leader-Post today that the Government of Saskatchewan is in 

secret meetings . . . And I want to quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

A group of Saskatchewan First Nations is collaborating 

with merchant banks, pension funds and Asian investors to 

prepare a multibillion-dollar bid to compete with BHP . . . 

[for a] proposed takeover of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc. 

 

Given the fact that we‟re moving an unanimous motion today to 

stop foreign investment in our resource, how is it that the 

Premier and his ministers are in secret meetings today and in 

the past week to sell off the Potash Corporation to foreign 

interests from Asia? How does that work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Leader of the Opposition‟s contention couldn‟t be farther from 

the truth. We have said on a number of occasions that if people 

want to come forward with competing bids, we‟d be happy to 

talk to them. We had discussions with BHP. We had 

discussions with PotashCorp. There was all kinds . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members to 

allow the minister to respond to the question from the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — We had meetings with a number of people, 

Mr. Speaker — representatives from BHP, from Potash 

Corporation. We indicated that there was lots of media reports 

that there was maybe other bidders out there. We were unaware 

of them until last week when a group of First Nations 

representatives came forward and said that they may be 

considering putting a bid together with respect to this. We were 

happy to say to them, certainly we‟ll take your meeting if you 

have something to contribute to this debate or something to 

contribute in the way of bid. We‟d be happy to welcome the bid 

from them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I find it strange indeed that 

at a very time that the Premier is giving a speech, Captain 

Canada speech to the chamber of commerce in Regina, how his 

response to a foreign takeover of the Potash Corporation is no, 

that he went all the way from the free enterpriser, the Kevin 

O‟Leary style of Wild West, open for business, to a social 

democrat position of just say no, that at the very same time, 

senior ministers of his government were meeting in secret with 

Asian investors about foreign takeover of that corporation. Can 

the Premier please square this circle and explain how that works 

and fits with his speech? 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, I would ask 



5684 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

that members placing the question refer to individuals by their 

proper name and title. I recognize the Minister for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

find it very interesting that the Leader of the Opposition‟s 

position is that we should not meet with leaders of the First 

Nations here in Saskatchewan. That would seem a very, very 

strange position. So when we get a call from leaders of First 

Nations here in Saskatchewan, we are always happy to take that 

call, always listening to the concerns that they have and any 

proposals that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. There are a few members 

on the opposition side that are greatly interfering with the 

ability of other members to hear the response. I recognize the 

Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we will meet with 

First Nations leaders on this topic or any other topic. That 

would be a very responsible position. That is the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I also find it interesting that the Leader of the Opposition 

would say we shouldn‟t be taking these kinds of meetings 

when, after he laid out his position, he met with officials of 

BHP. Somehow or another that‟s acceptable to the NDP, but 

it‟s not okay if the government, the duly elected government, 

meet with First Nations leaders here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what is clear from that 

minister is that there is negotiations going on at the present time 

that includes Asian investors, that includes Asian investors. 

This is very different than duty to consult with First Nations, 

that I never saw much of that going on when 3.5 million acres 

of habitat land was being sold. Or as that minister says when it 

comes to resource revenue sharing, he says absolutely no. 

That‟s what he says. 

 

I find it interesting when it comes to the selling of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan to Asian investors, who will be 

the people putting the money up, that he and the Premier have 

time to meet. But the also hypocrisy of holding a meeting with 

the chamber of commerce and saying no, while at the same time 

doing a backroom deal, how does the Premier square that? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me be very clear. There are 

no negotiations with any parties interested in a takeover of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan from the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s perspective, period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have said we will meet with the companies 

involved, and we have. We‟ve met with BHP. We‟ve met with 

Potash Corp of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that 

when the First Nations come forward and say, look, there might 

be an interest on their part together with other partners, we‟re 

going to take that meeting and hear from them what that 

proposal is. 

 

There‟s no negotiations. There‟s only one bid currently before 

the people of Canada, currently for consideration in this 

legislature. It‟s the BHP takeover bid, a hostile takeover bid of 

PotashCorp. The answer from the Government of Saskatchewan 

at this time is a respectful no, and we hope the opposition joins 

us in that position. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Funding for Health Regions 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 2010 budget 

cycle, health regions asked for a 7 per cent increase in funding 

to simply maintain the health services that they currently 

provide. And they didn‟t get it. They got half. When health 

regions are starved of money, two things happen. One, health 

care services have to be cut. And two, the people that suffer are 

the people of Saskatchewan who need those services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister forcing Saskatchewan families 

to accept decreasing health services because of his 

government‟s failure to properly fund health districts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the budget for the health 

regions this year for all the Department of Health, the Ministry 

of Health, is $4.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, a record amount of 

spending on health care in this province never seen before. Mr. 

Speaker, we increased the amount of spending in health, in the 

Health ministry by $127 million this year, Mr. Speaker — $127 

million increased spending this year over last year. That being 

said, Mr. Speaker, health regions are looking at their budgets. 

They‟re making decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we have said from the outset is that we do not want to 

see any patient delivery care affected, Mr. Speaker. There are 

efficiencies to be found, and health regions are finding those 

efficiencies — efficiencies on overtime, efficiencies on 

premium time and on sick leave, Mr. Speaker. Health regions 

are finding those efficiencies. We‟ve asked them to do it. We‟ve 

asked them not to affect front-line care, and I think the health 

regions throughout the province are doing a marvellous job. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The minister has really been in la-la land most 

of last year, and now he continues to stay there. This summer I 

toured Saskatchewan visiting many, many, many communities, 

and they told me in those communities, thousands of people 

told me that health care in this province has gotten worse under 

the Sask Party. 

 

Communities are being forced to spend hundreds of thousands 

of dollars of municipal tax money recruiting doctors. Seniors 

are being sent hours away from their families and spouses as 

long-term care beds close. And people are having to choose 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5685 

between lab services and home care services — all because of 

the Sask Party‟s failure to properly fund health regions. 

 

To the minister: why are Saskatchewan people being forced to 

suffer under a Sask Party government? What happened to 

putting the patient first? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I am very aware that the 

member opposite did a large tour of the province. In fact I saw a 

map of all the facilities that she went and visited. I would say 

that, after looking at that map, she‟s put on many miles through 

this past summer, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and I would just 

say that if, in the old Saskatchewan under the NDP, they put a 

quarter of that much attention into rural Saskatchewan that it 

wouldn‟t have been in the mess it was when we took over, Mr. 

Speaker. If they would have put a quarter of the amount of 

money into rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that they expect 

everybody else to do, it wouldn‟t be in the mess that they left it 

in. 

 

We are looking at many of the facilities around the province, 

whether it‟s long-term care, whether it‟s acute care facilities, 

Mr. Speaker, and improving those services and improving those 

facilities, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to physician recruitment, 

we‟re going a long ways on that front too. There are isolated 

pockets, Mr. Speaker, that there are issues, and I‟m glad to say 

that we‟ve got strong MLAs on our side that represent those 

communities that make sure that I‟m informed. Unfortunately 

they would have no rural representation and won‟t for a very 

long time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I hope the minister didn‟t spend much money 

while he was stalking me over the summer. 

 

In July the Government House Leader was asked about three 

long-term care beds and two respite beds that were being closed 

at Wawota‟s Deer View Lodge in his own constituency. His 

answer was, “People complained about highways and now 

they‟re complaining about these beds. Which do they want — 

highways or health care?” Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier‟s 

position: Saskatchewan people need to choose between 

highways and health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

Assembly and the province of Saskatchewan in no way have I 

ever or will I ever stalk that member. Mr. Speaker, the Sun 

Country Health Region has decided to look at the bed allocation 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I realize that Sun 

Country are looking at their long-term bed allocation, and in 

Wawota they are looking at the possibility of discontinuing 

three long-term care beds in that health region. And I realize 

that is a major impact for that community. I‟ve had the 

opportunity to meet with Wawota and listen to their concerns 

directly, as well as the member from Cannington has raised 

their concerns on a number of occasions to me, Mr. Speaker. 

But I find it very curious that that member would be so irate 

over a possibility of three bed closures when under her watch 

52 hospitals closed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister rode on those tired, 

old answers last year. I guess he‟s going to continue that, the 

same thing this year. That‟s all he‟s got. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier cut the health care budget which 

caused cuts to health care services. Now he‟s promising 

everyone in his Throne Speech that new health care spending is 

coming. As usual people are getting a mixed message from the 

Premier and the Sask Party government. 

 

To the minister: given that the government is in a deficit and 

health regions are forced to cut services, where is the promised 

money coming from? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I realize again that that 

member, through information that we‟ve received from the 

health region, has done a broad tour of the facilities around 

Saskatchewan. I believe there is about 52 facilities that that 

member visited, Mr. Speaker, and certainly had a look and 

talked to staff and had a look at the facilities. I want to tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, and the rest of the province, that the last time an 

NDP Health critic visited 52 hospitals in rural Saskatchewan, 

less than a year later they were all closed. Rural Saskatchewan 

will never fall for that again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Fiscal Management 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Fraser Institute 

recently released a report card on the fiscal performance of 

Canada‟s premiers. The National Post had this to say about out 

Premier‟s grade for runaway spending. I quote, “Saskatchewan 

Premier Brad Wall rolled up a pathetic 22.9.” Under the 

Premier, Saskatchewan is occupying a position of national 

shame as fiscal managers, called pathetic by national media. 

This is an embarrassing departure for our proud province, and it 

comes with negative consequences for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

My question: why isn‟t the Sask Party government ashamed of 

this record, this negative national spotlight, and why are they 

not laying out a plan to improve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an opportunity to stand in this 



5686 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

Assembly as the Minister of Finance and respond to the 

comments of the member opposite. Mr. Speaker, on Monday 

and Tuesday of this week I had the opportunity to be in Toronto 

and to visit with the financial institutions that do business in the 

province of Saskatchewan — the ones that manage the 

investment of the province and look at our capital growth. Mr. 

Speaker, there is tremendous optimism in everyone across this 

country, in this province, except the member opposite and the 

NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been tremendous gains in this province 

of Saskatchewan. We have seen the debt of this province go 

from over $6.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, down to 4.1 — Mr. 

Speaker, record, record debt reduction that the people of 

Saskatchewan appreciate and look forward to continued fiscal 

management by this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a joke, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

speaks of credit rating agencies. What we know is we‟re not 

getting a credit rating upgrade this year. What we know, 

yesterday in the Throne Speech, in the rotunda, is business 

leaders, financial officials, laughing at the statement that that 

Premier is still trying to mislead the public with, Mr. Speaker. 

What we know is that just like health care . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask members to be 

careful in the words they use and how they respond and direct it 

towards members. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, just like on health care, 

just like on potash, this government is simply not credible and 

simply not trustworthy. Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s review a few facts. That government inherited over $2.3 

billion of surplus from the previous NDP administration and a 

booming resource revenue sector, Mr. Speaker. Through 

reckless spending and misplaced priorities, they have turned 

that surplus into deficit of at least $1.3 billion over the past two 

years of consecutive deficit budgets. Now even the Fraser 

Institute and the National Post are recognizing this 

government‟s pathetic track record on fiscal management with 

the shameful grade of 22.9 out of 100, Mr. Speaker. Now I 

know the Sask Party government isn‟t very good with numbers, 

Mr. Speaker, so let me be very clear: 22.9 out of 100 is a 

terrible grade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is this: is the Sask Party government really so 

arrogant that it refuses to acknowledge its blunders? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to that member opposite ask questions 

last year, questions where material that was delivered just didn‟t 

seem to be as accurate as it should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to tell you exactly where the NDP left 

this province in November of 2007. Mr. Speaker, the debt, the 

GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt in November of ‟07 was . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

hope that the member wants to understand the numbers and will 

listen, wants to listen. The GRF debt, Mr. Speaker, in 

November of ‟07 was $6.8 billion. Today it is $4.1 billion. Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s $2.7 billion reduction in debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fund, the Growth and Financial Security Fund, 

on November of ‟07 sat at $1.2 billion — 1.2, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite stretches that to well over $2 billion. Mr. 

Speaker, let‟s be factually correct — $1.2 billion dollars in 

November of ‟07. Today, Mr. Speaker, today, Mr. Speaker, on 

March the 31st, 2010 — member has seen the public accounts 

document — that number is $958 million. Mr. Speaker, an 

improvement in the province of Saskatchewan of over $2.1 

billion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sure, Mr. Speaker, and the Fraser 

Institute puts that government at the bottom of the heap with 

premiers of New Brunswick and with premiers of Nova Scotia 

who have recently been ousted, maybe a little foreshadowing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Only the Sask Party government would stand in this House and 

pretend that a score of 22.9 per cent is a good grade. Arrogance. 

A percentage that is equally concerning — because the minister 

wants to talk about debt — a percentage that‟s equally 

concerning is 55 per cent. The provincial debt will increase by 

55 per cent by 2014. How much is that? That‟s $4.2 billion by 

2014. These are your documents, Mr. Minister, and you can‟t 

hide from it. 

 

To the minister, this is a major threat, a major threat to 

Saskatchewan‟s future. Why is there nothing in the Throne 

Speech to turn the Sask Party debt train and financial 

mismanagement around? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think there‟s one thing 

that I would agree with when the member opposite speaks about 

a threat. The threat to this province, the threat is from the NDP, 

and it was shown, Mr. Speaker, it was shown in spades in the 

by-election in Saskatoon Northwest. That‟s what the people of 

Saskatchewan believe about the NDP. 

 

We need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we move forward, we 

move forward with the continued debt reduction, that we move 

forward with the growth strategy. Mr. Speaker, over the last 

three years there‟s been a tremendous investment, Mr. Speaker, 

an investment in the province of Saskatchewan, a growth 

strategy. Now I understand that‟s a foreign term to the NDP — 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5687 

growth strategy — because for years they planned for decline, 

Mr. Speaker. Year after year, enrolment decline. Year after 

year, population decline. Year after year, drop in investments. 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re planning for a growth strategy. We‟re 

excited about it, and obviously the people in Saskatoon 

Northwest were just as excited. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 

from the truth, and the people of Saskatchewan know that full 

well. This government opposite knows what they were handed 

— one heck of a strong economy that had been developing for 

many, many years under the New Democrats. 

 

What has the record been under the Sask Party? Well it‟s one of 

static growth. In fact it was one of decline. Static growth, and 

I‟ll help you with the math over there, Minister. When you lose 

6.3 per cent in one year, in your GDP [gross domestic product], 

you‟re back to the same levels that you were in 2006, Mr. 

Speaker. And when we see ministers go out and try to say 

something opposite, Mr. Speaker, that creates huge concern for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

This is a government that inherited huge surplus. This is a 

government that has run two consecutive deficit budgets. We‟re 

concerned that it‟s going to be three out of four when the 

budget‟s tabled in the spring. This is a government that stripped 

over $1 billion out of our Crown corporation and that at every 

moment misrepresents the true state of our finances by piling up 

debt in our Crown corporations . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the member to go to the 

question, please. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Now we know this minister likes to 

deflect responsibility . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to go to the question, 

please. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — We know that the chief buck-passer that 

we have here . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the member to go directly 

to the question. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Minister, my question to the 

minister: as a new Finance minister here in Saskatchewan, why 

are you not correcting the reckless pattern that we see instead of 

defending a very embarrassing record? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let‟s clarify the position of 

Saskatchewan today. Population, Mr. Speaker, up 16,000 over 

last year. Saskatchewan unemployment rate in August, 2010, 

5.2 per cent — lowest, lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. CFIB 

[Canadian Federation of Independent Business] business 

owners in Saskatchewan, very optimistic about the overall 

confidence in the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, Potash Corporation and potash companies 

expecting to invest $12 billion in growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can sum it up by a quote in the Leader-Post on 

October 14th, 2010, from the Conference Board of Canada, and 

this is the quote, Mr. Speaker, about Saskatchewan‟s increase in 

numbers, and it says this: “These are numbers that you have to 

get used to. This is a new growth pattern we‟re seeing in the 

province.” That‟s what we‟re proud of, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re 

going to continue with that growth. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 

Committee on House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on House Services to report that it has 

considered committee membership changes, and I move: 

 

The 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the Table, in 

accordance with the Board of Internal Economy directive 22, 

the members‟ accountability and disclosure statements for the 

year ended March 31st, 2010; and in accordance with directive 

#23, I also table the financial statements and auditor‟s opinion 

statements for the New Democratic Party caucus and for the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus for the year ended March 31st, 

2010. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to be asking for 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion with respect to the 

hostile takeover bid of BHP Billiton of the Potash Corp of 

Saskatchewan. The wording of the motion has been distributed 

to all members. 

 

The Speaker: — If the Premier‟s going to be asking for leave, I 

ask the Premier to give a short reason as to why the motion and 

then just to read the motion for the record, please, before I call 



5688 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

the question. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Proposed Takeover of Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, early next week the federal 

government, through its Investment Canada investment review 

process, will make a decision with respect to this hostile 

takeover bid that will significantly impact on jobs, investment, 

revenue to the province and to the country, as well as our 

strategic position in the world as a major source of this 

important fertilizer. And it‟s important this Assembly deal with 

this matter at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to address a 

question regarding a potash issue in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I thank members for the leave to have this debate 

today. I know members opposite will want to join in. The 

Leader of the Opposition is going to want to join in. I think he 

wants to speak immediately after me and then there will be 

some other members perhaps on this side of the House. It is a 

chance for us to send a very clear signal from this Assembly 

and from the representatives of all of the people in 

Saskatchewan, of all of the regions of our province, as to the 

current hostile takeover bid of BHP Billiton on the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to, if I can, summarize a little bit of the 

provincial government‟s position in regards to this. Most of 

those details are getting more and more well known here in the 

province and across the country, and dare I say around the 

world, as a result of the coverage that we received from the 

speech on last Thursday at the Regina Chamber of Commerce 

meeting where I had the honour of laying out the government‟s 

position with respect to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government investment review process 

as it stands now . . . And by the way perhaps we should, all of 

us as Canadians, should consider that we should improve or add 

some value to the existing Investment Canada review process in 

the future. Maybe that‟s one good thing that will come from this 

particular hostile takeover bid. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can say that we have used the existing 

process. Notwithstanding changes that may happen down the 

road, we have used the existing measure that Investment 

Canada uses when they look at these deals and either approve 

them or deny them, or approve them with some conditions on 

those who are attempting the takeover. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most important measure in that 

investment review process for our analysis has been the 

question of net benefit. The federal government, through this 

process, asks an important question of these takeovers: is there 

a net benefit to the country? And we have said quite rightly, and 

I think it‟s been supported by federal officials, that in this case 

because 95 per cent plus of the economic activity of the 

takeover in question happens in our province, and because it 

involves a very precious and strategic provincial natural 

resource, we have said that the question of net benefit to 

Canada could be read as the net benefit to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re mindful of the mine that exists in New Brunswick and 

mindful of the fact that this is a proud asset of the entire 

country, the fact that Canada is home to 53 per cent of the 

known reserves of potash in the world. But with respect to the 

net benefit question, if it‟s not a net benefit to Saskatchewan in 

this case, our position has been it can‟t possibly, logically be a 

net benefit to the nation. 

 

So we‟ve looked at this net benefit question through three 

different measures, the first being investment and jobs in 

Saskatchewan. And maybe that‟s obviously for Saskatchewan 

families the most important measure for this deal. And again I 

won‟t get into all of the details but this takeover puts at risk 

Canpotex. 

 

I think one thing we can certainly credit to Mr. Kloppers and 

the officials at BHP Billiton is that they have been very 

straightforward about their MO [modus operandi] should they 

become the owner of these mines and these assets in terms of 

how they will operate them. They have said that their 

preference is to stand in front of their customers and take the 

price. They have said that they would like to move out of 

Canpotex. 

 

Now originally I think they were offering a much shorter 

transition period than they‟re now talking about, but one thing 

hasn‟t changed and that is their stated position that they‟d like 

to move away from Canpotex as a marketing arm. 

 

I note today, Mr. Speaker, and we received a communiqué 

today in the legislature; I received word from the Minister of 

Energy and it‟s available online, ironically enough that 

Canpotex today, just weeks after it had signed a 3 million tonne 

deal with China, has announced a similar sized deal — 3 

million tonnes I believe it is, 500 000 tonnes a year, price to be 

negotiated — with India. That news is out just this very day. So 

6 million tonnes of Saskatchewan potash — let‟s remember 

when we‟re talking about Canpotex we‟re talking about 

Saskatchewan potash — has been sold under contract over a 

number of the next number of years by this important agency. 

So it obviously offers some strategic value to the province, but 

right now we‟re focused on the jobs. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that BHP‟s [BHP Billiton] stated desire 

to move out of Canpotex means that Canpotex is at risk. Other 

companies have talked about continuing with its operation but it 

certainly puts those 80 or so jobs at risk in Saskatoon. We 

know, by the way, that those are great jobs, international 

investment jobs. And if you had a chance to go visit with the 

folks in Canpotex as a result of all of this . . . They said, by the 

way, it‟s the first time a premier had been to their offices. 

 

And we had a chance to meet all of the staff there. They‟re 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5689 

obviously pretty excited about their role in our provincial 

economy and the role for Canpotex in the world. And we got to 

see some of the logistics area of their operations and literally 

watched ships as they move around the world with 

Saskatchewan potash. And we know we don‟t want to lose 

those kinds of jobs in the city of Saskatoon or anyplace else in 

our province. 

 

We also are concerned, Mr. Speaker, that moving out of 

Canpotex, as BHP has said they would, will I think most 

assuredly put in jeopardy a major railcar upgrade near PCS 

[Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] Lanigan. Canpotex has 

highlighted — and I think they‟re close to making a decision on 

this, by the way — that they‟d like to make a $55 million 

investment in a railcar upgrade facility and that this would 

employ a number of jobs. There‟s person-years of construction 

and I think 20-plus full-time jobs that would be obviously at 

risk as a result of that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s something else that‟s very important 

in this jobs analysis, and it is the impact of a takeover. And the 

result is decline in price based on BHP‟s stated marketing 

strategy, the impact of a decline in price on the expansions 

currently under way in the province of Saskatchewan by the 

other two companies. 

 

Let‟s be very clear about what‟s going on in the province. And 

the Opposition Leader, I heard him say a few things from his 

seat in question period about questioning the future of these 

expansions. I‟m looking forward to finding out what he knows 

that the rest of us do not know. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, here‟s what we can surmise. If the price falls, 

as it will because of the model of BHP to run at full production, 

the expansions at Mosaic and Agrium are under way — with 

currently at $6 billion and hundreds of jobs in the province — 

are at risk. We know that. We know the potash expansion jobs 

shouldn‟t be at risk because BHP has said they would, if they 

were successful, continue with those. But we‟re talking 

specifically about the billions of dollars of expansion planned 

by Mosaic and Agrium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s important at this point to ask the question, 

why are those jobs being added to the economy today? Why are 

those 12 billions of dollars worth of investment occurring in 

mine expansion today? Mr. Speaker, it is a direct result of the 

royalty structure in the province of Saskatchewan, a royalty 

structure that recently has been renegotiated with the companies 

and the government through the Ministry of Energy and 

Resources. And the net result of this royalty structure is that 

there is an incentive for companies to invest. And the 

government made that decision with its eyes wide open. We 

knew . . . In fact it actually builds on a structure set up by the 

previous administration. They knew and we know that if you 

provide a tax incentive for expansion, there‟s a cost to that. It‟s 

going to impact on your revenue. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No matter who‟s doing it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the hon. member says no matter who‟s 

doing it. That‟s absolutely true, including if it‟s Mosaic and 

Agrium. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a decision we‟ve made as a province — 

that we want to create those jobs here, that we want to provide 

the right royalty environment for those companies to expand. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to get into a little bit in a moment 

the position that we‟ve heard expressed by members opposite as 

it relates to going together to Ottawa. And by the way, we think 

there‟s some merit here, but it‟s important we have a similar 

position because we know then that the BHP takeover is a 

potential threat to those jobs there. 

 

What about the issue of revenue? And obviously there‟s 

attendant investment with that. 

 

If I can just very, very briefly touch on the final point, I‟d say 

on employment, it relates to jobs in British Columbia. We know 

that port facilities at Prince Rupert and Vancouver are Canpotex 

facilities, and they employ Canadians. Not Saskatchewan 

people, but this is a Canadian issue, not just a Saskatchewan 

issue, as we know. 

 

We know that BHP Billiton has quite clearly said that their 

intent would be to establish their own port in Vancouver, 

Washington. And so again at least we have called into question 

the future of jobs in British Columbia, the future of more 

Canadian jobs. So is there a net benefit then to Canada or the 

province of Saskatchewan in terms of jobs? We would say no. 

No, far from it. We think there‟s a potential for a net loss of 

jobs. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Because BHP Billiton has said that Jansen Lake, the new mine 

that they propose there, the greenfield mine, is going to proceed 

regardless, you have to remove that from this analysis of net 

benefit then because those jobs are going to occur with or 

without the takeover. These jobs that are at risk are only at risk 

if the takeover proceeds. And in a meeting with Mr. Kloppers, 

he was very direct with the government. We asked him 

specifically, is the new mine going to go ahead regardless? His 

answer was yes. 

 

So the second measure we‟ve used for this net benefit analysis, 

Mr. Speaker, has been the issue of revenue. We had the 

Conference Board do a report. They‟ve highlighted, we think at 

the low end, about $3 billion in risk over 10 years. We think it‟s 

the low end of their analysis, Mr. Speaker, because they 

actually have said that they don‟t necessarily take Mr. Kloppers 

at face value when he has said to the world that his model is to 

stand in front of his customer and take the price and produce at 

full capacity. 

 

Producing at full capacity, according to the Conference Board 

analysis, causes a potential 60 per cent drop in price and a 

potential cost to the Government of Saskatchewan, to the 

people of Saskatchewan — who deserve a reasonable rent for 

this resource — of up to $6 billion over 10 years. So not a net 

benefit. We know that the corporate income tax is going to be 

reduced both to the country and to the province — not a net 

benefit. 

 

Remember, Mr. Speaker, here the measure is not whether this is 

net neutral or whether this takeover would be okay. The 



5690 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

measure the federal government prescribes is, is there a net 

benefit to the country, benefit to the province on jobs? The 

answer‟s no. On revenue, the answer‟s no. 

 

Finally and maybe and I think most importantly from a strategic 

position, Mr. Speaker — we cannot underscore this enough — 

that this is unlike any takeover in the history of takeovers 

around the world. Name another one where 50 per cent of a 

strategic world resource has been, at least indirectly, the subject 

of a takeover and been located not just in one country but in one 

subnational, a province within a country. And that‟s what we‟re 

talking about here today — 53 per cent of the potash, the known 

reserves in the province of Saskatchewan, 25 to 30 per cent at 

play in this deal to be managed then by a board of directors that 

is located in Melbourne, or Saskatoon; to be managed then by 

corporate officers who are predominantly Canadian and from 

Saskatchewan, or from elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a major strategic question that we need to 

answer here. In the last few days . . . And by the way, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to take care of one other question that‟s been 

circling around, and I know members in this House have 

wanted to get into this debate as well, this notion of the 

negotiations between the province and BHP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it became clear to BHP that the government 

was not seeing a net benefit to this some weeks ago — because 

I expressed that fact — BHP quite rightly and in a professional 

way came forward and said, how is it that we can address some 

of these issues? And so we‟ve been saying all along, we‟ve got 

issues around jobs, issues around revenue, and issues around 

strategic position. They began to offer some redress around the 

first two issues — jobs and revenue. Mr. Speaker, in the course 

of that discussion, there were specific ideas negotiated — not 

negotiated, but discussed. Things offered by BHP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that we couldn‟t come to any 

agreement even on those first two issues. Even had we been 

able to do that, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know how you overcome, I 

don‟t know how we overcome the third point — the strategic 

interest of Canada and Saskatchewan at play in this deal. 

 

And just to be clear, Mr. Mackenzie, who is the spokesman for 

BHP on this issue, was asked about this very issue of this 

billion dollars negotiation. He was asked, “There has been talk 

in the past few days [and I‟m quoting from the media], did the 

province and BHP go back and forth in bargaining, where the 

province said, pay us $1 billion and we‟ll support you?” 

Andrew Mackenzie says, and I quote, “No.” He says, I think 

this was a gross simplification of things that have been 

discussed. 

 

We listened to them. We listened to them, and we couldn‟t 

come to any conclusion even on those two points. And had we, 

I do not see how we could overcome concerns with respect to 

the third. And so, Mr. Speaker, if we could just conclude, I‟d 

like to conclude my remarks by talking then about the most 

important point in all of this — the third consideration, the 

strategic position of our country and of our province. 

 

And here I‟m going to quote a number of people from across 

the country who are voices of the free market, who are voices of 

enterprise and of business in this country, who share our 

concerns, who believe that it is not incongruous to have a view 

that certain resources are strategic and ought to be protected and 

also have the view that we need to have an open and dynamic 

economy that‟s welcoming of investment. 

 

Stephen Jarislowsky, I think one of the largest single investors 

in potash and a major business person in the country based out 

of Quebec said this and I quote, in his opposition to the deal: 

 

Nobody else in the world gives their raw materials away 

and doesn‟t have control over them. Whether it‟s 

Australia, Russia, China, Japan, Venezuela, Mexico, [and 

he‟s referenced some of the countries we‟ve been 

compared to but also a number of free market, free trading 

countries] nobody except a few fools. [These are his 

words, not mine.] And we have [he says this] fools from 

sea to shining sea. 

 

Dick Haskayane, for whom the Calgary school of business is 

named, said this — and of course he‟s also a former CEO and 

again a voice of enterprise and free trade for the country — said 

and I quote, “I have nothing against Australians or, for that 

matter, BHP. Ultimately, the issue is much broader, concerning 

the ownership and control of public companies that own and 

manage a large inventory of our strategic resources.” 

 

“PotashCorp is so important for the world because of its 

enormous reserves. Canada should take a long view and 

jealously protect the management of that asset considering the 

interest of shareholders and what is best for Canada,” Mr. 

Speaker. That last part, by the way, was Roger Phillips, 

formerly of the city of Regina, CEO at IPSCO and a clarion 

voice for the market and free enterprise, I would say, as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been no other deal like this, that involves 

either a strategic marketing arm like Canpotex put at risk by the 

deal nor reserves in this great abundance. 

 

It‟s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to hear the words of the 

former Chair of BHP Billiton in 2008, by the way, at a time 

when that company would have been beginning its play into 

Saskatchewan and considering potential takeovers. Mr. Don 

Argus, former Chair of BHP Billiton said, in the Hellenic 

Shipping News 2008, “If we fail to remain competitive, 

Australia will incur a substantial opportunity cost and, in the 

worst case scenario, our resources will fall into overseas hands 

and we will become a branch office — just like Canada.” 

 

That‟s the view of . . . this is not a socialist saying these things. 

This is not someone who advocates for government intervention 

in a cavalier way. This is a corporate leader. This is a business 

leader. This is the Chair of the very company that‟s trying to 

take this over. This was the view of, obviously of BHP Billiton 

and maybe others about how Canada has reacted to all of the 

takeovers that we‟ve outlined in the last number of weeks that 

really haven‟t worked for the country because promises made 

have not been kept. And so, Mr. Speaker, if we agree that this 

deal does not pass the net benefit by these three measures, then 

we have to deal quickly with the sometimes quick answers 

we‟ve been given by others to solve these problems that we 

have with the deal. 

 

One is royalties, just change your royalties. Mr. Speaker, that is 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5691 

not a healthy thing for the economy of this province at this time. 

There are $12 billion worth of expansion in that industry going 

on today, thousands of jobs being created today, because of the 

royalty structure we have. And if we have to somehow contrive 

a royalty structure to accommodate BHP‟s new production 

model and yet keep Mosaic and Agrium whole, how is that 

good for our economy? How is that the royalty consistency that 

we need? How is that sending a positive message about our 

business climate to the rest of the world? 

 

Mr. Speaker, others in this Assembly have recommended 

something similar, and we don‟t agree with that either. The 

New Democratic Party says that they‟d like to change the 

royalties so that government doesn‟t lose any revenue to tax 

write off from expansion or construction of new mines even 

though this was, quite rightly, their policy, one they instituted, 

one that we have tried to add value to. They now want to 

change the royalty structure. That‟s part of the plan the 

honourable leader has advocated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that we need royalty consistency. We 

believe the families that are being employed by those thousands 

of jobs created because of expansion is a positive thing. We 

believe $12 billion in expansion and what this means, not today 

to the revenues of the government but five and ten years down 

the road, what that means to this province‟s vision to be 

growing then as it is now . . . it‟s immeasurably important, Mr. 

Speaker, that we continue along the path that we are on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is not on for the government. We don‟t 

want to change the royalty structure. The royalty structure is 

creating opportunities today. It‟s creating jobs for families in 

the province. It‟s creating the right environment for expansion 

— $12 billion, $12 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also say this. The other quick answer 

we‟ve gotten from some people about the deal is that they can 

make promises. BHP can give you a bunch of undertakings. Mr. 

Speaker, that would feel a lot better about promises and their 

potential if they‟ve really ever been kept in these deals in the 

past. When takeovers have occurred, undertakings have been 

made, and then undertakings systematically have been broken, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the answer is no for these reasons. We haven‟t seen the 

promises that have been kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a chance now for all members in this 

Assembly to vote in favour of a motion that sends a strong 

message. It doesn‟t just say no to this deal but says yes to the 

province‟s future, that says yes to expansion in the industry 

today as it‟s happening, continuing briskly — as I say, 12 

billion and thousands of jobs. It‟s a chance to say yes to Canada 

stepping up and protecting its resources and saying to the world 

that we‟re going to be open to these deals, we‟re going to be 

approving takeovers in the future, but that this deal is different. 

It‟s different because of its size. It‟s different because 

agricultural food security is a growing issue around the world, 

an issue to which Saskatchewan provides many solutions, and 

we want to be able to provide them in the future with 

Canadian-led and Canadian-based companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a reasonable position. It is consistent with a 

country and a province that favours the free market and that is a 

free trading country and a free trading province. It‟s just as 

consistent here as it is in Australia or in Spain or in other places 

around the world who‟ve said we want to trade with the world, 

but in certain occasions we‟re required to say no if the strategic 

interests of our country are not served by any particular 

takeover. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say as well, in closing, I want to say 

a thank you to the potash task force that we have put in place. I 

want to say thank you to those who I contacted early on for 

some general advice, including Premier Romanow. I talked 

with Premier Calvert, with Premier Devine, and Premier 

Lougheed as well, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank all of those 

within government who have helped us, the Conference Board 

of Canada for their work. I also want to thank our MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] who have been 

providing input back to us about what they‟re hearing with 

respect to this deal. And I especially want to thank the Minister 

of Energy and Resources for his leadership on the file and the 

Minister Responsible for Enterprise Saskatchewan for their 

leadership on the file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to close with this. We need to send one message to 

Ottawa. We need to say one message to Ottawa, and that is no 

to this deal. The answer is no to this deal. We cannot go to 

Ottawa if one group, one-half of the delegation is advocating 

the very royalty changes that are the basis for our position to 

say no. That doesn‟t make any sense. That would not make any 

sense. So, Mr. Speaker, we ask all members of this Assembly to 

simply support the motion as it exists. We are going to look 

forward to the debate that ensues, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

thank all members for their attention and for their time. 

 

And so I move, Mr. Speaker, by leave: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the federal government to not 

approve the proposed takeover of PotashCorp by BHP 

Billiton. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That, by leave, this Assembly calls on the federal 

government to not approve the proposed takeover of 

PotashCorp by BHP Billiton. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank you to all the people in the province who are interested 

and have taken part in this great debate, the potash debate, that 

is going on at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could, by leave also, introduce the Leader of 

the Conservative Party who has joined us here on the floor. I 

think it is not by accident that he‟s here, wanting to be involved 

by listening in on the debate, and so I want to welcome him 

here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my words will not be long. I want to say to the 

Premier, I thank him for bringing the motion forward. I thank 

him because I think it‟s the right position that we have in place, 



5692 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

and the motion is going to be very important. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I am disappointed that when we approached the Premier over a 

month ago to ask for the legislature to be reconvened to pass 

this kind of a motion, we were at that point in time given the 

brush-off and not a very good explanation of why the Assembly 

wasn‟t recalled because I think had we passed this motion six 

weeks ago, the impact on the federal government and our 13 

Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] in the province 

would have and could have been much different. 

 

With only three working days left before the federal 

government is due to bring down the decision on this issue, 

some will make the argument that it‟s too little, too late. But I 

think even at this late date, I want to say thank you to the 

government and to the Premier for bringing this motion 

forward. 

 

Before I get to the small amendment that I will make . . . And I 

explain it to you, Mr. Speaker; it‟s a very simple amendment 

that will just say, once we pass the unanimous motion to call on 

the federal government, the Harper government, to stop the sale 

of this most important asset, our Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, that we — as leaders led by the Premier and 

supported by the Leader of the Opposition — that we would 

carry the message to Ottawa in a personal way and that that 

kind of impact, I think, would add weight and possibly be the 

final thing that would push it over. 

 

I know that in the reports on business news this morning, the 

word is that the federal government is moving more towards the 

position that we‟ve articulated for the last two months, now 

joined by the government. But we think that if we take this 

message strongly to Ottawa that it will have impact and could 

make the difference if we are seen to be in the capital with the 

13 Conservative MPs who have basically gone to ground on 

this issue. Nobody can find them. 

 

And I think the Premier should be calling them individually and 

asking them to stand up in a very public way, starting today, to 

speak out on behalf of the constituents because obviously many 

of the executives of the Sask Party — for the example, the 

member from Meadow Lake having represented that area — 

knows the federal MP very well, should be calling on them and 

urging them to make public statements today in Ottawa so that 

we have a solid, consistent voice from the right and the left on 

this most important issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are seldom issues that get the attention of the 

public the way the potash debate has here in Saskatchewan, 

whether it was in the 1970s when the Blakeney government, 

because of a lack of response from the American-owned potash 

companies of the day refusing to show the books and refusing 

to invest in our industry, the Blakeney government took the 

bold action here in the Assembly of buying the companies, the 

American companies, and setting up the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it‟s interesting today that the Premier is now consulting 

with Premier Blakeney to get advice on how best to protect the 

interest of the province of Saskatchewan and consulting with 

the then deputy premier, Roy Romanow, to figure out how it is 

that we can better protect our asset here in the province. 

 

But let me just talk about one of the reasons that we have this 

debate going on. It goes back to a strategic decision made in 

1989. And, Mr. Speaker, you and I will remember those days 

when the debate going on in the House was the privatization of 

the Potash Corporation and the deal that was made at that time. 

And the debate that went on, it was long and hard, and voices 

were raised and people argued about it in community. But the 

sale at that time was a fundamental turning point in the potash 

debate in the province. 

 

Obviously the New Democratic Party at that time, then in 

opposition, fought hard against the privatization and the sell-off 

of the assets to a private company. It wasn‟t only because it was 

a philosophical matter, but it was the price that we were getting 

for the asset. And I just want to go through the detail because 

some of the members may not know the detail, but we sold that 

asset for one-half of book value and one-quarter of replacement 

cost, or $630 million. That was the sale price. 

 

It also included an aspect that forgave a certain amount of debt 

on behalf of the new company, which was $662 million, for a 

net return for that asset of minus $32 million. And many people 

referred to that as the biggest economic blunder in the history of 

this province, where we gave away an asset now worth $40 

billion. We gave it away, and a cheque for $32 million for 

taking it off our hands. 

 

That now leads us to the point where we are today where the 

very people who fought against that sell-off are now being 

asked for their advice as how to protect. And I find it very 

interesting that this is a government that in 2007, one of the first 

Bills they introduced was the potash repeal Act that opened up 

for sell-off of the Potash Corporation. And the Premier at that 

time said the assets in the province were wide open for 

business. 

 

Many of the members, as recently as this spring, were in China 

talking about having the assets of the province up for sale, 

including potash. I don‟t think there was any caveat in any of 

the press releases that I saw that the assets were for sale with 

the exception of potash. I didn‟t see that in the news release, but 

members can rise in their place and explain how they explained 

that to the Chinese. 

 

But the point is that the Premier is the creator of the situation 

we now have, by in 2007 campaigning on an open for business, 

everything‟s for sale to the highest bidder . . . We now have 

people coming to buy those assets that he talked about. They‟re 

here and they‟re now wondering what the rules of engagement 

are, because when they put their money out to offer to buy 

assets, they‟re told no. 

 

And it reminds me of a young man who‟s playing in his 

backyard and starts a fire in the grass, and the fire takes off and 

it‟s almost burning down the house. And then he gets the 

garden hose to put out the fire. That reminds me of our Premier. 

He started the fire and now is patting himself on the back for 

putting the fire out. That‟s an amazing transition that has 

occurred since 2007. 

 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5693 

Now I‟m not opposed to the Premier coming to our position or 

the position of Roy Romanow and Al Blakeney of protecting 

the resource. But it‟s late, and there are many people who are 

now more than curious about what the position of our Premier 

is on foreign investment. Is it that we are open for foreign 

investment in uranium, foreign investment in the oil sands, 

foreign investment in potash, or is this a one-off? 

 

And what we have put forward is a concept similar to the way 

Norwegian people, through their government, allow foreign 

investment. The rules are set out. They‟re strategic. They‟re 

tough. If you‟re going to invest in the resource of Norway and 

the oil offshore, you have to go there for a long interview. It‟s 

open and transparent. It‟s not one-off where you go into the 

Premier‟s office and get a shakedown for a billion dollars. That 

would be seen as very inappropriate business in many other 

parts of the world, especially in Europe, and has been to this 

point in Canada. And it‟s only after the shakedown doesn‟t 

work that the Premier becomes Captain Canada. Then all of a 

sudden we‟re opposed to the takeover because we didn‟t get the 

money we were negotiating. 

 

Now that may be a principled position but I would argue that it 

is a very, very bad way to do business. What would be much 

better is if we had a policy on foreign ownership in the province 

where the Premier would say, look, we either want it, it‟s open, 

or whether he would say, here are the terms of engagement 

from day one. 

 

What is he today telling the Asian investors who his Minister of 

Energy is saying he‟s meeting with? What are they telling those 

people? Is it different than the story they‟re saying to BHP? 

And what if there is a large co-operative from the United States 

in the corn growing area who want to buy the potash? Do we 

have another story that we‟re telling them? 

 

And my urging is that when we pass this motion — and it‟s 

very important that it pass unanimously today, I hope with the 

amendment — but that we very quickly work on a policy in this 

province that would deal with investment that would not send 

these wild signals to the investors from around the world. And 

then when they come under the very conditions the Premier has 

talked about, then the hand is put up and we say, no we don‟t 

want your investment. 

 

The other thing that I just want to say to the Assembly and to 

the Premier is that we need to put in place a written agreement 

with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. We are in a 

position today where we need to get in writing the 

commitments that the Potash Corporation is saying they are 

going to do for the province, whether that‟s the head office or 

whether that is a bigger investment in community sponsorship. 

If we‟re demanding that in writing from other companies, we 

should be demanding and using this as an opportunity to get 

those same benefits, net benefits, and correct some of the 

wrongs of 1989 privatization at this point in time. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan need to know that we are, as 

legislators, working in the best interest of the shareholders here 

in the province. I‟ve said many times that I don‟t worry about 

the Potash Corporation board of directors doing what‟s in the 

best interest of their shareholders. They‟re very good at it. Or 

that BHP is looking after their shareholders. But I sometimes 

wonder whether the royalty rate that we are being paid as 

owners of the resource is right. 

 

And the idea that the Premier would say we‟re not going to look 

at royalties for 16 years is one that we do not agree with, and 

we are going to be working hard over the coming months up to 

the next election, explaining to the public how reviewing 

royalties on a very regular basis . . . And the Premier doesn‟t 

agree with this, I know, because he‟s already made the 

commitment to keep them the same for 16 years. They‟re our 

royalty. They‟ve been in place, but they need to be reviewed. 

That‟s the role of the board of directors of any corporation. 

 

Can you imagine the board of Cameco or the Potash 

Corporation saying to their shareholders, we‟re not changing 

anything in our sale price for our product for 16 years. It‟s 

madness. In the business world, they‟re laughing at you because 

you make that commitment of 16 years. They like it, but they‟re 

laughing at you. 

 

And what I would urge us to do is look at a mechanism that 

would, on a regular basis, look at the royalty structure. That‟s 

our job as legislators. It‟s not your job to protect the 

shareholders of the Potash Corporation or the shareholders of 

BHP. That‟s not your responsibility. Your responsibility is to 

maximize the return from all of our resources, and that means 

reviewing your taxation models, reviewing your royalties on a 

very regular basis. 

 

Also, Mr. Premier, there are many people in this province who 

believe that there should be a piece of ownership of the potash 

resource held by the people of the province through their 

government. You may not agree with that, but there are a large 

percentage of the people of the province who want to have part 

ownership of the potash of this province. 

 

Now again, I expect you to make fun of it and mock it the way 

you did two months ago when we talked about saying no to the 

potash deal and the takeover of BHP. That was your first 

response. It was a two-headed, job-killing monster if we pass 

this kind of a motion. That‟s what it was. It was a two-headed, 

job-killing monster if we passed a motion to stop this foreign 

money coming to the province. 

 

All of a sudden, the issue is a Premier with two tongues. That‟s 

the bigger issue. And if you listen to the investors from around 

the world, they‟re not worried about the NDP changing 

royalties and modifying it in the best interest of their people in a 

transparent way. They‟re worried about a Premier who says one 

thing one month and one thing another. That‟s a job-killing 

monster. And that‟s the responsibility of that government, the 

Sask Party government, here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously the fundamentals of potash . . . The 

Premier has enunciated them, and I agree, that with 54 per cent 

of the world‟s known potash, we can bargain pretty hard right 

now. Danny Williams, with only a small fraction of a per cent 

of the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . But no, you are 

bargaining. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the bargain is, would the Premier call 

the 13 MPs and get them to stand up and be noticed? It is to call 

Mr. Clement or send him, at least, a letter and ask him to say 



5694 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

no. That‟s the discussion that needs to go on, and it hasn‟t 

happened. And that‟s why we . . . Well the Premier hasn‟t even 

bothered to go to Ottawa to meet with the Prime Minister. Now 

does that show commitment and does that show a big 

responsibility to the people of the province that he really cares? 

 

The question is, we need to be firm. Because with 54 per cent of 

the potash in the world, we‟re in a great position, great position 

to bargain in terms of what we demand from any company who 

controls our potash, any company, whether they‟re owned . . . 

Well the Premier says the answer‟s no. He‟s not going to get 

any more for the people of the province. 

 

My idea and the idea of the NDP is, we need to maximize the 

amount of return we get from all of our resources. We also need 

to know that this demand will increase as the world, the Premier 

has said, will grow more food, but also for use in producing 

replacement for oil in the United States. A full 35 per cent of all 

the corn produced in the United States this year will go to 

ethanol. Ethanol comes from corn, and corn uses huge amounts 

of potash. 

 

[11:30] 

 

We‟re also part of the energy solution for making the United 

States, or helping them, become less reliant on Middle East oil. 

And that goes to corn, and that goes to potash. So it‟s not only 

food, but growing by leaps and bounds is the amount of potash 

that goes directly to corn, to a new fuel supply in the United 

States. That gives us even more power and more importance in 

the United States than we ever realized would be possible. 

 

Now my final comment is this. And I am very much hoping — 

because I really believe that having a common front and 

presenting this in person by the Premier, a delegation led by the 

Premier, supported by the opposition, would take this message 

and motion, unanimously voted on here today, to Ottawa to the 

Prime Minister, to the 13 MPs of the Conservative Party, to Mr. 

Goodale, and also to all the leaders in Ottawa, it may make the 

difference of whether in a close call — we get the will of the 

people implemented here by saying no to the takeover of potash 

by BHP. And the amendment that I would move in order to 

make this work, and I wanted to read: 

 

That the motion be amended to add the following text after 

the word Billiton: 

 

That the Premier and the Leader of the Official 

Opposition travel to Ottawa at the first opportunity to 

jointly deliver this unanimous motion to the federal 

government and to meet with the Prime Minister and the 

leaders of the federal opposition parties to communicate 

Saskatchewan‟s position; and 

 

That the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition meet 

with the 14 members of parliament from Saskatchewan 

to demand their public support for this motion in order 

to protect the interest of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I would so move that amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — An amendment to the motion by the 

Opposition Leader is as follows: 

That the Premier and the Leader of the Official 

Opposition travel to Ottawa at the first opportunity to 

jointly deliver this unanimous motion to the federal 

government and to meet with the Prime Minister and the 

leaders of the federal opposition parties to communicate 

Saskatchewan‟s position; and 

 

That the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition meet 

with the 14 members of parliament from Saskatchewan 

to demand their public support for this motion in order 

to protect the interest of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased 

to enter the debate and offer some thoughts with respect to the 

amendment that the Leader of the Opposition has put forward. 

And I can say that, given the Leader of the Opposition‟s 

positions over the last while with respect to this, it‟s difficult to 

understand whether he‟s in favour of the position of 

Saskatchewan or he‟s only in favour of the positions that he‟s 

articulated earlier. And he has said he thought that it was very 

important that Saskatchewan go with a common position. 

 

We would agree with him on that. But unfortunately in his 

speech that he‟s just given, he has outlined that he has the 

NDP‟s position and that‟s the position that he would want to 

advance. The Government of Saskatchewan has a much 

different position, of course, and that makes it very, very 

difficult for us to want to look at accepting the amendment that 

the Leader of the Opposition has come forward with. And it‟s 

not surprising because it‟s a plan, it‟s a plan that they have 

outlined that we as the Government of Saskatchewan do not 

agree with. 

 

They have outlined that they are interested in having a golden 

share. Well that‟s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, because the 

golden share was not only lost, negotiated and lost by the 

Leader of the Opposition and the NDP, but they‟ve also, in 

addition to other experiences in terms of golden shares, they 

gave it away in terms of the Saskoil privatization as well, Mr. 

Speaker. Interestingly enough something that he was able, not 

only was he able to negotiate the loss of that golden share as 

well, he was able to negotiate himself a government relations 

position with the company that picked it up. 

 

So it‟s quite interesting that when you see that kind of positions, 

it‟s not surprising that we have some reservations about his 

position and whether he would adopt the common voice that‟s 

coming out of Saskatchewan. I would say all across the 

province people are very, very supportive of the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the Premier of Saskatchewan, in 

saying that this is not a deal that‟s right for Saskatchewan, 

based on a whole host of evidence that is before the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. And that‟s the very reason why 

we believe that yes, there is merit in the Leader of the 

Opposition going to Ottawa, but not if he‟s not going to adopt 

the province‟s position. That‟s the concern that we would have. 

 

Right from the very outset, Mr. Speaker, we indicated that we 

had some concerns about this deal. Our concerns were in three 

important areas: in the areas of jobs, in the areas of the fiscal 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5695 

impact on the province of Saskatchewan, and in the areas of the 

strategic interests of this resource. That‟s very, very important. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says we should have immediately 

called the legislature back. Well let‟s examine that for a 

moment. The position of the government was that we should get 

the best advice we possibly could before we lay out the position 

of the Government of Saskatchewan. Incidentally that was the 

former leader of the NDP and premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Romanow‟s advice as well. 

 

So we did exactly that. We contacted the Conference Board, 

asked them if they would take a look at this. They agreed to 

this. The Conference Board, who the Leader of the Opposition 

has slammed on many, many occasions, although they are 

non-partisan — certainly a board that has a great deal of respect 

all across Canada. Governments of all political stripes have 

used their advice in the past. The Leader of the Opposition said 

at that point though, he didn‟t believe that they could add value 

to it. I would say that they added a significant amount of value 

because they gave a third party evaluation of this deal that I 

think was the basis for a very, very important decision that the 

Government of Saskatchewan made. 

 

So while the Leader of the Opposition just wanted to rush back 

and have a debate about this before all of the information was 

in, it was the government‟s position that we should get all of the 

information before we made the decision. 

 

And that‟s exactly what was done, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

addition to that, the Leader of the Opposition says, did you even 

talk to the government? Well of course we talked to the federal 

government. I talked to the Industry minister, Minister Clement, 

on a number of occasions. We talked to the Saskatchewan MPs 

on a number of occasions. We talked to a number of other 

people about it. The Prime Minister and the Premier of 

Saskatchewan had a conversation about it on a number of 

occasions. 

 

Myself and the Minister Responsible for Enterprise went to 

Ottawa. We had a number of meetings and I would characterize 

them as very, very good meetings. We met with Minister 

Clement, outlined our position . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

We met with Minister Flaherty. Well it was a little bit difficult 

to meet with the Prime Minister, as the member points out that 

we should have, because he was in Europe at the time. 

Would‟ve been a little bit awkward to do that. 

 

We met with Minister of Finance Flaherty. We met with the 

Minister of Treasury Board, Minister Day. We met with the 

other MP from Saskatchewan that‟s not a member of the 

government caucus, Ralph Goodale. We met with the Leader of 

the Opposition, at his request to meet, Michael Ignatieff. 

 

We met with the Saskatchewan MPs that are on the government 

side in Ottawa. We met with them. And I would characterize 

every one of the meetings in this similar fashion. We outlined 

the position of Saskatchewan, our concerns around the three 

areas that the Premier has outlined: jobs, fiscal impact, strategic 

importance of potash in Saskatchewan. 

 

We talked to them about our position. We answered any 

questions that they had, which were a number of questions that 

they had. And we said, as a result of all of the information that 

we have gathered, all of the information in terms of the legal 

advice that we have received from a very influential law firm 

that has a very, very strong position in terms of these types of 

deals, mergers and acquisitions, we met with the . . . I would 

say that we had very, very fruitful and good discussions with all 

of those players. 

 

They listened attentively to the concerns of Saskatchewan. They 

said that they would take those concerns back and deliberate 

them with respect to Saskatchewan‟s position, deliberate them 

and make their decision at some point in the near future, 

February 3rd or perhaps even earlier than that. So I think it was 

November 3rd or just prior to that they may make a decision 

with respect to that. 

 

I think that that is a responsible position that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has taken. Right from the very outset, we said 

that we were prepared to sit down and talk to people about this 

deal. The BHP officials said that they would like to talk to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. They have a significant 

investment in Saskatchewan already. They have plans to move 

forward with their Jansen Lake facility which they said would 

happen whether this deal proceeded or not. So absolutely we‟re 

happy to take that meeting and sit down with those officials, 

talk to them about it. 

 

They outlined their position with respect to jobs. They outlined 

their position with respect to the fiscal impact on Saskatchewan. 

We didn‟t agree with it on either front there. And of course in 

terms of the strategic interests of the resource, it‟s a little bit 

difficult, I suspect, for them to comment on that, not being 

Canadians, as this company is controlled by Canadians. 

 

So I found it passing very strange, Mr. Speaker, that in question 

period today, the Leader of the Opposition says that when First 

Nations leaders called us up, when Rick Gamble phoned us up 

and Ken Thomas phoned us up and said, we‟re giving some 

thought to putting together a bid on behalf of First Nations 

people, the Leader of the Opposition‟s position is, we shouldn‟t 

have taken that meeting. We shouldn‟t have had a discussion 

with those people. And I would say that probably is no surprise 

given, given his position, given his position and how he takes 

for . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I would say that that position that the 

Leader of the Opposition enunciated in question period today 

should be of no surprise to anyone here in Saskatchewan. That 

he is willing to take those two First Nations leaders for granted, 

just as he has taken First Nations people for granted . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask the member from Regina 

Rosemont to come to order. The Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I would say it is, on behalf of the 



5696 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

Government of Saskatchewan, it‟s a little bit hard to take advice 

about who the Government of Saskatchewan should meet with 

in terms of First Nations leaders, when we see him advocating 

that we should not take a meeting that those very important 

First Nations leaders are asking . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the members from Regina 

Rosemont and Athabasca to allow the minister to lay out his 

position, and they will have plenty of opportunity to enter the 

debate as well to lay out their opportunity. I recognize the 

Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — So it comes as no surprise to the 

Government of Saskatchewan that the Leader of the Opposition, 

in his questions here in question period today, would lay out a 

position that marginalizes First Nations people and leaders in 

Saskatchewan and says that just because they‟re coming 

forward with a position that he may not agree with, the 

Government of Saskatchewan should not even meet with them. 

 

Well I‟ll tell the Leader of the Opposition and members of the 

opposition one thing — that this government is always willing 

to listen to the questions and concerns of First Nations leaders 

when they bring them forward. We indicated that we would be 

happy to have a discussion with them, that we would be happy 

to receive any proposal that they might be bringing forward. 

 

We met with them. Absolutely we met with them. That is the 

responsibility of a duly elected government is to listen to what 

the people of Saskatchewan want, and most . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the . . . 

Order. The member from Regina Rosemont will allow the 

minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I would say, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Walsh Acres also 

wants to enter the debate. I ask the member to allow the 

minister to respond and, at the appropriate opportunity, to enter 

the debate. I recognize the Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — And I would say, Mr. Speaker, given the 

interjections by the member from Walsh Acres . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just ask the minister to 

go directly to the debate and not bring other members into the 

debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I would just say that we were 

puzzled by the Leader of the Opposition‟s questions today and 

his obvious position that the Government of Saskatchewan 

should not have met with First Nations leaders. We indicated 

that we‟d be happy to meet with Ken Thomas and Rick 

Gamble, two First Nations leaders here in Saskatchewan. 

 

They had a proposal that they wanted to present to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, or at least that they were seeking 

information in terms of how they might go about doing that. We 

indicated to them that, if they have a proposal, I‟m sure the 

people of Saskatchewan would be interested in hearing that. I‟m 

sure that . . . I would expect very likely that the Potash 

Corporation executives would be interested in their position as 

well, certainly BHP and maybe the federal government in 

addition to that. 

 

I would just say that, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s important that we 

also recognize some of the other things that the Leader of the 

Opposition was saying here today. He goes into a history of 

how he believes this all started. First of all he, in grand fashion, 

introduces the Leader of the Progressive Conservatives, Rick 

Swenson, into the legislature, presents like they are on common 

front on many, if not all, issues. 

 

And then he goes into the history of the PotashCorp and the 

privatization — something that that member voted in when he 

was a member, voted in favour of — and slams him royally 

after introducing him, and I would say in grand fashion. So it 

would be no surprise when I watched, when I looked over there 

and saw the leader of the Conservatives squirming in his seat. 

He probably was wondering just how intimate their friendship 

was. 

 

I guess I would say and to allow other members to take part in 

the debate here, I would just say in closing that I think that the 

importance of the question that is before us is the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, is the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan that this is not a good deal based 

on the information that are available to anyone in terms of jobs, 

in terms of jobs, and the impact on jobs here in Saskatchewan 

which does not meet the net benefit question. 

 

On the second position, which is with respect to the fiscal 

concerns and impact on Saskatchewan, does that meet the net 

benefit here in Saskatchewan when we are going to lose, by the 

Conference Board‟s work, that they concluded anywhere from 3 

billion to $6 billion over the next 10 years? Again that does not 

meet the net benefit question to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And in terms, of course, of the strategic interests and 

importance of this industry and this mineral to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that does not meet the net benefit question as 

well. 

 

We take the Leader of the Opposition‟s position very, very 

seriously when he says that we should be going with a common 

voice. But yet in his speech, he indicated that they were not 

prepared to go with a common voice, that they were prepared to 

go with the NDP‟s position, as ridiculous as it is. They were 

prepared . . . So they want to go down to Ottawa and they want 

to present a position that‟s different than the duly elected 

government here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would say that the people of Saskatchewan would say, I 

don‟t think that that is a very good thing to present two different 

positions, one that makes sense — the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s — and one that certainly doesn‟t make sense, 

the Leader of the Opposition‟s one particularly when he talks 

about golden shares. Because all of the people of Saskatchewan 

know that on two occasions he gave up the golden share. On 

two occasions he gave up the golden share for the people of 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5697 

Saskatchewan, negotiated that away for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now he says he wants to negotiate it back into 

any agreement. So it‟s little wonder that the people of 

Saskatchewan have some serious doubt about his sincerity 

when he says he wants to go with a common voice. 

 

And that‟s the reason why, Mr. Speaker, that members of this 

government will not be supporting the amendment. I would say, 

though, that if he were willing to come back into the Chamber 

and change his position maybe we‟d consider it. It‟d be about 

the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I remind the member 

that members are not to refer to the absence or presence of other 

members, and I ask the member to refrain from that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — If the NDP wanted to come back and 

change their position and say that we will renounce our position 

and that we are prepared to accept the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s position, then I think you would have at least 

some degree of credibility, even though it‟d be about the 10th 

time you‟ve changed your position. Nevertheless it‟d be a 

welcome change this time around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to conclude on one other important 

topic, and that‟s the area of royalties. That‟s the area of 

royalties. The Leader of the Opposition says that we should be 

renewing or reviewing the royalty structure here in 

Saskatchewan. We just did it a little while ago. We made some 

changes with respect to the royalty structure in Saskatchewan 

that has resulted in about $12 billion of investment in 

Saskatchewan. We made some changes in the royalty structures 

on the natural gas side as well, just recently here in 

Saskatchewan, that have been welcomed by the industry here in 

the province. 

 

I would say, though, that the NDP‟s position is always the same 

when it comes to these sort of things. The answer to these 

questions are always . . . How can we just simply extract more 

from the industry or from the people of Saskatchewan? By 

raising royalties, that‟s the answer to all of the questions. Just 

get a bigger royalty grab away from industry or from the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, and that‟ll fix the problem. 

 

Well it won‟t fix the problem. It has resulted in stagnation in the 

economy over the last 50 years of NDP, largely NDP, rule. And 

that‟s the reason why we see now, where there‟s a government 

that has said that there is going to be stability in terms of 

royalties, that‟s why we see the kind of growth that we see in 

the economy. That‟s why we see the oil sector just booming in 

our province. That‟s why we see interest in our province from 

companies like BHP who recognize that this is a great place to 

do business, that this is the place that you want to be if you 

want to believe in the new economies in the world. This is a 

place that clearly the people of Saskatchewan understand and 

realize the importance of this resource. 

 

So I just conclude by saying, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan does not accept the position of the Leader of the 

Opposition and will not be prepared to support the amendment 

which says, I want to go and present the NDP‟s position not the 

Government of Saskatchewan‟s position. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to enter 

in debate today for a number of reasons. First I‟d like to talk 

about the ability of the member opposite to twist facts. Now we 

ought to take with a grain of salt anything that he talks about in 

this Assembly because this is the same member who‟s currently 

being sued by a company for twisting facts about their 

company. This is the same member who has twisted facts on his 

own resumé during a leadership bid that says that he is a 

structural engineer when he took a two-week welding course. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts are more twisted than any piece of 

metal he would have welded. It‟s absolutely disgusting to listen 

to the twisted facts of the member opposite. 

 

Now another twisted fact is what he says with respect to First 

Nations people. This is the same member who absolutely 

refuses to discuss resource revenue sharing, who absolutely 

refuses to discuss or negotiate deals with respect to The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. If there‟s any group of men and women 

in this province who has a terrible history of dealing with First 

Nations men and women in this province, it‟s the Saskatchewan 

Party government and their members. It‟s absolutely shabby. 

 

Who did they negotiate with on The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act? Nobody. Who have they negotiated with on an online 

gaming agreement? Nobody. Who have they negotiated with on 

tobacco use? Nobody. Who have they negotiated with on the 

closure of long-term care facilities on First Nations? Nobody. 

This is just a terrible record that I‟ve put together in 30 seconds 

here in response to his absolutely twisted position. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we ought to take with a grain of salt the words 

that come out of the mouth from the member from Swift 

Current. 

 

Now I want to make a few things perfectly clear. One is that 

we‟re opposed to this deal. I want to make that clear for the 

member opposite because he‟s questioning that at this point, 

though I‟m not sure how he could be. We‟re opposed to this 

deal. But we‟re opposed to this deal for principled reasons. 

We‟re not opposed to this deal, like the Premier is, because he 

threw a hissy fit after he didn‟t get his shakedown of $1 billion 

from a multi-national company. That‟s not what this is about. 

For us it‟s a principled position and a consistent principled 

position that we‟ve held from the beginning. And what is it for 

these guys? Well it‟s a fit that‟s thrown by the Premier the day 

after his shakedown is unsuccessful. 

 

So now let‟s talk about the Premier, because currently in 

Saskatchewan the emperor has no clothes. He‟s been parading 

around as the emperor, with no clothes on, convincing 

everybody that he‟s a free enterpriser — all his buddies, Mr. 

O‟Leary, the folks on Dragon’s Den, all the rabid right wingers 

in Canada he would call his friends just a couple of weeks ago. 

But now they‟re questioning everything he says and does 

because he‟s a leopard who‟s trying to change his spots. And 

what people are finding out about this Premier is that he‟s 

wearing no clothes at all, that they were right the first time. 

 

This is the same guy who travels to New York and China and 

Washington to talk about how Saskatchewan‟s open for 

business, but he can‟t create rules that will enable people to 



5698 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

have any confidence in that. And why is that? Why is that? 

Because when a multinational company comes in to set up 

shop, he invites them and — it‟s like the Leader of the 

Opposition said — he starts these fires and they get out of 

control and he puts them out and then he wants the credit for 

putting them out. 

 

Let me quote, if I could, about the position change of the 

Premier on this issue. Terence Corcoran, a writer for the 

National Post says this, and I quote, “Sounding ever so much 

like the head of some mosquito-ridden developing country 

squeezing dollars of a multinational mining giant . . .” He goes 

on to say that “The banana republic comparison may seem a 

little harsh, but the idea comes from the widely reported news 

that Mr. Wall or his negotiating minions actually asked BHP to 

pay a billion dollars up front into government coffers.” 

 

So the shake down is confirmed by the National Post, and it 

sends an absolutely terrible message to the business community 

about doing business in Saskatchewan. We are called a “banana 

republic” and a “mosquito-ridden developing country” by the 

National Post because of the actions of this Premier. It‟s 

absolutely abhorrent. 

 

And I‟ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, multinational companies 

operate under conventions. They have certain rules that they 

have to uphold. And if you offer the Government of 

Saskatchewan $1 billion upfront, then the people in Madagascar 

and the people in any country in the world can ask for the same 

thing and should be expected to give. So they‟re asking BHP to 

operate under rules that they absolutely cannot operate under 

and as the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, he should 

know better. But when he doesn‟t get his way, then he comes 

out against BHP. 

 

So there are other people who have spoken out about the actions 

of this Premier in this case. Another one is Mr. Tom Flanagan 

in a piece that he‟d done for Mining Weekly. He‟s the former 

senior advisor to Canadian Prime Minister Steven Harper. And 

Tom Flanagan said on Friday that “Saskatchewan Premier Brad 

Wall‟s opposition to BHP Billiton‟s $39 billion bid for Potash 

Corp was „naked self-interest in the most narrowest [case].‟” He 

added that “Harper would likely approve the deal.” 

 

He also went on to say that: 

 

A week before Wall‟s speech, an Insightrix Research 

survey found that 55% of Saskatchewan residents were 

opposed to BHP Billiton buying Potash Corp. 

 

Flanagan said that this showed the premier was playing to 

the populace. “That would be my guess,” he commented, 

saying that Wall‟s opposition was incongruous with the 

free-market-oriented conservative Canadian politics that 

he was rooted in. 

 

So the leopard changing his spots, Mr. Speaker. And he goes on 

to say this: 

 

I‟m disappointed in Wall — though he may be playing 

games too, he knows it‟s not really his decision. He could 

be hoping the federal government might enforce some 

additional sweeteners. 

So on the most important issue facing Saskatchewan people — 

the Premier‟s words, this is the most important issue facing 

Saskatchewan people — he‟s accused of playing games. It‟s a 

sad commentary on the level of professionalism that this 

government exhibits. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now it also says in the story that: 

 

Flanagan went on to criticise the upfront levy of up to 

$1.5-billion that Wall wanted BHP Billiton to pay for 

potential future revenue losses. “That strikes me as 

something that would happen in the third world,” he 

decried. “I can‟t remember anything like that. This sends a 

terrible message.” 

 

It‟s an absolute ridiculous way to do business, Mr. Speaker. 

And it‟s a terrible way to negotiate with a multinational 

company. The Financial Times earlier said the levy sounded 

like baksheesh. Now, Mr. Speaker, for those folks who don‟t 

know, baksheesh is a term used to describe forms of political 

corruption and bribery in the Middle East. “Leo Deuel 

sardonically described baksheesh as, „lavish remuneration and 

bribes, rudely demanded but ever so graciously accepted by the 

natives in return for little or no services rendered.‟” 

 

So to have this deal on what he says himself is the most 

important issue facing Saskatchewan today referred to as 

baksheesh is absolutely terrible. It‟s terrible news for the 

investment climate in Saskatchewan. It‟s terrible news that puts 

us again on the front page of financial newspapers for the 

wrong reason — to be called a banana republic, 

mosquito-ridden, baksheesh over what again is supposed to be 

the biggest deal facing Saskatchewan today. 

 

Now let‟s talk about this though in context with the Premier‟s 

performance on a number of other big issues in Saskatchewan. 

He stated very early on in his term that he wanted to bring 

nuclear power to Saskatchewan. So they spent again millions of 

dollars on studies and found out what we‟d told them all along, 

that it was too expensive, and you couldn‟t do it. So his idea 

crashed and burned. 

 

Well he scurried quickly from nuclear power to isotope 

production. So he said he could get a deal with the federal 

government and add value to uranium through an isotope 

reactor. So what happened to that deal, Mr. Speaker? Well that 

deal crashed and burned as well. And I don‟t know if it‟s 

because of this new great relationship that he‟s got with Ottawa, 

but it‟s another deal with Ottawa where he was absolutely 

ignored. 

 

The next deal was clean coal. He said he was going to invest 

$800 million in clean coal. To this date, I don‟t know if there‟s 

a dollar invested. But we want to know where the money went. 

What happened to the $800 million that was supposed to be 

invested in clean coal? And are we any closer to producing 

clean coal power today in Saskatchewan than we were five 

years ago? I think that‟s another one of the Premier‟s grand 

schemes that crashed and burned. 

 

Now the next one is carbon capture and storage, another deal 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5699 

with the federal government where we have to count on the 

federal government, the same as this deal. And he claims he‟s 

got a special relationship with Ottawa. But this is another deal 

with Ottawa that crashed and burned under the Premier‟s watch. 

 

He‟s good at the photo ops, and he‟s good at starting things, but 

he can‟t ever make a deal. And he certainly can‟t make deals 

with Ottawa based on this record. Why would anybody believe 

that he‟ll get anything done with Ottawa in this case? 

 

Now why shouldn‟t we believe the Premier when it comes to 

the issue of the day, the sale of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan? Well he says it‟s the most important issue 

facing Saskatchewan today and puts it on page 10 in his Throne 

Speech and devotes a few lines to it. Well isn‟t the Throne 

Speech supposed to be where you lay out your plans for the 

next year? His plans for the next year include next to nothing 

for potash. Why didn‟t he use this as an opportunity to outline 

what his position is on potash? Passing reference, page 10 of 

the Throne Speech, barely mentioned. He should have had a 

strategic plan and outlined a strategic plan for potash, but he 

chose not to. 

 

Why else shouldn‟t we trust the Premier on this issue? Well he 

was part of the group that sold it in the first place. They 

negotiated a deal where, at the $600 million level, the asset was 

still purchased at half its assessed value. He negotiated that 

deal. That is without the paydown on the debt of that company 

that the government agreed to which netted the company $32 

million to take PotashCorp off the government‟s hands. 

 

Now how is it that you can negotiate a deal to sell a company, 

give the company $32 million for taking it off your hands, when 

it was a deal at $600 million that was half the value of the asset, 

and then claim to be the great protector of potash in 

Saskatchewan and a protector of the resource for the people? 

It‟s incongruous with everything that he‟s ever stood for. It‟s 

incongruous with his actions. And so I don‟t understand how 

people would believe him when he says he‟s the great protector 

now. 

 

Now another reason that you might not want to believe the 

Premier in this case is because he‟s not looking out for the 

shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan. He‟s mad that you 

didn‟t get a deal with BHP for $1 billion so he could buy the 

next election. It‟s as simple as that. 

 

And so if he‟s not looking out for his shareholders, the people 

. . . And he‟s said very clearly here today, both he and his 

minister, that they‟re not interested in talking about royalties. 

They‟re not interested in examining whether or not we‟ve got 

the right royalty regime structure. They‟re not interested in 

getting the most value out of this asset for the people of 

Saskatchewan. So why would you trust that he would get the 

best deal in this case if he won‟t look out for the people of 

Saskatchewan on royalties? 

 

Now I don‟t think you‟d want to listen to a Premier who doesn‟t 

understand fundamentally his own projections on the revenue 

side on potash. I don‟t think you‟d want to follow that person. I 

don‟t think you‟d want to believe what they say. But this is the 

case when it comes to this sale. They don‟t understand or 

haven‟t been clear. And I‟m not sure which is worse, Mr. 

Speaker, whether they‟re hiding the fact or whether they don‟t 

understand it. 

 

But they don‟t understand that their projections on the revenue 

side are flawed, absolutely flawed, because there are writeoffs 

available after production begins when that Jansen Lake mine is 

open for BHP. So it doesn‟t matter who the owner is, whether 

it‟s PCS, whether it‟s BHP. It doesn‟t matter who owns it. So 

their own revenue projections are flawed. He doesn‟t 

understand them, or he‟s hiding it from the people of 

Saskatchewan. We‟re not sure which is worse. 

 

Now why else wouldn‟t you believe the Premier in this case? 

Well, while he‟s giving his Captain Canada speech, he must 

have got a run in his tights, Mr. Speaker, because as he‟s giving 

the speech, there‟s absolutely . . . there‟s talks going on with a 

consortium who is supported by Asia — countries from Asia, 

companies from Asia — in order to purchase PCS. So while 

he‟s talking to the chamber of commerce about there is no deal 

that‟s good enough for PCS, for the sale of PCS in 

Saskatchewan — there‟s no deal possible that‟s good enough — 

he‟s negotiating behind closed doors with Asian-backed bids. 

So why would you trust that he‟s looking out for the best 

interest of Saskatchewan people? 

 

So now we get to another point. I have quoted a few folks with 

respect to this deal and I want to quote, if I could, the great glee 

that they took in repealing the potash Act that led to this deal. 

They talked about how they wanted to be open for business and 

how Saskatchewan‟s going to be changed by what we‟re doing 

here. And so I want to quote from the National Post, December 

18th, 2007, because this is what led to all of this: 

 

Brad Wall, the Premier of Saskatchewan, is killing 

legislation that allows his government to expropriate the 

province‟s potash industry, part of his broad strategy to 

show [how] Saskatchewan is business friendly and eager 

for foreign investment. 

 

The law in question is called the Potash Development Act, 

an obscure piece of legislation enacted . . . in 1975. The 

act was never directly implemented, but the NDP 

government did nationalize a number of potash mines in 

the 1970s. 

 

No one is worried that will happen today, and Mr. Wall 

acknowledged that [his] revoking the law is a “symbolic” 

gesture. For him, it‟s about sending the world an important 

message. 

 

“We want to signal our government is looking to create a 

very investment-friendly atmosphere, both for companies 

invested in the province and those that are external to 

Saskatchewan that are looking to increase opportunities 

here,” he said in an interview. 

 

Industry leader Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan welcomed 

the news. 

 

The company called it proof the government “understands 

the importance of the potash industry in the province.” 

 

So if you trace back to the investment that the Premier desired, 



5700 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

this is exactly the conditions he wanted, and now he‟s running 

away from them because he doesn‟t understand how to do 

business at this level. And if you look at his own track record 

for business — I believe he started three and they‟ve all crashed 

and burned, in addition to all of the other things that have 

crashed and burned since he‟s been the Premier — so it‟s ironic 

today that he would pretend to be Captain Canada and defend 

the interests of Saskatchewan people in the potash industry. 

 

Now what he should be doing is negotiating a deal for 

Saskatchewan people based on ethical principles, based on a 

plan that he‟s got for the potash industry and the future of the 

industry. And many people would argue that that should include 

an ownership stake. Now there are right wing premiers in 

Canada who have done this successfully in the very recent past, 

and these are people whom he has good friendships with and 

he‟s idolized and said good things about. Ed Stelmach, the 

Alberta Premier, is ensuring that the Alberta government is one 

of the largest oil companies in Alberta through the royalties in 

Alberta that pay them bitumen directly. The oil sands is going 

to be developed with Alberta as a major player in part of that 

industry. 

 

Additionally, if you look at what‟s happened with the Alberta 

Treasury Branch, they‟ve expanded their services greatly in the 

last couple of years and offered services that banks offer 

directly. Now this is the Alberta government, his Conservative 

friends, starting and opening up businesses for the Alberta 

people. So it‟s good enough for Alberta people to own part of a 

company and a resource company with the oil sands, but he 

doesn‟t think that that‟s a good fit for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Additionally, Conservative Premier Danny Williams negotiates 

on offshore drilling rigs and projects a stake, a portion of the 

deal for Newfoundland and Labradorians. He negotiates that on 

their behalf so that they own a part of that resource. Now these 

are two Conservative premiers in Canada and, some would 

argue, two of the most conservative premiers in Canada, and 

they see fit to extract for their shareholders the maximum 

benefit that they can get. And they do that through ownership. 

So I‟m not sure why in Saskatchewan we can‟t do the same 

thing. There are simple examples that have been used very 

successfully in other jurisdictions. 

 

Now there are other methods to do that that he should be 

investigating. And this is a perfect time in our history to be 

looking at something like a sovereign wealth fund. If you look 

at what is going on in Norway these days, they have over $200 

billion invested in a sovereign wealth fund that they‟ve gotten 

through one-time revenues through offshore oil. Saskatchewan 

could do the same thing with potash and oil and gas if they had 

the vision to do it. But the Premier‟s not interested in a 

sovereign wealth fund or looking a sovereign wealth fund. 

 

He could be looking at this as an opportunity to negotiate better 

pensions for the current workers at PCS. Why isn‟t he asking 

PCS, whose current CEO [chief executive officer] stands to 

make over $500 million on this deal or somewhere close to that 

depending on the share price that would be finally negotiated? 

And the Premier won‟t ask for his shareholders a little more 

than what they‟re getting. He won‟t ask for the shareholders — 

the people that built this company, the very workers who work 

in those mines every day — he won‟t ask for more for them, as 

he‟s got an historic opportunity to do that here and he refuses. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Now as I‟ve outlined, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

reasons why you wouldn‟t want to trust the Premier when it 

comes to potash and, specifically, when it comes to defending 

his shareholders‟ interest in the province of Saskatchewan 

because on a number of fronts he‟s refused to do it. He‟s had 

opportunities but he‟s chosen not to. And if you look at his 

recent history with big deals and with big projects in 

Saskatchewan, his track record is worse than the 22 per cent 

rating he got for his management of our fiscal house for the 

province. It‟s zero. He‟s oh for five on those big projects, so 

I‟m not sure why anybody would trust that he would do a better 

job in this case. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise today on this issue, an incredibly 

important issue for the future of our province. I‟m going to keep 

my remarks fairly short and succinct, Mr. Speaker, with regard 

to the substance of the amendment to the motion. I know the 

previous speaker didn‟t do that; it was your typical rant from 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think one of the important things that we go through 

before debating this motion, Mr. Speaker, is the way the Canada 

investment Act process for review functions. And I would point 

to section 36 of the Canada investment Act, for members 

opposite, which addresses the privileged nature of 

communication on the part of Investment Canada, Industry 

Canada, and the minister responsible for the administration of 

the Investment Canada Act, who‟s Minister Clement. 

 

What the process, what‟s important to the process is the 

privileged nature of that information and it‟s why Minister 

Clement has both in the House of Commons and elsewhere 

been very careful in terms of his comments on the matter. 

 

This extends as well, Mr. Speaker, to other members of the 

government, both in the cabinet and elsewhere. And with regard 

. . . The reason I bring this up, Mr. Speaker, is with regard to the 

substance of the motion from members opposite which calls for 

members of parliament, government and otherwise, to take a 

public position prior to the announcement of the Investment 

Canada decision coming on November the 3rd. 

 

The problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that if that public 

position were taken prior to November the 3rd, there would be a 

situation where the process would be vulnerable. The process 

has to be pristine in terms of the review. With that process 

being vulnerable, there‟s a judicial review mechanism under the 

Canada investment Act and what could happen is that the 

proponent company could attack a decision on the basis of the 

process being flawed. 

 

So we would end up in a situation if the member‟s amendment 

to the motion were carried successfully and those impacted did 

as asked in that motion, that even in the case of a successful 

answer from Investment Canada, which would be a no 

obviously, the perverse effect would be that the decision would 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5701 

be open to attack through the court of competent jurisdiction 

under that review process. So there‟s definitely . . . there‟s a 

problem on that front in terms of where those members want to 

go with their motion. 

 

In terms of the other part — and the Minister of Energy has 

talked about this — if we are going to go to Ottawa, and as the 

Premier said and the Minister of Energy as well, there would be 

some merit in the proper circumstances to doing so. We need to 

have a common position. And clearly the members opposite 

don‟t share the same position as the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We simply can‟t have two messages being taken to Ottawa that 

are contradictory. And they are contradictory. We heard from 

the Leader of the Opposition today, which apparently is a new 

policy of the NDP — I don‟t think we heard it before — that 

he‟s in favour of a never-ending royalty review structure. Now 

this is a problem for a whole bunch of reasons. We heard from 

the Minister of Energy some of those problems. The stability of 

the royalty regime has been a major contributor to the economic 

success in this province — $12 billion of investment in the 

potash industry alone has been a direct result of stability and 

certainty on the part of industry that we‟re going to have a 

stable royalty system going forward. 

 

Also interesting, Mr. Speaker, the position of Nexen Energy. A 

document from 2007, where presumably the Leader of the 

Opposition was still employed as a junior lobbyist at the time, 

Mr. Speaker, the position of Nexen states, “The existing regime 

is working as intended and should be preserved.” In that role as 

that junior lobbyist, Mr. Speaker, he would have been taking 

that message to the federal government, to the provincial 

government in Alberta, to other governments across the country 

— that Nexen‟s position was that the existing regime is 

working as intended and should be preserved. 

 

We now hear that he has a new policy that there‟s a 

never-ending royalty review, Mr. Speaker. And we just don‟t 

share that position. We feel that there‟s appropriate times where 

royalties can be looked at. But stability is of vital, vital 

importance in going forward on these matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, another part of the argument we heard from the 

Leader of the Opposition, and he‟d made the argument before 

as well, was in favour of essential nationalization of the 

resource and of the company in question. Obviously that‟s not a 

position that we support as a government, and taking that 

contradictory message to Ottawa wouldn‟t be an appropriate 

way of putting our message forward. 

 

I‟d point out as well that it‟s somewhat hypocritical for the 

member to be calling for a golden share when it was he himself 

who was responsible for getting rid of the golden share that the 

Government of Saskatchewan previously had in PCS and 

another company named as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the things we have done as a government is very, 

very assertively put forward the position of our government 

with federal ministers and others in Ottawa. The Minister of 

Energy and myself spent days, a couple of days earlier this 

week. I had been to Ottawa about a week and a half before that 

as well, meeting with ministers and caucus members from both 

government and opposition. 

 

I think we‟ve made some significant progress in terms of the 

understanding that those decision makers have of our position. 

We‟re going to be obviously getting a decision on November 

the 3rd, Mr. Speaker, and you know, we‟ve advocated very, 

very strongly what that decision be. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

obviously won‟t be supporting the amendment and we hope that 

the members opposite will support the main motion. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s always an 

honour to rise in this Chamber and speak to issues of 

importance to people of Saskatchewan, and perhaps never more 

so than today when we‟re discussing the future of potash — the 

people‟s resource — of which, as speakers have referred, 

Saskatchewan has over 50 per cent of the world‟s reserves. 

 

And there‟s been a lot of discussion today about the different 

parties‟ positions on this issue, Mr. Speaker. And sometimes it 

hasn‟t been by the party; it‟s been by the opposite party trying 

to characterize or mischaracterize, I think in some cases, the 

opposite party‟s position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Energy and Resources made a number of 

characterizations of the position of the New Democratic Party 

and of the NDP opposition in particular, Mr. Speaker, and I 

don‟t necessarily accept those characterizations. But towards 

the end of his remarks he said something along the lines of this, 

that it is the NDP position that we should extract the greatest 

value from this resource and from the resources of the province 

for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. And the word he 

used I think was extract, Mr. Speaker. Well that‟s a fair 

comment, Mr. Speaker. Simply put, that is our position, that we 

should extract from the resources that belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan the greatest value and benefit to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I may not agree with much that the Minister of Energy and 

Resources said this morning going into this afternoon, but I do 

agree with that. That‟s a fair categorization of our position, 

simply put, Mr. Speaker, and to a certain extent the rest is detail 

although it‟s very important detail. 

 

Now the question‟s been asked — and I think any reasonable 

person might now ask this question — is, why are we having 

this debate today at the eleventh hour. Why did we not have this 

debate when the opposition called for it six weeks ago or a 

month ago or three weeks ago, Mr. Speaker? Would not this 

resolution and any delegation that proceeds from this Assembly, 

from this government, to Ottawa have far greater impact if it 

had not been done at the last moment, if the legislature had been 

recalled — as we suggested — to have this debate, to have a 

motion like this passed, many, many days, weeks ago, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And the reason it wasn‟t called back — and I know I‟m 

paraphrasing the Premier of the province — but the reason it 

wasn‟t called back was because the government didn‟t know 

what their position was six weeks ago or a month ago. They 



5702 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

didn‟t know what their position was, Mr. Speaker, and they 

needed time to determine what their position was. They had a 

lot of reading to do, Mr. Speaker. For example, mostly what 

they had to do was read the polls. And anybody who‟s aware of 

any polling that‟s been done on this issue could predict where 

this government was going to land, Mr. Speaker, where they‟ve 

eventually landed. 

 

But six weeks ago, when we were there, they weren‟t ready yet, 

Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why we haven‟t had this debate. That‟s 

why we haven‟t had this motion until today. Because the 

government wasn‟t ready, because the government didn‟t know 

where they were, and perhaps because the government had a 

long way to go to get to the current position on this matter, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s why we haven‟t had the debate; that‟s why we 

haven‟t had the motion. It‟s been a torturous and tortured route 

for the Premier and for the Sask Party government to arrive at 

this position. 

 

When he finally got there within the last few days, Mr. Speaker, 

when he finally got there, that the resources of the province of 

Saskatchewan belong to the people of Saskatchewan and the 

people of Saskatchewan should be deriving the greatest benefit 

from those resources — when he finally got to that position 

after weeks and weeks, Mr. Speaker — it reminded me of 

something Robert Bourassa, the premier of Quebec, said in the 

‟70s: we‟re all social democrats now. And in Saskatchewan, 

after the long, winding road the Premier‟s followed, we seem to 

be all social democrats now. Not quite all of us, Mr. Speaker. I 

think the Liberal leader is still channelling Ayn Rand on this 

issue. But for the most part, we‟re all social democrats now. 

 

And we welcome, we welcome the appreciation, the new-found 

appreciation that the Sask Party government has for this 

principle, that the Minister of Energy and Resources put it kind 

of clumsily, that the resources of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan should benefit to the greatest extent the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate . . . As a matter of 

fact, I think the Minister of Energy and Resources had to follow 

even a more long and winding road to get there than the 

Premier ever did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it also reminded me of something that Tommy Douglas said 

when he was a leader of the New Democratic Party in the 

Parliament of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And he was asked about his 

concern about, you know, the Liberal government stealing his 

ideas. And he said, I don‟t care that they steal my ideas; I wish 

they would steal my principles as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we don‟t care that our ideas are being stolen by the 

government but we‟d appreciate it if they stole our principles as 

well. We‟d feel more comfortable if this was a principled 

position of the Government of Saskatchewan because, as 

Tommy Douglas said, if a man‟s going to steal your pyjamas, 

it‟s best he take both halves if he wants to look decent. 

 

Now there‟s a story that . . . We argued about the provenance of 

this story in the opposition caucus. I thought it was George 

Bernard Shaw; it may not have originally been him. But in this 

particular case, to paraphrase this story, it would go something 

like this. BHP Billiton to the Premier of Saskatchewan: so I 

understand that for $400 million for a domed stadium and $1 

billion to take care of your deficit problem, you‟ll sell out the 

resources of the province of Saskatchewan. To which the 

Premier would say yes. Now the Premier today says, well even 

if I got yes to both those questions, I still had a third question, 

which makes you wonder why he asked the first two. I mean if 

it‟s always going to be no because of the strategic value of the 

resource to the province of Saskatchewan, why did he ask for 

the $400 million? Why did he ask for the $1 billion? It kind of 

raises that question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But anyway, the Premier says yes, for $400 million for a domed 

stadium, $1 billion for my deficit problems, sell out the 

province of Saskatchewan, sell out the resources. BHP Billiton 

says, you know, Mr. Premier, maybe we can do your domed 

stadium, maybe we can do that, but we can‟t come up with $1 

billion — no deal. Will you do this for $400 million? And the 

Premier says, no I will not do this for $400 million. What do 

you think I am? To which BHP Billiton would have to reply, 

well I think we‟ve established what you are; we‟re just haggling 

about the price. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Now the one thing the Premier can do is put his toe in the water, 

his finger in the air, and read a poll. And it may take six weeks 

or eight weeks to do that, but he can do it. And now he has 

ended up in the position that we have held from the very 

beginning of this debate, that the people‟s resources belong to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And that the principle, as the 

Minister of Energy and Resources sort of described as the NDP 

program, which remarkably and disappointingly he seems to 

think is a bad thing, that the value of those resources should be 

greatest for the people of Saskatchewan that can possibly be 

achieved — extracted, I think, was what the minister used and I 

would adopt that word — yes, that‟s our position, that the 

greatest value should be extracted from the people‟s resources 

for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. That‟s our 

position. 

 

Now whether that position can be achieved for the people of 

Saskatchewan in respect to this hostile takeover now comes 

down unfortunately to this — the special relationship between 

our Premier and Prime Minister Harper. And let me canvass for 

a moment that special relationship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When this government proposed to build a clean coal plant — 

for those of us who remember this government‟s proposal for a 

clean coal plant — when this government proposed to build a 

clean coal plant, which is surely, given our obligations as a 

country, an international obligation in respect to climate 

change, it is a national obligation of our government. It is not an 

obligation of the people of Saskatchewan to achieve greenhouse 

emission targets for the country of Canada. Surely this is a 

national project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it was the position of this government and this Premier and, 

given the special relationship between this Premier and Prime 

Minister Harper, that every Saskatchewan resident pay $1,000 

for such a project to any $10 paid by a citizen of Canada. That 

was the position of this, that was the position of this Premier, 

this Saskatchewan Party. And the special relationship that 

existed between this Premier and the federal government in 

Ottawa was such that Prime Minister Harper said, too rich for 

us; no way. 



October 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5703 

But maybe the best example, Mr. Speaker, the best example of 

this special relationship is — and it‟s very relevant to this 

debate on potash, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s about resources — 

is the debate about equalization and resources, Mr. Speaker. 

When this Premier was in opposition, when this Sask Party was 

in opposition, and when there was a Liberal government in 

Ottawa, this Premier stood four-square at that time for the right 

of Saskatchewan people to benefit from the resources, to extract 

the greatest value from their resources, and appreciated that 

non-renewable resources should be removed from the 

equalization formula. That was the position. That was the 

position. 

 

When there‟s a Conservative government in Ottawa, and this 

Premier — speaking of not being able to trust promises, Mr. 

Speaker, which the Premier spoke to earlier — this Premier 

becomes Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, what is the 

position on equalization? Completely different. 

 

Not only, not only, not only can he not get any deal from the 

Prime Minister on removing any part of non-renewable 

resources in the equalization formula, not only can‟t he do that 

to maintain whatever this relationship is, whatever value it has; 

the Premier instructs his Attorney General to withdraw the court 

reference in respect to the constitutionality of this expropriation 

of our resources, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government 

doesn‟t even want to know if this is constitutional, Mr. Speaker. 

The Prime Minister doesn‟t want to know, so the Premier 

doesn‟t want to know. It is that relationship that we now rely 

upon to protect our strategic resources in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I don‟t know how sincere or enthusiastic the Premier is when he 

takes the equalization case to Ottawa, but I know how effective 

he is. He‟s not effective at all. I don‟t know how sincere and 

enthusiastic he is when he takes the greenhouse gas emissions, 

clean coal case to Ottawa. I don‟t know how sincere or 

enthusiastic he really is in private meetings with the Prime 

Minister, but I know how effective he is — zippo, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don‟t know how sincere and enthusiastic he is in his current 

position on potash and on this takeover, Mr. Speaker. I honestly 

don‟t know. He may be sincere. He may be enthusiastic. But 

I‟m afraid, given his record, of how effective he will be with 

Prime Minister Harper. I‟m afraid he will not be very effective, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let‟s be clear about the position of the NDP, and let‟s be 

clear about the position of the government. Because the 

Minister of Energy and Resources said a lot of things about our 

position; the Premier said a few things about our position. But 

what the minister said at the close of his remarks, near the close 

of these remarks, that this opposition believes that the resources 

of the province of Saskatchewan belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to use his word, extract, we would extract 

the greatest value possible from those resources to the benefit of 

the people of Saskatchewan — that‟s our position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If that is truly the position of the Sask Party government, if that 

is sincerely their position, Mr. Speaker, if they don‟t just want 

to borrow some of our ideas but want to adhere to those 

principles, Mr. Speaker, then there‟s no reason why they 

shouldn‟t support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. There‟s no 

reason why the Leader of the Opposition and the Premier 

cannot go shoulder to shoulder to Ottawa to take that position 

forward if that is the position of both sides of the House. It‟s the 

position of this side of the House. Is it the position of the 

government? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented by the Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That the Premier and the Leader of the Official Opposition 

travel to Ottawa at the first opportunity to jointly deliver 

this unanimous motion to the federal government and to 

meet with the Prime Minister and the leaders of the federal 

opposition parties to communicate Saskatchewan‟s 

position; and 

 

That the Premier and the Leader of the Official Opposition 

meet with the 14 members of parliament from 

Saskatchewan to demand their public support for this 

motion in order to protect the interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion . . . I believe 

that the nays have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:38 until 12:40.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 18] 

 

Lingenfelter Belanger Harper 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Quennell Wotherspoon Chartier 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment motion, 

please rise. 

 

[Nays — 33] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Duncan Huyghebaert McMillan 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Reiter Brkich Elhard 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Ross 

Wilson Gantefoer Michelson 



5704 Saskatchewan Hansard October 28, 2010 

Wyant Ottenbreit Kirsch 

Bradshaw Tell Heppner 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 18; 

those opposed, 33. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment has been defeated. The 

question before the Assembly is the original motion presented 

by the Premier, by leave: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the federal government to not 

approve the proposed takeover of PotashCorp by BHP 

Billiton. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:43 until 12:44.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 51] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Duncan Huyghebaert McMillan 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Reiter Brkich Elhard 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Ross 

Wilson Gantefoer Michelson 

Wyant Ottenbreit Kirsch 

Bradshaw Tell Heppner 

Lingenfelter Belanger Harper 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Quennell Wotherspoon Chartier 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order. Those 

opposed, please rise. 

 

[Nays — nil] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Clerk. 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour, 51; those opposed, nil. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. Next order of business. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Speaker of the House of 

Commons, the Prime Minister of Canada, the leaders of 

the federal opposition parties, the Hon. Tony Clement, 

Minister of Industry, and Saskatchewan‟s 14 members of 

parliament. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Government House Leader: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Speaker of the House of 

Commons, the Prime Minister of Canada, the leaders of 

the federal opposition parties, the Hon. Tony Clement, 

Minister of Industry, and Saskatchewan‟s 14 members of 

parliament. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I would move this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:47.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5679 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5679 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5679 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5679 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5679 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5679 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5680 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5680 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5680 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5680 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5680 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5682 

 Agriculture Month in Saskatchewan 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5681 

 Political Wardrobe 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5681 

 Dalmeny Fire Chief Honoured 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5681 

 Statement of Thanks 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5682 

 Autism Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5682 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5683 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5683 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5683 

 Funding for Health Regions 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5684 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5684 

 Fiscal Management 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5685 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5685 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5687 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5687 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Proposed Takeover of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5688 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5691 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5694 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5697 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5700 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5701 

 Recorded Division (Amendment) .............................................................................................................................................. 5703 

 Recorded Division (Motion) ....................................................................................................................................................... 5704 

  D’Autremont (Transmittal Motion) ...................................................................................................................................... 5704 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


