




















































Hansard: December 08, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 24A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6435 

 December 8, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I’m absolutely delighted to introduce a 

number of guests who are with us this morning to discuss the 

Women’s Build, Regina’s first-ever Women’s Build. 

 

We have with us today supervisor for the Build, Val Overend 

from Saskatchewan Women in Trades and Technology; Liana 

Wolf from Regina Construction Careers; and Patricia Fayant 

who is the instructor for SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] for Women in Trades. Could 

you give us a wave? 

 

We have Karen O’Brian and Kama Leier from Deloitte & 

Touche. We have Tabetha Stirrett from North Rim; Pam 

Schwann from Saskatchewan Mining Association; and Vanessa 

Wood from SIAST. Paula Koch, Mandy McGregor, Cindy 

Covey, Trish — I’m going to say this wrong — Bezborotko 

from Habitat for Humanity. We have Nancy McEwen, a Mary 

Kay consultant and Pat Faulconbridge, the executive director of 

the Status of Women. 

 

Thank you very much for attending today, and I ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming these lovely women to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition I too would like to welcome everyone for the 

Women’s Build. I was at the announcement this morning and 

we all look forward to the sod-turning in May. And I can pound 

a nail, so I’m looking forward to participating in it, as well as 

I’m sure many of my colleagues. So again, welcome to the 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a very special guest today seated in your 

gallery. It gives me great pleasure to introduce a good friend, 

Mr. Oliver Cameron — Oliver, do you want to stand and be 

recognized? — from the Beardy Okemasis First Nation. Oliver 

Cameron was the recipient of the Labour Force Development 

award at the 12th Annual Circle of Honour Awards. 

 

Mr. Cameron, or O.C. to his friends, has been the director of 

labour force development for the Saskatoon Tribal Council for 

24 years, demonstrating a strong commitment to improving the 

lives of others through training and employment opportunities. 

I had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, about 10 years when I was 

working with Western Diversification to work with Mr. 

Cameron on some early initiatives regarding First Nations in 

the workforce. He had a keen vision then. It’s proven to be very 

successful. With his hard-working and professional manner, 

Mr. Cameron is a role model for the next generation of First 

Nations leaders in our province. 

 

I look forward to meeting with him after question period. Mr. 

Speaker, through you to all members of the Assembly, please 

welcome Oliver Cameron to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 

like to join with the minister to welcome O.C. to his Legislative 

Assembly. As the minister has touched on, Oliver’s done a 

tremendous amount of work over the years. 

 

The minister had given me a bit of heads-up that you were 

coming to the legislature today, Oliver. So I was googling you 

up, and there’s some pretty groovy pictures from the 

Saskatchewan Indian circa 1976 of Oliver to be seen. 

 

But in addition to the work with the Saskatoon Tribal Council, 

before that Oliver was there from the ground up with the 

Saskatchewan Indian Community College, the forerunner of the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology, which of course 

is a tremendous success these days, Mr. Speaker. And it goes to 

remind me that that work is something that takes years and 

decades to get to that kind of place of success that we see today. 

And certainly one of the people that played a key role, not just 

working for the college then but a stint as principal of the 

community college for a time, was Oliver Cameron. 

 

So Oliver’s always quick with the . . . He’s gives you a very 

warm welcome, pulls your leg pretty hard. But it goes to the 

work that he’s done over the years as a champion of treaty 

education, the right to treaty education, and the well-being of 

First Nations people and how that reflects on the success of all 

Saskatchewan people. So it was not a big surprise that Oliver 

got the Circle of Honour Award, and I was very, very proud to 

be there that night to personally congratulate him. But it’s really 

great to see Oliver Cameron here today in his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you a group of important people, a group led by 

Jen Britton, who are here. It’s the Saskatchewan save our 

Crowns coalition. These are individuals who are concerned 

about the Crowns, are defenders, and understand how important 

the Crowns are both to keeping our utility rates low, creating 

thousands of good jobs in the province. And I just want to 

welcome them all here today to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 



6436 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

pleasure to rise today and introduce to the Assembly through 

Mr. Speaker, a gentleman by the name of Clay DeBray. Clay is 

a hard-working volunteer. He’s a coach. He’s a husband and a 

father, and is a proud leader in the Aboriginal community with 

youth engagement in recreation. He sits in the east gallery today 

looking at the proceedings. He’s also hoping to be a nominated 

candidate for the New Democrats in the upcoming election in 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. So I’d like all members to welcome Clay 

to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I apologize to the member of Prince Albert 

Northcote. Any further introductions? 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the deterioration of our 

highway system. This particular petition pertains to Highway 

310, and the petition states that the condition of this highway is 

a potential safety hazard to those residents who have to travel 

on this highway each and every day. Mr. Speaker, the prayer is 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the Sask Party government to commit to providing 

the repairs to Highway 310 that the people of 

Saskatchewan need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Goodeve and Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of over 150 people who have signed to 

bring to our attention that the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Association has approximately 180 senior centres throughout 

the province, with the vast majority of them located in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These centres provide much-needed recreation and social 

activities as well as important health clinics and workshops, and 

this contributes to an enhanced quality of life for many of the 

seniors who use them; and that due to the skyrocketing costs of 

utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., many of these centres will close 

within the next few months, and the closure of these centres 

will lead to the deteriorating mental and physical health of 

seniors, which will lead to additional stress on long-term care 

facilities and hospitals. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

And the signatures of these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities of Blaine Lake, Leask, Morse, Herbert, Debden, 

Prince Albert, Big River, Saskatoon, Spiritwood, Lanigan, 

Jansen, Ernfold, Hepburn, and Shellbrook. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know that the income gap between the rich and the poor here in 

Saskatchewan continues to grow, and now one in five children 

in Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And unfortunately 

we also know that when governments reduce spending, 

supports for social programs are cut first. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Regina, Saskatoon, North Battleford, and Vanscoy. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of Highway 102. Highway 102 is the only road access 

for communities like Grandmother’s Bay, Sucker River, 

Stanley Mission, Missinipe, and Southend. There is a 

substantial amount of traffic on this highway that involves the 

transportation of goods and services to and from the 

communities, as well as providing a vital infrastructure link for 

the mining and resource industries. The current road has huge 

potholes, ruts that cause a real danger to anyone who dares to 

travel on it. And this road is in dire need of repairs and 

upgrades. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the Sask Party government to recognize that 

Highway 102 is used extensively by the mining, resource, 

and tourist industries which contributes millions of 

dollars to the provincial economy every year; and that the 

people who travel this road must be able to travel in 

safety; and that in doing so commit to immediately 

providing the repairs needed to Highway 102 and paving 

the remainder of the highway to Southend. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good people of 

Southend. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6437 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls on expanded hospice and palliative 

care here in Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system, including residential 

hospices, would increase end-of-life options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition from the residents of Furdale who 

are looking for a permanent solution to their situation, Mr. 

Speaker, and not just having it delayed by another year, 

potentially. A government ministry has directed SaskWater to 

cut off supplies of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. 

This same government ministry has directed that customers 

may no longer treat non-potable water using methods approved 

by Sask Health. 

 

The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater 

for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment, as well as for 

livestock and irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

being referred to by the government ministry is a private 

operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost 

with no guarantee of quality, quantity, and availability of water. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Saskatoon and Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

residents as it relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of 

our finances by the Sask Party. They refer to the two 

consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of dollars of debt 

growth, Mr. Speaker, both this year alone and the $4.2 billion 

projected to grow over the next four years, Mr. Speaker, 

representing 55 per cent growth in our debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course these deficits and this debt growth is occurring at a 

time where revenues are at all-time highs, Mr. Speaker, and this 

sort of mismanagement comes at a price to Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask the member to go to the prayer. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Breast Friends 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today in the House to speak about a special group of 

Saskatchewan women. Breast Friends is comprised of Patti 

Hack, Cecile Halyk, Linda Helgason, Darlene Cooper, Jeannie 

Johnson, Val Helgason, Anne Reynolds, Nat Dunlop, Charlene 

Rokochy, and Jacquie Klebeck who works here in the building. 

They are a group of 10 seasoned women from Foam Lake. 

These incredible women continue to raise funds for cancer 

causes from the sale of their own self-published national 

bestselling cookbooks. 

 

Just recently the Breast Friends cookbook was prominently 

featured in the November issue of Gourmand Magazine, 

published in Spain and widely distributed throughout Europe. 

The magazine features the latest in cookbooks and culinary 

news and features Breast Friends as an example of the new 

trend — cookbooks that support charities. All of the Breast 



6438 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

Friends’ cookbooks are national bestsellers. For the Breasts of 

Friends, For the Breasts and the Rest of Friends, and Breast 

Wishes each contain over 400 tried-and-true recipes as well as 

pictures, cancer information, quotes, quips, and a generous 

helping of stories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like the Assembly to recognize the Breast 

Friends for their continued efforts in working for a cancer cure, 

raising more than 1 million for the fight against cancer via their 

fundraising cookbooks. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Climate Change 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, climate change is a challenge 

unlike any other the human family has faced. It requires us to 

work together to restore the health of our planet, and it is a task 

that falls on all of us everywhere on Earth. 

 

Saskatchewan generates a significant amount of greenhouse 

gases. These gases are already contributing to warming in our 

prairie region that is occurring at a faster rate compared to the 

rest of Canada. The evidence remains clear and resounding that 

more must be done to reduce greenhouse gas emissions which 

lead to growing climate destabilization, producing dangers like 

more droughts, declining surface water levels, increased 

number of forest fires, and more severe weather like tornados 

and floods. 

 

Unfortunately the Sask Party government chose to break its 

election promise adopted from the previous NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government to aggressively reduce 

greenhouse gases. After nearly two years of delay, the Sask 

Party alternative has not set any measurable targets and allows 

polluters to police themselves with a self-regulation-style model 

of environmental protection with after-the-fact enforcement by 

government. At the same time, the Sask Party government is 

draining the Environment budget with harmful cuts to Dutch 

elm disease management, cuts to forest fighting, cuts to 

watersheds, cuts to industrial environmental protection, cuts to 

climate change research, and even cuts to Saskatchewan’s only 

UNESCO-designated [United Nations Educational, Scientific 

and Cultural Organization] biosphere. 

 

New Democrats will continue to hold the Sask Party 

government to account for its mismanagement of our finances 

and our environment, Mr. Speaker. After all, the environment 

and the fight against climate change is something we simply 

can’t afford to lose. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Biggar and Area Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 27th I 

had the pleasure of taking part in an event referred to as the 

Blast from the Past. This event was a fundraiser sponsored by 

the Biggar Knights of Columbus Monsignor Tomb Council 

6169. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this fundraiser consisted of a wonderful meal 

catered to by a long-time caterer Katie Sagon and her crew, 

entertainment by some local talent, a silent auction, and 

karaoke. It was an event that was enjoyed by over 200 people. 

The event was well organized and came together at the hands of 

two members of St. Gabriel Parish, Sheila Itterman and Lynda 

Kral, along with a number of helpers. This event raised 

thousands of dollars for the Knights of Columbus and will 

allow them to continue their charitable works. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy to say that the Knights of Columbus have dedicated 

one-half of the proceeds raised at this fundraiser to go towards 

the new long-term care home that will be built in Biggar. 

 

Also many thanks to the Friends of the Lodge, a group of 

dedicated volunteers from throughout the catchment area that 

have come together to educate and inform the communities that 

will benefit from the long-term care home and assist in raising 

funds to ensure that the lodge is developed and furnished 

adequately. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 

thank all those who were involved in putting this fundraiser on 

and those that made it a success by taking part in it. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Veterans Memorial Hall 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on November the 11th, I 

attended Remembrance Day ceremonies in Cumberland House. 

Mr. Speaker, the community celebrated the grand opening of 

the Cumberland House Veterans Memorial Hall. 

 

The hall was built to accommodate the many community 

activities such as community meetings, weddings, and wake 

services. Mr. Speaker, the Veterans Memorial Hall was 

constructed through the capital grants program. And the 

community is continuing to fundraise for kitchen appliances 

and equipment. They will continue to do many other 

community fundraising activities to complete this wonderful 

project. 

 

It was a very proud day for the community, Mr. Speaker, as 

Cumberland House has a long history of community members 

volunteering for both war and peacetime service. I was 

honoured to take part in the official ceremony with Mayor 

Andy McKay and council, Chief Lorne Stewart of Cumberland 

House Cree Nation, Grand Chief Ron Michel of PAGC [Prince 

Albert Grand Council], Leonard Morin, area director for Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan, and several other officials. I was also 

pleased to bring greetings on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Many of the community veterans are displayed on a 

floor-to-ceiling painting by local artists and is on display in the 

hall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

community of Cumberland House on the official opening of 

their new hall. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

The Salvation Army 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Last week, Thursday, December 2nd, I had 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6439 

the opportunity to volunteer at the Salvation Army’s Christmas 

dinner at the White Buffalo Youth Lodge in Saskatoon. This is 

an annual event for the Salvation Army, and the three separate 

seatings were well attended by local residents. The Salvation 

Army folks made sure that it was a festive event. Volunteers 

were decked out in red aprons and had a choice of Santa hats or 

reindeer ears. There was a band and singers who sang 

Christmas songs during dinner, and every table was decorated 

for the season. 

 

I thought it’d be a good idea to bring along my nieces. Jasmine 

is 16 and Sharmaine is 13. Their friend Ingrid asked to come 

along as well. This was a first volunteer experience for all of 

them. All three girls jumped right in and did whatever was 

asked of them or whatever was needed. And before we left that 

evening, they all asked if they could come back and help out 

next year. I’m so very proud of these young girls and their 

willingness to help others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Salvation Army is an amazing group of men 

and women who do so very much for our communities and for 

our province. Just a sample of what they do on an annual basis: 

serve over 80,000 meals, provide over 17,000 beds, have over 

100 emergency food hampers provided, and have provided over 

4,000 people with free clothing. Their community service 

centre consists of two shelters, a drop-in centre, a meal 

program, family services, a church, and many other services. I 

want to thank the Salvation Army for their efforts to bring 

Christmas cheer to the lives of so many in Saskatoon last week 

and to thank them as well for what they do on a day-to-day 

basis. They do it quietly and without much fanfare, and they 

deserve our recognition and respect. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we leave this place for Christmas, I would 

hope that we can all find something to do to reach out to others 

who need a little bit of extra help. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, over the years, our Crowns have 

delivered utilities and service at modest cost while providing 

high-quality jobs. Under the NDP, every Saskatchewan person 

had enjoyed the lowest cost utility bundle which guaranteed 

Saskatchewan people paid the lowest price in Canada for the 

utilities we use daily. This made Saskatchewan a more 

attractive and affordable place to live. 

 

The Sask Party government’s first action was to scrap the 

lowest cost utility bundle. Then they raised the natural gas 

rates. Then they raised the power rates, then the gas, then the 

power. Then they introduced the first rate increase in a decade 

at SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. Then the Sask 

Party introduced their Saskatchewan-first policy forcing 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations to sell off profitable 

investments in other provinces. 

 

The results — utilities have never cost us more. Saskatchewan 

people pay and pay. The Sask Party government can’t be 

trusted with Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. They pretend 

to have dropped their policy of privatization of the Crowns 

while they privatize by slices. The Premier continues to lead 

their philosophical charge to privatize. 

 

New Democrats will continue to defend our Crown 

corporations from the Sask Party privatization attacks for the 

benefit of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

A Candidate’s Brochure 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

some voters in Regina South recently received a brochure from 

the NDP candidate. It’s actually not a bad brochure. It contains 

none of the usual vitriol and the running down of Saskatchewan 

that we’ve come to expect from the NDP. 

 

But there is also something else that was noticeably absent in 

this brochure. There was not one mention anywhere of the 

current leader of the Saskatchewan NDP — not one picture, not 

one mention of his name. It’s almost like he doesn’t exist. In 

fact, in the brochure the candidate mentions that he ran to be the 

NDP leader, but he never actually mentions the individual who 

did become the leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a big problem. Candidates are 

running for the NDP, but they’re running away from their own 

leader. I can understand why a candidate would want to run 

away from a leader with a 12 per cent approval rating, and I 

think the voters of Regina South will see through this. Mr. 

Speaker, when the NDP candidates are trying to distance 

themselves from their own leader, it’s no wonder that the voters 

of Saskatchewan feel the same way. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, in the 

gallery, in your gallery is a group of save our Saskatchewan 

Crown Corporations coalition who are here today because 

they’re very concerned about what this Sask Party government 

is doing to the Crowns in the province. One of their biggest 

concerns is the fact that every penny of profit has been stripped 

out of the Crowns this year, and what this will lead to is much 

higher debt and higher utility rates while the government is 

trying to hide the debt that they’re running because of their 

mismanagement. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: in light of the fact that many 

people in this province are worried about the Crowns, how is it 

that he continues to pretend that he is the saviours of the 

Crown? And does he intend to take 100 per cent of the profits 

in next year’s budget from our Crown Corporations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to the 

Assembly that it looks like, as a result of some excellent 

performance from SaskTel, that we’re going to actually need 

less of a proportion of the dividend from, in terms of the total 



6440 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

revenue, from the Crowns. 

 

I would also say this, Mr. Speaker, that under our 

administration we have made significant investments in the 

Crown Corporations, Mr. Speaker. Tens of millions of dollars 

invested in SaskTel to provide better cell coverage, Mr. 

Speaker. To also provide 100 per cent Internet coverage across 

the province, that’s the objective of the government. That’s the 

objective. We continue to make those investments. We make 

investments in SaskPower so that the country continues to lead 

in terms of clean coal and sequestration technology, Mr. 

Speaker. SGI continues to flourish, Mr. Speaker, as a Crown 

Corporation in Saskatchewan as well. And the same is true for 

SaskEnergy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to invest in our 

Crown Corporations. Those Crowns will continue to provide 

excellent service at a low cost for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the save our Crowns 

coalition is worried of course about the stripping away of the 

cash from the Crown corporations and using the Crown 

corporations as a cash cow. 

 

They’re also worried about the privatization and the contracting 

out in many, many areas of the Crowns. Things like SaskTel 

operator service and the Max Internet interactive TV 

installation, email, high-speed Internet, all of those being 

contracted out; privatizing and selling off SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] and The Ag Dealer as well as the 

Hospitality Network; and, most importantly, the privatization of 

a large part of SaskPower’s production with the signing of a 

deal with Northland Power, where all of the profits will go to an 

Ontario company, leading to higher utility rates and fewer jobs 

in the Crowns. 

 

Can the Premier explain why this is good for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first of all just some factual 

misstatements by the hon. member in his question. SCN for 

example, not a Crown corporation. Additionally I would say, 

Mr. Speaker, that the example of engaging with private sector 

suppliers of power was an example set by the NDP when they 

were in power. I believe that hon. member sat in the cabinet 

when they sought to do a deal with SunBridge, a private 

supplier of wind power, Mr. Speaker; also the Atco cogen deal 

done by that government, also the Crown corporation buying 

from a private supplier. 

 

So if privatization is happening today because of the Northland 

deal that the people of North Battleford like, if that’s what he 

calls privatization, Mr. Speaker, it was him and his government 

that set the example and began that kind of privatization, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would also say that what we will see in Saskatchewan going 

forward is the government continuing to invest in our Crowns. 

What we will not see, as we did in 2001 when he sat at the 

cabinet, is the stripping of equity to the tune of 181 per cent of 

the earnings of the Crown for his government. You won’t see 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 

The Premier will know that last year his government stripped 

$1.3 billion from the Crowns to cover up for their mistakes in 

the Department of Finance and to cover up a deficit that his 

government is running at the present time. We all know that. 

 

We also know that he is privatizing, this government is 

privatizing big pieces of SaskTel, of SaskPower. This will lead 

very directly to fewer jobs in our Crowns and much higher 

utility rates. Why is it that the Premier has this as a legacy for 

the families in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with Saskatchewan doing so 

well today in terms of its position, national leadership, with 

Saskatchewan performing so well economically, and with by 

and large, as the Opposition Leader has noted, the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan being very satisfied with the 

direction, it shouldn’t surprise anybody at all in this province 

that they’re going to engage in a nonsensical fear campaign 

about the future of the Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are investing in our Crown corporations. In 

SaskEnergy, 46 million in transmission, 24 million in 

distribution. At SaskPower, 307 in transmission and 

distribution, 148 million in new generation. That’s just to list a 

few. In SaskTel, next generation wireless network, 129 million; 

44 million in access and core network growth; Max 

enhancements of $30 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Crown corporations are strong today. They’ll continue to 

be strong. They’ll continue to provide great service to the 

people of the province at a low cost, Mr. Speaker. What they 

won’t do is go off on investment jaunts in Nashville and in 

Georgia and get involved in potatoes. That’s what would risk 

the future of a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A pattern 

is developing with this Minister of Social Services. When 

concerns are raised, she diminishes them or she ignores them. 

The Provincial Auditor says she’s failing to protect children and 

doesn’t even know how many children are in her care. And 

what does she do? She attacks his methodology, questions his 

findings. And over the last couple of weeks, a well-respected 

individual in the social services field has tried to raise serious 

concerns related to child protection with the minister, but the 

minister has ignored her. 

 

My question is this: why does the minister refuse to listen when 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6441 

people raise serious concerns about the protection of children in 

our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I have to assure 

the members opposite that we’ve been listening very carefully 

to the concerns that he’s been bringing forward, and we’ve been 

talking about all the work that we’ve been doing as a 

government. We understand that when we became government 

that there was a lot of attention needed to be given to a lot of 

areas. 

 

We had areas where government had not looked at seniors’ 

income for decades. We had not looked at the rental supplement 

for decades. We had not increased money for people on social 

services for decades. CBOs [community-based organization] 

needed an increase. It wasn’t looked at for decades. The 

members opposite wanted to pretend that they were there for 

the poor and for people who needed help, and they didn’t do 

anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have put money, we have put $45 million 

more into assistance for people on welfare, 106 per cent 

increase for child and family services. There’s more work to be 

done, Mr. Speaker, but I assure you we are ignoring no one. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we know much of what the 

minister said is not accurate at all. Mr. Speaker, Carol 

LaFayette-Boyd is in the gallery today. She retired from the 

public service in 2005 after training many social workers and 

foster parents and helping to develop many of the policies and 

protocols that are in place today. Now she’s assisting families 

that are caught up in the child welfare system. 

 

And over the last couple of weeks, she’s tried unsuccessfully to 

meet with the minister to discuss serious concerns about 

policies and protocols that are being broken. Families are being 

unjustly torn apart and children are suffering as a result. 

Because she was ignored, Carol wrote a letter to the minister 

and to the Premier in which she writes, “Child welfare within 

your ministry is in chaos.” 

 

To the minister: why does the minister refuse to listen to 

Carol’s very serious concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the number of children in 

our care and the concerns of our system has been brought 

forward many times. In fact that’s one of the reasons why we 

had things like the child welfare review panel. I’m looking 

forward to releasing the results of those recommendations in the 

next few days, in the next little while, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we do know that there’s more work to be done. Some of 

the people that call my office have been getting attention from 

people that work not just in the ministry but within my office. I 

assure you when they bring forward concerns, it’s looked at by 

a whole host of people who are professionals. 

There are people in this ministry, Mr. Speaker, who are 

dedicated individuals. In fact I dare to say that there isn’t one 

person working in the Ministry of Social Services who doesn’t 

do it because they like their job. It’s not for the money. It’s 

because they care about what they are . . . about the people in 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I assure you that when we’re looking at issues and 

dealing with children in care of this province, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

our top priority. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s another quote 

from Carol’s letter to the minister and the Premier. And I quote: 

 

The public has a right to know how deliberately your 

ministry disregards policy and treats the families and 

children in care with total disregard. It is in the public’s 

interest to know whether or not your government is 

unable to bring order back to child welfare or that the 

minister and this government will take measures to 

correct blatant misconduct, gross breach of policy and 

law within their ministries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are serious concerns. And when children 

and families are being hurt, we need to act quickly. 

 

My question is this: in light of these concerns raised today 

which corroborate the findings of the Provincial Auditor, will 

the Premier agree to establish a special all-party committee to 

urgently examine the crisis in our child welfare system so that 

the concerns of Carol can be properly heard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is about the third time 

this week that the member opposite has asked to have a special 

committee dealing with something. Do you know what we have 

to do? Mr. Speaker, what has to be done is looking at the 

reports that have already been implemented. We have just got 

. . . The Pringle report is going to be released within the next 

two weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to meet with the individual that the member opposite is 

speaking about, and I’d also like to assure the people that we 

find the Provincial Auditor’s findings very concerning. The 

problems in the child and welfare system have been ongoing for 

25 years, and I know we can’t solve the problems overnight. 

 

We’ve implemented a new foster home database. That’s 

something that was very important. The members opposite 

didn’t have a clue where their children were because they were 

all paper children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re implementing the database, and we’ll have 

an opportunity to release the report from the Pringle report in 

the next time. Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to future 

work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



6442 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

Personal Health Information 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week, the 

Health minister admitted that he misjudged public opinion on 

the government’s new regulations allowing health regions to 

share people’s personal information with fundraisers. He said, 

and I quote, “I probably did for sure.” 

 

But in the face of overwhelming public opposition, the minister 

is still sticking to his guns. He said, “We’re going to let this 

play out a little longer and see what happens.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell him what’s going to happen. People aren’t 

going to like it six months from now or a year from now. They 

just don’t like it. They’re not going to like it ever.  

 

To the minister: why is he ignoring the public’s clear message? 

Why doesn’t he just admit he was wrong and repeal the 

regulation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first of all I want to point out to the Assembly the 

amazing work the foundations do across the province. I had the 

opportunity to be in Yorkton not too long ago to a stroke 

rehabilitation therapy opening, Mr. Speaker, and the 

foundations had put a yellow ribbon around all the equipment 

that they had bought to put into this facility. And it was 

amazing the amount of money that foundations raise throughout 

the province. 

 

When we moved on the regulation, a regulation that the 

opposition had thought of when they were in government, when 

we moved on this regulation, Mr. Speaker, we knew that not all 

health regions were going to follow along. There are some 

health regions, for example Five Hills, that the foundation sends 

to everyone within the city of Moose Jaw, for example. But we 

knew that some health regions were interested, very interested. 

They were asking for it. Foundations were asking for it. I know 

a number of patients that were very pleased to give, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Since that time, we’ve seen the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region decide not to pursue it. But there are other health 

regions that are working on it, Mr. Speaker, with their 

foundation to make sure that if they move forward, that the 

patients of the province know all their options. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister did a very poor job of 

consultation before this came in. The public was not asked and 

the public has clearly indicated what they think of this. This 

information doesn’t belong to the minister or the government. It 

belongs to the patients. And this is something the Sask Party 

government doesn’t understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan people choose to keep the 

fact that they were in the hospital or that they receive treatment 

private, even from their families or loved ones. And there’s a 

very real danger, Mr. Speaker, that because of this and because 

people know their information will be made public, they won’t 

seek treatment in a timely manner. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why is the minister pressing ahead with the 

plan that could prevent some patients from seeking the 

treatment that they need, and why is he so determined to violate 

patients’ rights? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if you look at other 

provinces, this is not unprecedented across the country, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s other provinces that have this very regulation 

and allows foundations and health regions to share name and 

address only, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s up to the health regions now. If they so choose 

to move forward on this, Mr. Speaker, they certainly can. They 

can work with the foundation within their area and with the 

Ministry of Health to make sure that all the proper information 

is given to patients prior to and post, Mr. Speaker. Those details 

are being worked out between health regions and foundations 

that want to pursue it. If the health region chooses not to pursue 

it, Mr. Speaker, that is their decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve given them that decision-making power. We could have, 

I guess, dictated to them. It’s not ours to dictate. The health 

regions make the decision. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — News flash, Mr. Speaker, the minister gave the 

health regions the authority to do it. So now they have the 

authority to do it on his doing from passing the regulation. So 

he can’t dodge it now. The public will know who it came from. 

 

Over half the health regions in this province have already 

announced that they plan to opt out, and they know that the 

patients see this as a violation of their privacy. People have 

spoken and they’re speaking everywhere in every forum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting though that the government is 

pressing ahead with this. They see no problem in violating 

patients’ privacy, but they’re using privacy legislation to justify 

redacting 1,800 pages of information about an insider deal in 

the health sector that could cost taxpayers millions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why the double standard? Mr. 

Speaker, why is it acceptable to share a patient’s personal 

information with fundraisers, but not acceptable to share with 

taxpayers how their money is being spent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the HIPA came 

into effect, Mr. Speaker, The Health Information Protection 

Act, prior to that, this information was shared. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I would say for about 10 to 15, 10 years at least under 

the former government, under the NDP government this 

information was shared. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve allowed health regions to make that 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6443 

decision if they so choose, to share name and address with a 

health region, with a foundation. They can do it. Many health 

regions are opting out, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but I will tell 

you that foundations take this very, very seriously . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m trying to hear the response 

from the minister. I’d ask the members to allow the minister to 

respond to the question. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, foundations and health 

regions take this very seriously. That’s why you haven’t seen 

any of them move quickly on it, Mr. Speaker. You’ve seen one 

health region, Regina Qu’Appelle, say they’re not going to 

move on it. We knew that other health regions, many of the 

smaller health regions wouldn’t be doing it, moving on the 

regulation. We’ll see what some of the other health regions, be 

it Saskatoon or P.A. [Prince Albert], decide to do in the 

upcoming months. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to say that the minister 

takes this seriously when the Privacy Commissioner, who’s an 

independent officer of this legislature, has said no to this. And 

he simply ignores that. He ignores the public opinion. People 

are talking about this; they don’t want it. The Privacy 

Commissioner said no. We, when we looked at it, also said no 

because of those very concerns. But obviously when the 

minister consults with whoever he consults with, he didn’t hear 

this. He didn’t obviously reach the right people or he ignored 

what they said. 

 

My question to the minister is, why did he do this in the first 

place? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, health 

foundations do amazing work. They raise millions and millions 

of dollars that go into the health care system each and every 

year, Mr. Speaker, be it in Regina, be it in Indian Head, be it in 

Fort Qu’Appelle, be it in any small community or large 

community across this province. Health regions and 

foundations were looking at how they could perhaps increase 

the amount of fundraising by targeting people, not for 60 days 

after they had been at a hospital stay, Mr. Speaker. Name and 

address only would be exchanged from health region to 

foundation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the member asks why did we move in this direction, 

health regions had been asking for it. Foundations had been 

asking for it, Mr. Speaker. A number of patients thought it was 

a very good idea, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle has decided not to move on it, 

and I absolutely respect their right and view on this, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to see how some of the other health 

regions, whether they move forward with their foundations into 

the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

morning I had an opportunity to review the Ministry of Health’s 

website, and here is the Ministry of Health’s website’s 

definition for an affiliate: 

 

Affiliates are those not-for-profit organizations that 

operate hospitals and special care homes. Typically these 

facilities are owned by faith-based organizations or other 

community groups with their own board of directors. 

 

A very simple question to the minister, and I think the public 

would appreciate an answer: why is Amicus not an affiliate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I answered this question 

yesterday. The member was going on about whether it was an 

affiliate or talking about an affiliate. I said yesterday that health 

regions enter into agreement with a number of organizations — 

some are classed as affiliates, some are classed as 

non-government organizations, Mr. Speaker, some are classed 

as health care organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is saying we shouldn’t 

enter into those agreements, I would ask the member opposite 

why did they enter into an agreement with Extendicare that 

provides long-term care throughout the province? It isn’t an 

affiliate, Mr. Speaker, but under the NDP it was fine to enter 

into that agreement. Mr. Speaker, this is 100 new long-term 

care beds that will be in her backyard, Mr. Speaker. I’m quite 

frankly amazed that she would throw the brakes on it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a health care organization is 

defined as an affiliate, or prescribed persons that receive 

funding from a regional health authority to provide health 

services. Well, prescribed persons that receive funding — this 

is their definition — from a regional health authority include 

for-profit special care private ambulance operators as well as 

organizations providing mental health and addiction services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why isn’t Amicus, a faith-based organization with 

a board, not an affiliate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, health regions 

enter into agreements with many organizations. Some are 

looked at as affiliates. Some are health care organizations, Mr. 

Speaker. Some are NGOs, non-government organizations, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact even health regions will enter into agreements 

with third-party deliverers such as the surgery centre in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and the facility in Regina that is seeing 

hundred and hundreds of procedures going on. 



6444 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, if we ever go back in this province to the NDP, 

they’d be ripping up those agreements, and there’ll be hundreds 

and thousands more people waiting for surgery, waiting for 

long-term care in this province. Mr. Speaker, we can never go 

back to the old NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, health care 

organizations as prescribed in The Regional Health Services 

Administration Regulations describe these organizations such 

as Backlin’s Ambulance Service, Blaine Lake ambulance 

service, Canadian Mental Health Association, Canora 

ambulance service, Cenaiko Enterprises Corp., Creighton 

Alcohol and Drug Abuse Council, Crestvue Ambulance 

Service, Crocus Co-op, Cupar Lions Volunteer Ambulance Inc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a very simple question, and the minister is 

trying to divert us away from the answer. Why is Amicus not an 

affiliate, given that it comes from a faith-based organization 

and has a board of directors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member has been 

asking questions for six weeks, Mr. Speaker. We know that she 

would absolutely throw on the brakes, Mr. Speaker. She doesn’t 

like the agreement. She doesn’t like the deal. But I can tell you 

for 60 patients, 60 residents in acute care centres in Saskatoon, 

namely City Hospital, they’re going to love this when they get 

to move into a facility that’s appropriate for them at the end of 

their life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP they closed hundreds and 

hundreds and hundreds of long-term care beds. That is why, 

Mr. Speaker, for the first time in 20 years, Mr. Speaker, new 

long-term care beds are going to be built in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. If it was under the old NDP, they’d rather have them 

live in an acute care centres. And to the Sask Party, it’s just not 

acceptable. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Women Build Program 

to Construct Habitat for Humanity Home 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to inform the House about an exciting new 

construction project due in the province to the Status of Women 

and Habitat For Humanity that will see one more Regina family 

receive the gift of a lifetime — a home to call their own. I’m 

proud that this affordable housing project will be led entirely by 

women and that it will be a first of its kind in Regina. 

 

This initiative will enable a family to experience home 

ownership for the very first time. It’s a win-win situation for 

everyone. Established by Habitat for Humanity, Women Build 

is a program that promotes and encourages women’s leadership 

and participation in construction and skills trades, an 

occupation group in which women are clearly 

under-represented. In 2009 for example only 1,200 women, as 

compared to nearly 42,000 men, were employed in construction 

and other trades in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to recognize the 

Habitat for Humanity volunteers, for men and women who 

willingly devote their time and energy to build communities, 

one home and one family at a time. As our government 

embarks on a new road, we are extremely proud to encourage 

and support Saskatchewan tradeswomen and students in their 

work to help a Habitat for Humanity partner and their family 

come home. 

 

Since 2009 we’ve dedicated $2 million in funding for Habitat 

for Humanity affiliates in Regina, in Saskatoon, Yorkton, 

Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, and Lloydminster to help build 40 

new homes across the province. To date we’ve committed 1.4 

million of $2 million in grant funding available to 

Saskatchewan Habitat for Humanity affiliates to develop 28 

homes. 

 

This investment is a concrete demonstration of our commitment 

to increase the supply of quality affordable housing across 

Saskatchewan and to encourage Saskatchewan women to lead 

and to learn skills, skill trades. There is work to be done, Mr. 

Speaker, and we are committed to doing it. 

 

It will be my privilege in the next months ahead to keep the 

house appraised of the Status for Humanity-Women Build 

project and of this government’s ongoing work in the area of 

affordable housing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you very much to the minister for the advance copy of her 

statement. And I too want to join in congratulating Habitat for 

Humanity-Regina Women Build for this project. We know 

every home that’s built is very meaningful for the family who 

will receive it. And if you could add on the value of having 

women bring an awful lot to projects like this, especially in the 

skill development, I think that’s very important. And we know 

that Habitat for Humanity as an NGO is very innovative. 

 

I think about in Saskatoon the work they’ve done in terms of 

providing high school students with the opportunity to learn 

skills, and often there would be young women involved in that. 

I think about Bedford. E.D. Feehan had innovative programs, 

and now they’re at Mount Royal because of the investments 

that we made in terms of providing funding — some $17 

million — for the Mount Royal expansion. So this is very 

important, and I just want to emphasize the congratulations to 

Habitat for Humanity Regina Women Build. 

 

But I do want to draw a line there when we talk about the work 

that this government has done around affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan. We know the waiting lists have grown over the 

last couple of years from 1,100 to 2,300, and that’s very, very 

serious. And what we need most than anything for this province 

is a provincial housing strategy about how we’re going to meet 

the crisis, the short-term crisis of people and emergency 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6445 

shelters tonight, the long term about making sure people have 

homes like this one, so everybody has a safe place they can call 

home when they go home at night. Thank you very much. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister just rose on a ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn’t meet the definition of a ministerial statement. 

Ministerial statements are to bring forward new direction, new 

policy, or significant changes in the government’s direction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This member’s statement did none of these, Mr. Speaker. This 

is simply a matter of her re-announcing what she announced 

today and already held a press conference on, Mr. Speaker, of a 

continuation of a program where the government helps Habitat 

for Humanity build homes, Mr. Speaker. This is not new 

direction, new policy, or a significant new direction for 

government, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t meet the definition of a 

ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker, and I would like you to rule 

on this matter. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on the point of order, the minister was announcing a new 

partnership with Habitat Saskatchewan that was building a 

home, particularly by women, Mr. Speaker, which was entirely 

new. Mr. Speaker, the government continues to partner with 

organizations, NGOs such as Habitat, Mr. Speaker, and this is 

an important initiative that needs to be communicated and 

recognized, Mr. Speaker, and is something that is very 

worthwhile in the province of Saskatchewan. And the minister 

made the announcement this morning, just prior to coming into 

the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ve listened . . . Order. Order. Order. I’ve 

listened to the point of order by the member from Regina 

Dewdney, the Opposition House Leader, and the Government 

House Leader’s response. In the past, Speakers have ruled that 

announcements or ministerial statements that are relating to 

issues that are long past have been issues that it has been felt 

have already been released to the public. But we’ve also 

recognized announcements made earlier in the day and the first 

opportunity in the Chamber. We have recognized those 

opportunities. I will, however, take the opportunity to take a 

close look at the statement to ensure that we’re following the 

guidelines that we have established. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its eighth report. I 

move: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy has moved: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Economy Committee. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 148, 

The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 with amendment. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that Bill and its amendments be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 148, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 with 

amendment and that the Bill and its amendments be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 

a first time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a first time 

and a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



6446 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010 with amendment be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 156, 

The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 

Whole on this Bill and that this Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 156, The Freehold Oil and 

Gas Production Tax Act, 2010, that the Bill be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 

Tax Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 156, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its 11th report. I 

move: 

 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee of Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Crown 

and Central Agencies: 

 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Before orders of the day . . . Order. 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — To seek leave under rule 59 to move a motion 

of urgent and pressing necessity in light of the concerns raised 

today in question period, which corroborates the findings of the 

Provincial Auditor late last week, which showed that this 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6447 

government is currently failing to adequately protect children in 

its care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to move a motion that will propose an 

establishment of a special all-party committee to examine this 

important issue. I have provided the government . . . I’ll briefly 

read the text of that motion now: 

 

That this Assembly immediately establish a special 

all-party committee to consider the Pringle report and to 

review the situation of children in care in Saskatchewan 

and to make recommendations to the Legislative 

Assembly, and 

 

That the committee have the power to sit during the 

intersessional period, and 

 

That the committee have the power to send for a person’s 

papers and records, to examine witnesses under oath, to 

receive representations from interested parties and 

individuals, to engage such advisers and assistants as are 

required for the purposes of the inquiry, and to hold 

meetings away from the seat of government in order that 

the fullest representations may be received without 

unduly inconveniencing those who desire to be heard, and 

 

That the committee be instructed to submit its reports to 

the Legislative Assembly on March 7th, 2011, the first 

day of the spring period of the fourth session of the 

twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave under rule 

59 to move a motion of pressing and urgent nature. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

The Same Question Rule 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move further in orders of the day, I 

have a statement. Order. I would like to draw to the attention of 

the members that this Assembly, order, that this Assembly had 

under consideration two Bills which, through the process of 

amendments, ended up with provisions of substantially the 

same purpose — Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010 in the name of the Minister of 

Agriculture and Bill No. 617, The Protection of Service 

Animals Act in the name of the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

Both Bills propose means to protect service animals from 

abuse. 

 

According to Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 23rd 

Edition, page 578: 

 

There is no rule or custom which restrains the 

presentation of two or more bills relating to the same 

subject, and containing similar provisions. But if a 

decision of the House has already been taken on one such 

bill . . . the other is not proceeded with if it contains 

substantially the same provisions . . . 

 

This Legislative Assembly has numerous precedents on the 

subject of the same question rule with respect to Bills. Speakers 

have consistently ruled that if the Assembly has agreed to one 

Bill that contains similar provisions in another Bill the Speaker 

must then prevent any further consideration of the second Bill. 

 

Today Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 

2010 was reported back to the Assembly with amendments. The 

Assembly agreed to the amendments and third reading. Given 

the decision by the Assembly to adopt the amended Bill, it is 

my duty to ensure that the Assembly does not come to two 

different decisions on the same question. For this reason, it is 

necessary that I order that item no. 4 under private members’ 

public Bills and orders, second readings, Bill No. 617, The 

Protection of Service Animals Act be removed from the order 

paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 633 and 634. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to question 633 and 634 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance, I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — Order. Now I will call the Committee of 

Finance to order. I will recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

Be it: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2011, the sum of $443,173,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Question before the Assembly is no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 



6448 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2011, the sum of $443,173,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the resolution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I move that the committee rise and that the Chair report 

that the committee has agreed to a certain resolution and ask for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolution and ask for leave to 

sit again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read a first and 

second time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a certain 

resolution be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion that the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 163 — The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 163, The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 163, The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

by leave of the Assembly and under rule 72(2), I move that the 

Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. Moved by the 

Minister of Finance that Bill No. 163, The Appropriation Act, 

2010 (No. 2) be now read a second and third time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 

reading of this Bill. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6449 

privilege to be able to enter the debate on Bill 161 with respect 

to The Election Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this is something 

that many of us in the opposition, actually the entire opposition 

caucus, take very seriously and have great concerns about given 

how it will affect the voting procedures of the next provincial 

election and also municipal elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time there is any changes made to how the 

voting procedures change, those changes, Mr. Speaker, should 

be of a very positive nature and should be therefore something 

that are very inclusive versus exclusive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is no small secret that the voting percentages, the people, the 

amount of people that come out to vote in either a federal, 

provincial, or municipal elections, let alone other types of 

elections, Mr. Speaker, has steadily been on the decrease, Mr. 

Speaker. And any time you see a decreasing percentage of 

voters in any capacity, Mr. Speaker, it’s two things. It’s 

obviously very disconcerting because these people don’t feel 

that they have a voice that needs to be heard or a voice that 

needs to be represented or that they’re feeling entirely 

disenfranchised. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a threat to democracy itself. And that 

alone is something that we should all be very, very, very wary 

of, Mr. Speaker, because one thing we have in Canada, one 

thing we have in Saskatchewan is this precious thing. It’s a very 

precious thing to have the democratic system that we do, Mr. 

Speaker. There are many countries in the world that do not have 

that immense privilege, that right to be able to express their 

democratic opinion, Mr. Speaker, through the right to vote in a 

democratic process. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t too long ago that even in Canada, 

even in Canada, Mr. Speaker, women didn’t have the right to 

vote in Canada, Mr. Speaker, up until a few decades ago, Mr. 

Speaker. So we understand especially, especially the women in 

Canada understand, Mr. Speaker, how important it is to ensure 

that all people feel that they have that inclusive right to vote 

and to be heard and to exercise their opinion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I find it very interesting when one looks at what the 

Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs is quoted saying as 

recently as December 1st of 2010, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

quoting from the Leader-Post. And it says, “We’re going to 

make sure we continue consulting with the stakeholder groups 

to ensure that we have all the avenues covered off to be more 

inclusive versus exclusive,” says the Minister for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Now what’s interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, is two things. 

It’s one quote from the Minister for Municipal Affairs for the 

Sask Party government, but there’s two things that are very 

interesting in this quote. The one, Mr. Speaker, is obviously the 

issue about how the minister talks about being more inclusive 

versus exclusive, when this proposed legislative change, Mr. 

Speaker, does precisely the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Any time you make the voting process more complicated, more 

difficult, that is not a warm and inviting and fuzzy-type feeling 

for the voter to be engaging in, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite the 

opposite. It causes the voter to say, gee, to heck with it. Why 

should I bother? I don’t have the proper identification at the 

moment. I just moved. You know, I don’t have the means to be 

able to afford a voter . . . I mean a photo identification or 

whatever it is, Mr. Speaker. But those means are precisely that 

— they are exclusive, not inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m not sure what the Sask Party government is reading. I’m 

not sure what they’re understanding. We in the opposition 

certainly know that the voter turnout is decreasing on an annual 

. . . I mean on an ongoing basis, I should say, depending on 

what type of an election is taking place. And we have great 

concerns about that and we’d like to see the processes 

addressed. We have no issue with making amendments to The 

Election Act with respect to the voting process, Mr. Speaker. 

But we want to see those issues actually address the problem of 

voter complacency, voter turnout. We want to see those 

processes try and increase the voter turnout and not further 

decrease voter turnout. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other part of the quote from the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs that I found very interesting, very 

interesting was, “We’re going to make sure we continue 

consulting with the stakeholder groups to ensure that we have 

all the avenues covered off.” And then he goes on to say . . . 

End quote. 

 

Well what’s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is we again see 

the modus operandi of the Sask Party government which is: 

let’s throw out some legislation; let’s roll things out first and 

then we’ll consult. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the normal process of any government 

would be to consult on whatever legislative changes one wants 

to make first, and then bring those legislative changes forward, 

Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, this is yet an ongoing process 

that the Sask Party government seems to engage in, which is, 

bring things to the floor of the legislature regardless of whether 

it’s good, bad, ugly, or whatever and then we’ll consult with the 

people of the province. 

 

Now you know what’s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is if 

they were doing that in terms of bringing forward legislation 

and consulting with people of the province and then actually 

listening to what they heard, you might be able to say, okay, 

they operate a little differently, but hey, you know, we’ll go 

with how they roll. But, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting about 

that is it’s not even that that is the case. 

 

They roll out legislation. They bring it to the floor of the 

Assembly. They say, and I’m going to use that expression 

loosely, they say that they’re going to enter into a consultative 

process after they brought legislation forward. And yet they 

don’t heed what they have heard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I just go back to question period which was — what? — a 

mere half hour ago, Mr. Speaker, where the opposition Health 

critic asked if the Minister of Health is going to pull back the 

regulations that he put into place with respect to releasing 

confidential information about people who stay in the health 

facilities that we have in this province and releasing that 

information to fundraising organizations. 

 



6450 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that that passed through the 

House, the legislature. We also know that, from the opposition 

— phone calls and letters and emails that we receive — that 

this is something that the Saskatchewan public absolutely does 

not want to see happen. We also know that, Mr. Speaker, from 

the blogs that one can read . . . which I know the Sask Party is 

very enthusiastic about going to the blogs, Mr. Speaker, and the 

polling and things like that. And one can see from the 

comments that are on the blogs, Mr. Speaker, one can see from 

the information that they’ve collected and they’ve received in 

terms of the individual MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] or the minister’s office himself, that they know that 

the public does not want this confidential information to be 

released to the fundraising organizations without their express 

consent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we even have the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, who has 

now admitted that yes, by golly, he made a mistake. I don’t 

know if he’s actually admitted that he’s made a mistake, but he 

concedes the fact, Mr. Speaker, that he misjudged the public. 

There we go. So he’s saying that he misjudged the public. He 

misjudged the outcry from the public that they do not like this 

process happening of releasing confidential information to 

fundraising organizations. 

 

And yet, what is the minister going to do about that, Mr. 

Speaker? He is not going to do anything. He’s taking a 

wait-and-see approach. A wait-and-see approach as to what? As 

to whether a health region does release that information to a 

fundraising organization or a wait-and-see approach to see 

whether the Saskatchewan public changes its mind? It’s hard to 

say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the Minister of Municipal Affairs says in this quote 

with respect to Bill 161 that they “want to continue consulting 

with stakeholder groups,” Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why 

because it doesn’t change anything, Mr. Speaker. Nothing 

changes. They go forward with the legislation that they want to 

go forward with regardless of what the opposition says, 

regardless of what third party stakeholders say, regardless of 

what the public says. They rule simply because they want to 

rule regardless of whether or not it’s the right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker. If the Sask Party government wants to steamroll 

forward with it, the Sask Party government is going to 

steamroll forward with it, Mr. Speaker. And so the ruse of 

holding stakeholder consultations after the fact is exactly that. 

It’s simply a ruse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the other thing that’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, is how 

this is going to affect other organizations and other voting 

processes, Mr. Speaker. So we have the chief executive officer 

from the Saskatchewan association of urban municipalities, 

SUMA, [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], his 

name is Laurent Mougeot. And he says his organization will 

want to be part of the discussions around what ID 

[identification] is going to be acceptable Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it’s interesting that the chief executive officer for SUMA 

is saying that they want to be part of the discussions around 

what ID is acceptable. And he goes on to say, “If the 

preparation to go to the polling station is such that you have to 

go to an extensive process, I think it might be discouraging to 

some people,” Mougeot said. Now here, Mr. Speaker, we have 

one of those stakeholder organizations that should have been 

consulted prior to the legislation coming to the floor of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps they were. But obviously 

they have concerns, Mr. Speaker. They have concerns. They 

have concerns that if there is some sort of cumbersome process 

for people to prepare for in terms of going to the polling station 

to be able to vote, that it may be discouraging to some people. 

 

And I’m very, very glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that SUMA is 

concerned with the fact that there is low voter turnout, Mr. 

Speaker, and they don’t want to see that happen, Mr. Speaker. 

SUMA wants to see a way of getting people engaged in the 

voting process, Mr. Speaker, because they know that that 

provides the best outcome for their organization as well, Mr. 

Speaker. So they want to ensure that this is not going to be 

something that’s going to be cumbersome to the voting public 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there is also other issues to address such as ensuring 

people who work at polling stations know what is appropriate, 

the same gentleman said. And you know, Mr. Speaker, when 

we look at that point, of the people who work at polling 

stations, I mean we’re very fortunate that we have these 

individuals that are willing to sit these long hours and do the 

process that is necessary to make sure that people are eligible to 

vote, and then sit at the polling stations and ensure that those 

polling stations can go forward in the way that they should in a 

responsible manner, Mr. Speaker, in a manner which is 

acceptable to the Chief Electoral Officer and to ensure that 

there is guidelines that are being followed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we do, Mr. Speaker, of course have situations where there 

are what I would deem some overzealous workers in these 

polling stations who sometimes make things difficult for the 

voting public when in fact those demands didn’t need to be 

made, shall we say, in those particular situations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have now been through two elections and 

needless to say have heard some of those stories that have come 

to me as an MLA and as a candidate in those elections. And so 

when we already see some of those idiosyncrasies coming 

forward in these past two elections that I’ve been part of, and 

now we’re looking at making things even more difficult for the 

voting public, I’m very, very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about 

how the voting public is going to react to that. 

 

Because I know in the situations that I’ve been told of so far, it 

basically caused people to say, you know what? To heck with 

that. I can’t be bothered or clearly my voice doesn’t matter. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say it’s quite the contrary. The voice 

of every single individual citizen who is eligible to vote, Mr. 

Speaker, is important in every election that takes place, every 

single election, Mr. Speaker. And we want to ensure that 

everyone feels that they are invited to do so and that they are 

eligible to do so in a way that is not something that is 

cumbersome to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we don’t want to see an overzealous interpretation of the 

rules, Mr. Speaker, and that there’s a very real danger that some 

of that could happen with causing further encumbrances on the 

voting public in terms of their participation in an election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6451 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice was also quoted in 

the newspaper article from the Leader-Post on December 1st. I 

found it also very interesting what the Minister of Justice had to 

say because he said, well it says here that the Minister of Justice 

doesn’t think the move will disenfranchise voters. And then it 

goes on to say: 

 

If you plan your affairs you should have no difficulty 

voting. But if you think you’re going to go out at five 

minutes before the election time without anything, you’re 

not likely going to be able to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the Minister of Justice, the Minister of 

Justice who is saying that people have to make sure that they 

engage in all sorts of preparations to be able to go out and vote, 

besides being enumerated, essentially. And if they, you know, 

lead very busy lives, if they’re busy driving their kids to 

basketball and volleyball and skating . . . And maybe they’re 

doing volunteer work. Maybe they’re helping out at Habitat for 

Humanity. Maybe they’re helping out at the local food bank 

because those two organizations are seeing a serious increase in 

need, Mr. Speaker. Maybe when those people are so busy with 

their lives that they’ve not recognized the fact that they’ve had 

the opportunity to be enumerated and that the election is taking 

place that evening, heaven forbid. The Minister of Justice is 

saying, too bad, so sad. You don’t get to vote. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not acceptable. Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely 

not acceptable. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Every eligible voter in this province should be able to vote, Mr. 

Speaker, without any future encumbrances that are being 

imposed upon them by this Sask Party government who is 

trying to make life more difficult for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. They are not doing anything that they said that they 

were going to in the last election, which they said they were 

trying to make life better for people in Saskatchewan. It’s quite 

the opposite. They’re making life more difficult for people in 

Saskatchewan. They’re making life more expensive for people 

in Saskatchewan. And they are going to make life difficult for 

the future of Saskatchewan because the fact that they’re running 

deficit budgets and, again, accruing debt at a rate that is 

unconscionable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see again, we have the Minister for 

Municipal Affairs, who is saying that, you know, we’re going 

to consult after the fact. And he actually thinks, Mr. Speaker, by 

adding more encumbrances onto the voting procedure that it’s 

going to make things more inclusive versus exclusive. And then 

we have the Minister of Justice saying that well you know 

what? If you don’t make all the necessary preparations, too bad, 

so sad. You don’t get to vote. Now does that sound like a 

government who is trying to make things more inclusive versus 

exclusive, Mr. Speaker? I think not. Not by my definition, not 

by the definition of this NDP opposition do we think that 

making things more difficult for the people of Saskatchewan is 

being inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the right that people should be able to exercise 

in a free and democratic society, not just the comfortable or the 

privileged who are doing relatively well under the status quo, is 

something that the Sask Party government should be 

addressing, not making it more difficult for marginalized 

groups and the people who have no voice to be able to exercise 

their privilege of being able to vote in an election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the list of people, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party 

government has failed is growing ever longer, Mr. Speaker. It is 

lengthening on a daily basis. We can see as you can see, Mr. 

Speaker, from the amount of people that are writing to us and 

coming to us and phoning us and visiting the legislature, that 

the list that the Sask Party government is leaving behind is 

growing. 

 

Of course the only list that the Sask Party seems to be growing 

is the list of the people that are either friendly with the staff in 

the building or the people that work within the Premier’s office 

or those that are directly related to some of the MLAs and 

ministers on the Sask Party side. That list is also growing, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of who’s getting the money and who are 

getting the contracts in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That list is growing as well because once again we’re seeing 

that despite the fact that there is public dollars being used, Mr. 

Speaker . . . As a matter of fact in Amicus it’s $27 million of 

public money that is being used to guarantee the project called 

Amicus, Mr. Speaker. Was there a public tender done on that, 

Mr. Speaker? No there wasn’t. Were the contracts given to their 

friends, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely — their friends from the 

Premier’s office, the relatives of ministers, Mr. Speaker, and of 

course large donors to the Sask Party itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill 161, The Election 

Amendment Act . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I’m so glad 

that one of the members on the opposite side is cheering my 

speech, Mr. Speaker. It’s nice to see that there is at least a few 

people that are listening, Mr. Speaker, because they obviously 

are not in agreement with their party that they belong to on this 

Act. So that’s why they’re obviously cheering me when I’m 

making my points here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s quite relieving for me to know that there are some 

people on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that are 

concerned about the low voter turnout and are concerned that 

this Act is actually going to disenfranchise more people than 

it’s going to invite to vote, Mr. Speaker. So I do appreciate the 

vote of confidence that I’ve received from the Sask Party 

government as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people that are being left 

behind, like I said, and those people especially want to be able 

to exercise their privilege to vote in the next election and in 

other elections, Mr. Speaker. One of those groups obviously are 

seniors, Mr. Speaker. They’re struggling to cope with the rising 

cost of living in particular, Mr. Speaker — rising rents, and the 

rising cost of electricity. They’re frustrated by the government’s 

broken promises on health care. And many seniors are telling us 

that they feel let down, even betrayed by this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a group of individuals, the senior 

citizens of this province, that would have a lot to say with 

respect to any election that’s taking place, Mr. Speaker, and 

would certainly want to be able to exercise their vote, Mr. 

Speaker, in the next election. And what’s interesting is at a time 



6452 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

in their lives when so many of them no longer have driver’s 

licences, Mr. Speaker, the government is wanting to demand 

that seniors present photo ID when they vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, if they’re no longer driving, it’s 

no small wonder that they may not own photo ID and you 

know, might have gotten rid of their driver’s licence because of 

the fact that they’re short of their documentation because of the 

fact they’re no longer driving. And not everyone is going to be 

aware of the fact that they can spend the $10 to have the photo 

ID authorized for a certain period of time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s interesting that a group of citizens of this province, the 

senior citizens of this province who would have so much at 

stake in terms of exercising their voice through a vote, Mr. 

Speaker, would be further disincluded. Further, further, further 

disenfranchised, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the voting process 

and would therefore not necessarily be able to exercise their 

vote in an election process that’s taking place. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s really disconcerting when you 

see that and when you hear that because the senior citizens that 

are contacting us as an opposition caucus and the senior citizens 

that are contacting me as an MLA have a lot to say, Mr. 

Speaker. And, you know, they should be the individuals of this 

province, just like the elders of this province who are respected, 

Mr. Speaker, are respected for the contribution that they’ve 

made to the province, should be respected for the knowledge 

and education and experience that they can provide to others in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we’re doing is saying to them, you know what? As 

the Minister of Justice pointed out, hey if you don’t make all 

the necessary preparations, if you don’t purchase that photo ID, 

and if you don’t, you know, try and find someone to get you to 

where you need to go to be able to make that purchase, and if 

you can’t make your rent . . . But you know we’re still going to 

force you to buy that $10 photo ID, Mr. Speaker, because we 

expect you to have that come election day, Mr. Speaker, if you 

want to exercise your right to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and there are other people that the government has 

failed. For instance students are angry about the rising cost of 

tuition and rent and utilities and car insurance, Mr. Speaker. 

These are very real concerns for the students of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if anyone thinks that the students of the 

province aren’t concerned about Bill 161 and the changes that 

are being proposed by the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

you’d better think again. Because the students of this province 

are watching this, Mr. Speaker. They’re watching this, and 

they’re wanting to see what the government is doing, what the 

Sask Party government is doing to be more inviting in the 

electoral process rather than being more complicated in the 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the First Nations and Métis people are 

especially angry about the lack of consultative process that the 

Sask Party is taking part on with respect to any legislation that 

they’re bringing forward, Mr. Speaker. And of course one can 

only look at the spring session and see what happened with The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 

This is only one example of where the First Nations and Métis 

people had to exercise their voice in such a demonstrable way 

that they actually came to the legislature and stood at the front 

lawn of the legislature to ensure that . . . Since the Sask Party 

government was using those groups as groups that validated 

that, the changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

And despite the fact that there were letters written to the 

contrary and despite the fact that there were numerous emails 

and letters and phone calls saying no, we weren’t consulted; no, 

we don’t agree with the changes, they actually went to the 

trouble, Mr. Speaker, of coming to the front lawn of the 

legislature to ensure that they are not just heard but seen, Mr. 

Speaker, because for some reason, the Sask Party government 

finds it very easy to ignore the voices of people when they 

express their concerns. They find it very easy to ignore people 

when they simply throw out their names as having been 

consulted but not having really told them about what changes 

they’re going to bring forward, Mr. Speaker. So these 

individuals decided to make the trek all the way to Regina and 

make themselves seen on the front lawn of the legislature, not 

to mention on the front steps of the legislature in a very, very 

visible way, because Mr. Speaker, this was something the Sask 

Party government then could not ignore. 

 

So what’s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact 

that they couldn’t ignore it, they didn’t pull the Bill to take the 

3.5 million acres of wildlife habitat protected land out of 

legislation. What did they do? They decided that, well, they’re 

going to put a few consultative processes in place, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of having a few bodies, a few groups that they can talk 

to when there’s a process of consultation to take place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one can see that when we talk about 

consultation on this particular Bill 161, that the consultation, 

despite the fact that it’s taking place after the fact, doesn’t 

change anything anyways because it didn’t change anything 

when these people were standing on the front steps of the 

legislature or on the front lawn of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

That Bill still went through. Those 3.5 million acres of 

protected land were still pulled out of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

and are now open to the discretion of the Minister of 

Environment or the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan or 

the Deputy Premier perhaps or whoever else might have the 

lucky pen on that lucky day, and they can decide to sell those 

lands at their whim, Mr. Speaker. So one can see that regardless 

of whether consultative process takes place, after the fact or 

not, it doesn’t change anything anyways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another group of people that I have great 

concerns about with respect to The Election Amendment Act is 

the homeless people, Mr. Speaker, the homeless people in this 

province, which now, for the ones that have actually been 

counted, is estimated at 2,200 people in Regina alone, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s what I’m saying. I mean we know that 

there’s approximately 2,200 people in Regina alone that have 

actually been accounted for as being homeless. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re angry enough that the Sask Party government 

has done nothing in their plight and in their situation to find a 

roof to put over their heads, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are people that are being affected the hardest by the 

rising cost of utility rates, by the rising cost of living, Mr. 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6453 

Speaker, and of course the rising cost of housing, Mr. Speaker. 

And these are certainly individuals who in large part don’t own 

a vehicle, Mr. Speaker. They don’t own a vehicle. They are the 

individuals that rely on the public transit system. And that’s 

why, Mr. Speaker, it is so essential and it is so incumbent upon 

us, as municipalities and as a provincial entity and provincial 

government, to ensure that the public transit system is as good 

as it possibly can be for those individuals who don’t have other 

means of transport, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now these individuals, Mr. Speaker, don’t have vehicles, so 

they certainly don’t have drivers’ licences. They’re homeless, 

Mr. Speaker, so for them $10 means a lot, Mr. Speaker. It 

means exponentially more than it would to you, to me, and to 

others perhaps in the province, Mr. Speaker. Ten dollars is a lot 

of money for these individuals to look at. So on a day when 

they don’t know how they’re going to feed themselves or 

perhaps their dependants, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to look at 

that $10 bill, Mr. Speaker, and they’re going to look at 

themselves and say, gee, you know, in a week there is an 

election. I can take this $10 and I could go buy my, you know, 

photo identification, Mr. Speaker, or I can take this $10 and I 

can potentially buy — who knows? — 10 boxes of Kraft 

Dinner or, you know, a jar of peanut butter and a few litres of 

milk, Mr. Speaker, or whatever it is. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you when someone is going hungry 

and when someone has no means to put a roof over their head 

or they have to rely on public transportation or they have to 

literally turn over every penny that they have on a monthly 

basis to ensure that they have enough food to get through the 

month, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to look at that $10 bill and 

that whole notion of being able to vote is going to go down the 

drain for those individuals, Mr. Speaker, because their bellies 

are going to speak louder than the notion of being able to 

exercise a vote that they feel disenfranchised about to begin 

with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, instead of being more inclusive like the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs claims that the Sask Party 

government wants to be or versus the Minister of Justice who 

talks about the fact that you have to do all the necessary 

preparations if you want to vote, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

forgetting a segment of society for whom that just isn’t so 

simple and for whom it is even less than just so simple but 

ultimately impossible to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are individuals that are barely making it from day to day 

and in some cases aren’t making it from month to month, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s why we’re seeing the increased usage of 

food banks, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I’m so proud of the 

Regina Food Bank for having commissioned a study to get 

some real numbers and some tangible facts as to what is driving 

individuals to have to use the food bank on a more frequent 

basis, on an increased basis, Mr. Speaker. I’m so very glad that 

they’ve done that so that there is information for the 

government to study and for the opposition to study. So these 

individuals especially will want to be able to exercise their right 

to vote, but disenfranchising them and making things more 

difficult for them to vote, Mr. Speaker, is not the way to go 

about this, Mr. Speaker. 

Now, you know, Mr. Speaker, this is also a government that 

vetoed the selection of a bipartisan committee for the Chief 

Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, their record on 

the whole voting structure, on the processes for voting in the 

province of Saskatchewan, on the notion of fairness, equality, 

transparency, accountability is very grey, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you have a bipartisan committee that brings forward a 

recommendation and all of a sudden that recommendation is 

then overturned by the Sask Party government’s ability to do 

so, Mr. Speaker . . . One has to question why the Sask Party 

government, through the bipartisan committee, would even 

have those discussions, would even enter into the discussions 

about the filling of the position of a Chief Electoral Officer if 

the Sask Party government is then going to veto the 

recommendation that has been made. 

 

So one has to wonder the sincerity of the Sask Party 

government in their actions and especially since they haven’t 

exactly been forthcoming with their reasons for having vetoed 

that recommendation, Mr. Speaker. So I’m sure that . . . I know 

that the opposition caucus is very interested to learn about what 

the reality is of that situation, Mr. Speaker. There are many 

people in the province that are interested to learn about what the 

reality is of that situation, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure at some 

point it’ll all come out in the wash, so to speak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again the people of the province that are 

concerned about the fact that the Sask Party government vetoed 

the recommendation are also people that would want to be able 

to exercise their vote in terms of how they feel the situation was 

handled by the Sask Party government, as would another 

political party in this province, Mr. Speaker — namely the 

Progressive Conservative Party in this province — because they 

would like to be able to enter into the democratic process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately there are some encumbrances again from 

interference as we’ve heard from across the way with respect to 

accessing those funds and being able to compete on a level 

playing field, Mr. Speaker. So again this is something that the 

opposition is watching in terms of how the Sask Party 

government is interfering in that part of the political process. 

 

So the notion of wanting to say that they want to engage more 

voters in the electoral process through Bill 161 and yet doing 

something quite opposite in terms of allowing those voters to be 

able to exercise their vote for their political party of choice, 

being the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, seems suspect. It seems very suspect. So you would 

think that, if they were truly interested in wanting to engage 

voters in the voting process, they would want to assist the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan to be able to 

access the millions of dollars that are currently in a trust fund 

that has some implications for the Sask Party members, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s quite the opposite. We’re seeing, we’re seeing 

a lot of interference by the Sask Party itself in terms of how 

these things are proceeding through the courts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so it again seems suspect as to why they would now talk 

about wanting to engage voters and yet seem to be doing quite 

the opposite when those voters don’t have the means of being 

able to engage themselves in the political process and vote for 



6454 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

their political party of choice, Mr. Speaker. So again Bill 161 

seems suspect in terms of them talking about wanting to engage 

more voters and yet disenfranchising voters through making the 

encumbrances that they are making in terms of making voting 

more difficult for the Saskatchewan public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, there are other examples too, Mr. Speaker. For 

instance there is Bill 43 that was introduced in, what I believe 

was, a spring session. Time flies, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes 

it’s hard to keep track of when these Bills have been 

introduced. Perhaps it was the session before. But, Mr. Speaker, 

Bill 43, again it inhibited people’s ability to exercise their 

democratic right to free speech and hold protests, Mr. Speaker. 

Now generally speaking, the democratic process to free speech 

and to hold protests happens with respect to organizations that 

people are involved with, that they’re not happy with. But for a 

large part of the time, Mr. Speaker, a lot of these protests are 

taking place in opposition or in concern with the processes that 

are taking place on a provincial level and on a federal level, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at a lot of those 

democratic rights being hindered and that those protests may be 

hindered through this legislation that the Sask Party 

government brought forward and had passed through — which 

is Bill 43 — it again further disenfranchises people from voting 

because they see that, if they want to exercise their voice 

through these processes, the government will bring forward 

legislation to hinder their ability to do so. So, Mr. Speaker, it 

further disenfranchises people from voting, and therefore 

putting more restrictions on that voting process makes it more 

difficult for those individuals to cast their ballots as well. 

 

Now you know, Mr. Speaker, the government talks about the 

fact that they’re trying to harmonize the rules in Saskatchewan 

to make them more like other provinces or at the federal level. 

But what’s interesting about that argument, Mr. Speaker, is 

simply this. Why would the Sask Party government use that as 

the impetus for making the ability to vote in Saskatchewan 

more difficult and using the excuse that they want to bring 

Saskatchewan in line with some other provinces and with 

respect to how things are done at the federal level, when the 

federal legislation is currently being challenged in the Supreme 

Court of British Columbia by a coalition of organizations 

including, Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities, seniors, 

renters, and people who are homeless? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this speaks exactly to the groups that I have just 

spoken about. We’re talking about people who are the most 

vulnerable people in our society for the most part, people who 

have the least voice in terms of an organized voice, Mr. 

Speaker, the least ability to challenge what is happening with 

their government processes, Mr. Speaker. And there are 

organizations now that are taking on these individuals, these 

groups and these individuals, and taking their voice forward 

and challenging the federal legislation in the Supreme Court of 

British Columbia. So why is it that when this legislation is 

being challenged in British Columbia as we speak, would the 

Sask Party government want to adopt something that is 

potentially going to be challengeable? It makes no sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Wouldn’t it make more sense for the Sask Party government to 

see what the outcome is of this Supreme Court challenge in 

British Columbia and see how that washes out and see how that 

proceeds and then decide what they’re going to do here in 

Saskatchewan? That, Mr. Speaker, would make a lot of sense. 

Unfortunately once again we see the Sask Party government 

doing something that makes no sense. And unfortunately that 

seems to be the MO [modus operandi] for this government as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So like I said, using that as the reason for wanting to bring 

forward the changes to Bill 161 is nonsensical. 

 

Now they talk about, the Sask Party government also claims 

that people will not be disenfranchised, pointing to measures 

included in the legislation that give people alternatives. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, those alternatives would be then at the discretion 

of a returning officer. And as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, returning 

officers can, you know, can be overzealous in their 

interpretation of what their role is, Mr. Speaker. And there’s no 

question that there could be situations like have happened in the 

past — without these extra rules being in place, Mr. Speaker — 

of turning away potential voters, Mr. Speaker, because the 

returning officer deems that to be appropriate. So when you 

leave things to be subjective like that, Mr. Speaker, it is cause 

for concern. And there is certainly a danger of misinterpretation 

being made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the other issues is obviously with the 

renters, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, renters change addresses 

frequently. And quite frankly they’re changing addresses more 

frequently now than ever before, Mr. Speaker, because rent 

increases are happening very rapidly. We’ve heard from the 

opposition critic for Social Services that rents now, it looks like 

the average cheapest rent is $900 a month, Mr. Speaker, which 

is unimaginable for people who are working minimum wage 

jobs or are on very minimal means of income, Mr. Speaker. So 

you know, they tend to move around a fair bit. Because if it’s 

$900 a month when they move in, but they’re given notice that 

it’s going to increase to $1,000 within a month or two, Mr. 

Speaker, that extra $100 a month can make or break whether or 

not those renters can actually stay in that rental unit or rental 

housing situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see much more frequent changes of addresses for renters, 

Mr. Speaker. So it would be therefore that much more difficult 

again for them to be able to prove where they currently reside at 

in terms of a given address because of course those processes 

take a lot of time. Depending on where they’re going to get 

those fixed addresses from, that documentation from, Mr. 

Speaker, it can take a month or more for that to take place. And 

in some cases, Mr. Speaker, there are mistakes that are made, 

and it can be multiple months before they have any of that 

documentation. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a situation where it’s 

causing further encumbrances, problems for people to be able 

to exercise their right to vote with something as simple as a 

fixed address because these are individuals that are having to 

move frequently to be able to keep their head above water, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6455 

So you know, what if they have recently moved and not yet 

received their updated documentation? Has the government, has 

the Sask Party government decided on what they’re going to do 

about those situations? And what if they haven’t received mail 

yet from a government agency? What is the Sask Party 

government going to do about that? 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at individuals who are 

barely able to keep their head above water, are in a fairly 

desperate situation. Usually they have dependents, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not top of mind for them to ensure that they have 

everything in place so that they can be able to exercise their 

right to vote. That usually comes about as an aha moment — oh 

my goodness, you know, tonight’s the election, tomorrow’s the 

election. I don’t have anything with a fixed address on it yet in 

terms of my current address. What am I going to do? So, Mr. 

Speaker, one can see that it further hinders people from being 

able to exercise their right to vote. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I talked about seniors and how 

important it would be for them to want to exercise their right to 

vote. But a lot of them have mobility issues, Mr. Speaker, and 

so we have mobile polling stations to be able to accommodate 

that, Mr. Speaker. But again if they’re not able to get the 

identification they need by means of a photo identification, then 

how are they supposed to be able to exercise their right to vote, 

Mr. Speaker, if they have mobility issues? So it again, it’s 

nonsensical that on one hand we’ve got mobile polling stations 

that will allow the voter to be able to vote without having to go 

through extraordinary means to deal with their mobility issues, 

but yet on the other hand we’re saying, you know, do whatever 

you have to do to be able to get your voter identification so that 

you can exercise your right to vote. The two don’t mesh, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then of course, I mean, I talked about renters not having a 

fixed address. Well then we have an issue of course with people 

who are homeless and are couch surfing and don’t have any 

documentation that would have a current address, Mr. Speaker. 

And what is the Sask Party government doing to invite those 

individuals to be able to exercise their right to vote? Because, 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 161, from what I can see, is not addressing 

that situation at all. And that’s exactly what any changes to The 

Election Amendment Act should be doing. It should be 

addressing changes to engage more people in the voting 

process, rather than making it more stringent for them to be 

able to exercise their right to vote. 

 

So we can see that the government’s making it harder for 

certain groups of people to vote. We can see that the 

government has shown no leadership to make it easier for 

people to vote and to invite more people to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course there are changing technologies that are being 

used and experimented with in different places in North 

America. I was privileged to be able to see first-hand one of 

those systems which was computer voting, Mr. Speaker, and 

that was in South Carolina a few years ago. And I’m not saying 

that that is necessarily going to be the panacea in terms of the 

voting process. But, Mr. Speaker, these are things that the Sask 

Party government should be examining, not how do we make 

things more difficult for people to vote and how do we further 

disenfranchise those who are already the marginalized and 

disenfranchised voters of the province and who, quite frankly, 

have the most at stake in terms of having their voice heard, Mr. 

Speaker, but looking at other ways to engage people to vote and 

increase the voter turnout. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously there’s still very much to go 

through in terms of the comments that were made on second 

reading by the minister and some of the other concerns that we 

have as an opposition caucus, like for instance providing photo 

identification free of cost so that individuals don’t have to incur 

the fee of having to pay for that photo identification if they 

don’t have the means to do so. But unfortunately we haven’t 

heard any of that from the Sask Party government yet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’m hoping that for the first time since the Sask Party 

government has been elected that we may see something new 

and different. And, Mr. Speaker, I guess I’ll express one of my 

Christmas wishes. And one of my Christmas wishes, Mr. 

Speaker, is to . . . Well my truest Christmas wish would be to 

see the Sask Party government actually engage in a 

comprehensive and meaningful consultative process on any 

changes it would like to see made in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s one of my true wishes. 

 

But if I give you the watered down version of that wish, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be that the Sask Party government, once it 

brings forward a piece of legislation or any changes that it 

wants to see done in the province of Saskatchewan and then 

finds out from the people of Saskatchewan through the 

feedback that they receive — like the Minister of Health 

referred to, he didn’t anticipate the feedback from the people of 

Saskatchewan — once they see the feedback from the people of 

Saskatchewan, once they engage in a consultative process after 

the fact after they brought a proposed change forward, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would actually heed what the public is saying 

and make those changes that should be made, make the 

appropriate accommodations that should be made. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, trying on something really crazy 

and different, maybe even take on some of the suggestions that 

are made by the opposition caucus as to how to truly engage the 

voting public in this province to increase the voter turnout in 

the elections that are taking place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there’s so much more to investigate 

with this Bill. And the opposition caucus is just in the process 

of doing so. And therefore I’m going to adjourn the debate 

today, Mr. Speaker, and allow the rest of my colleagues to 

make comments on the research that we as an opposition 

caucus are doing with respect to Bill 161. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 



6456 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 — be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

truly a pleasure for me to enter into this debate, the debate on 

An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts, and to do so on 

behalf of the fine people of Regina Northeast. It’s always a 

pleasure to be able to represent those good folks in this fine 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s interesting and perhaps even most 

appropriate that I have the opportunity to enter into this debate 

and to be able to share some of my thoughts, having had the 

privilege — and I consider it a privilege as well as an 

opportunity — to have served in local government for 10 years. 

I had the privilege of serving as the councillor for division 5 in 

the RM [rural municipality] of Clayton for 10 years. And it was 

certainly a enlightening opportunity. It gives you an opportunity 

to get first-hand knowledge of the role that local government 

plays in our society and in the development of our economy and 

the functioning of this province. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, many, many of those individuals in 

Saskatchewan here who have perhaps not had the opportunity 

to have first-hand experience at local government often perhaps 

take local government for granted and often perhaps overlook 

the importance that local government serves in the servicing of 

our residents of our great province and the servicing of this 

province. Because local government, I think, is a very 

important institution and an institution that certainly needs to be 

supported and identified every possible way of strengthening 

local government. Because I think local government is the 

people who are on the front lines, and often the people who face 

issues each and every day and make the decisions as to what is 

in the best interest of those folks they represent. 

 

Now I’m sure that there will be those out there who will say 

local government should be revisited and perhaps the institution 

itself should be reviewed. And I’m never against change, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m never against looking at ways and means to be 

able to identify efficiencies and to make sure that changes that 

do come about are changes of progress and the changes that 

would certainly support and enhance the role of local 

government. Because I think local government is a very 

important cog in the governing wheel that operates 

Saskatchewan, and other provinces I’m sure, but certainly 

operates Saskatchewan on an ongoing basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the right to vote is the principal fundamental 

principle of our democracy. Democracy, Mr. Speaker, is the 

most efficient and effective way of governing. I think we’ve 

seen throughout our history where we’ve had struggles to 

ensure that democracy remained to be the way that our 

forefathers saw as the direction to move as far as establishing a 

governing structure was concerned. And then we look at 

history. History is full of tales of struggle to ensure that 

democracy was alive and well. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that should be the role and the 

principle of any government of any political stripe, is that of 

ensuring that everything is done that can be possibly done to 

strengthen democracy, to make sure democracy is the tool that 

will continue to be the tool of government of us in 

Saskatchewan, us in Canada, and those around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the right to vote, the right to vote is the 

fundamental principle of our democracy. And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, it should be the role of government to look at 

encouraging all of those people who are legally eligible to vote 

in an election, encouraging them to vote. And I’m saying, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe it should be the role of government to set 

aside partisan politics to ensure that implementation of the rules 

and regulations, review of the democratic process is done in the 

light of trying to develop a system here where more and more 

people will take part because that is the right of individuals, the 

right of individuals to choose their representation whether that 

representation be as an individual or whether that be a political 

party. 

 

I think what we need to do as a society and as those in this 

legislature that are making up the rules which govern the 

operation of our democracy is that we should be looking at 

ways and means to enhance and encourage people to take part 

in democracy, for it is the participation that makes democracy 

strong. It’s when you have a lack of participation or you isolate 

people or you discourage people from voting is when you have 

a weakening of democracy. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, we have seen that example happen in 

other jurisdictions around the world. If we study our history at 

all, we’ll recognize that in other parts of the world there are 

those people who have struggled perhaps a lifetime to try to 

establish a free and democratic system within their country. 

We’ve seen people who have given up their lives in that 

struggle. We’ve seen people who have, perhaps for generations, 

have carried on that struggle. And we have seen cases, Mr. 

Speaker, where a democracy, although it did not fully take hold, 

but democracy was established and was starting to grow, but 

because of certain manipulations by those in power at the time, 

caused democracy to die, caused democracy to be isolated 

because of those . . . they were restricting the participation of 

individuals in the voting process and it simply caused 

democracy to wither on the vine and die. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is certainly not the role of any government. 

For any government it should be to look at ways and means to 

enhance, to improve the system, to encourage people to 

participate, to encourage people to take part in an election, to 

encourage people to vote. 

 

That’s why I say, Mr. Speaker, the right to vote is a 

fundamental principle of our democracy. And yet, Mr. Speaker, 

we see a suggestion here by the government that is moving, I 

think, in the wrong direction. The government is suggesting 

that photo ID become a mandatory method of identifying 

people at the polls when it comes time for local government to 

hold an election. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I find that strange, Mr. Speaker, because I have 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6457 

participated in five, took part in five municipal elections and, 

Mr. Speaker, never did we have a problem. Never was there 

ever a problem in any of the elections that I took part in. There 

was never a problem of someone ineligible to vote come into a 

poll and insisting upon voting. That was never a problem, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We never had a problem of identifying those people who were 

eligible to vote because, quite frankly, in the RM’s case it was a 

landowner who had the right to vote. Most of them, most of 

them were the friends and neighbours. Most of them you knew 

almost on a daily basis. Certainly you recognized them because 

they were someone who lived just down the road. 

 

There were others, less in number, but there were others who 

were perhaps not residents of the area, not residents of the 

community. They owned land. Perhaps they had inherited that 

land. They may have lived in other areas and they would have 

the right to come back and vote and some of them did. Some of 

them took the election of the local government serious enough 

that they would leave, you know, they would leave their job in 

Yorkton or perhaps even in Regina here. I know some 

individuals who owned land out there, who inherited land out 

there who would certainly take the day off and come out and 

vote at election time because they felt strong enough that they 

needed to have good representation locally to ensure that their 

wants and their needs were being first represented, and then 

hopefully met. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see that this government is looking 

at ways and means of not . . . I don’t believe enhancing the 

process of voting. I don’t think that this encourages people to 

vote. In fact I think it’s the opposite; it discourages people. 

 

And I say that because I can identify some people in my own 

mind here, out in my old area there of division 5 in Clayton, 

who I think because of age would find it difficult to have a 

picture ID, a photo ID to be able to vote. And in fact, I don’t 

believe that they even operate a vehicle any more. I think, if my 

memory serves me correctly here, I think that they’re probably 

to the point that they don’t feel comfortable in operating that 

vehicle any more. Therefore they don’t own or operate a 

vehicle and therefore have no need for a driver’s licence or a 

photo ID, which you and I would take as granted as the 

mechanism to use our driver’s licence to be able to use our 

photo ID to identify ourselves. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s one group alone — the senior citizens 

who no longer are eligible to drive and therefore, nor no longer 

feel the need to drive at least, and no longer have a photo ID, a 

driver’s licence photo ID. 

 

There may be those people out there, Mr. Speaker, who perhaps 

have never had a vehicle and therefore never had a need for a 

driver’s licence and therefore simply don’t have that as a photo 

ID, and therefore would find it embarrassing perhaps to go to a 

poll. The fear would be that going to the polls without having 

the photo ID, the driver’s licence or other such photo ID . . . 

And they have no need for it. They don’t have one and 

therefore they would feel perhaps embarrassed if they go to the 

polls when they’re asked to produce a photo ID, although they 

may know each other. They could still be asked to produce a 

photo ID and if they don’t have that, then would feel 

embarrassed by not having it and perhaps even feel 

embarrassed by . . . Those people gathered there would, you 

know, make them feel awkward. Therefore to avoid that, to 

avoid that, they simply don’t go to the polls. They simply don’t 

take part in the election. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly issues around the belief by 

this government that a photo ID is required. Because like I said 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, I participated in five municipal elections 

and never once, never once did we have a problem there of 

anybody coming to the polls that the returning officer, the poll 

clerk, or the scrutineers weren’t able to identify and didn’t 

know who they were or certainly no requirement to produce 

any type of documentation to clearly identify who they were, 

because it was a belief that these folks didn’t and weren’t 

eligible to vote in the election process. That was certainly not 

an issue and never was an issue, and I fail to see, Mr. Speaker, 

how this could possibly, possibly be considered as a need here, 

Mr. Speaker. So when we see this we can’t help but bring up 

some, I suppose red flags, if you want to put it that way. 

 

As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, I spent 10 years in municipal local 

government with municipal politics. And during that period of 

time I know that there’s the opportunity for government to ask 

for or carry out reviews, and perhaps carry out a review on the 

election process within local government or ask for input from 

local government as to what those people who are elected, who 

are on the front lines, who deal with these issues each and every 

day, and ask them what changes that they would suggest need 

to be done to improve, improve the ability for local government 

to be able to encourage people to participate in the election 

process. 

 

So immediately, Mr. Speaker, arises in my mind the question 

of, who asked for the changes? Who asked the government to 

bring this particular amendment or make this particular 

amendment to this Act? Who was it that approached 

government and said this would be a good thing? Who was it? 

Was it an individual? Was it individuals or was it groups? Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no evidence and the government has not 

provided us any information to support the reasons why the 

government is recommending and bringing forward a Bill that 

would cause these changes to take place. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, one has to raise a concern or a red flag 

around that when one wonders why, why is the government 

proposing these changes? Why is the government bringing 

forward these amendments in this particular Bill? And are they 

doing it because they have been requested to do it by an 

authority, that one would say is an authority, that would have 

the right to ask that such a question? And that would be, of 

course, say the Association of Rural Municipalities or SUMA. 

Any of these government representations would probably have 

the authority to do it, because they would have, you know, a 

motion made at their convention or they would have had 

representation from municipalities or something calling for 

these changes. But we don’t see any of that, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t see any of that coming forward from this government. We 

simply don’t see this government supporting any reason why or 

providing any information as to who might have asked for these 

changes. We don’t see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we also don’t see, Mr. Speaker, is how was it determined 



6458 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

that these changes were needed? How was it determined that 

these changes were needed? What are the cases, what are the 

cases or the examples that the government could put forward 

supporting these changes? Are there a list of circumstances and 

various elections of municipal governments throughout this 

great province over the last decade — I will even go that far, 

Mr. Speaker, over the last decade — that would indicate that 

there was a real need for these changes, that these changes 

would address a real problem that was existing out there that 

local officials were having to deal with on a regular basis at 

election time? Mr. Speaker, I don’t think so. 

 

I follow the local government elections out in my old area that I 

was born and raised in and used to represent at one time, and I 

follow those municipal elections really closely. And we’ve just 

gone through a series of these elections this last fall, and I did 

note in the process of candidates who were announcing their 

intentions to be seeking the position of a councillor or perhaps 

the position of reeve for local government, and they did their 

announcements. Some of them bought advertising spaces and 

bought little ads in the local paper. And after the elections took 

place, the local paper would report the outcome of the election 

or the results of the election as to who won, who lost, and 

usually they indicated, you know, the votes gathered by each 

candidate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, nowhere, nowhere in any of those stories 

reported in the local papers out there of the results of the local 

elections, nowhere was it reported that there was any problems 

at the polls, there was any situation that arose at the polls that 

caused a controversy, that caused a candidate to be concerned 

about the eligibility of voters, caused the candidate to be 

concerned about the eligibility of that vote being cast. Nowhere. 

There wasn’t one story about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So then when you see the results, the actions of local 

government and how it operates and how well and how 

efficient their election process is and then you see these 

amendments — amendments which are now going to require 

individuals out there, although they may know each other for 50 

years, are still going to have to produce a photo ID in order to 

participate in the election process — you have to wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, how was it determined these changes were needed? 

There is no evidence, Mr. Speaker, that these changes were 

needed. Certainly no evidence has been put forward by this 

government. There’s been no evidence of these changes being 

needed that I have seen personally in watching the local 

government election process as it unfolds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one wonders why. Why is the government doing 

this? Again who asked for it? And why would it have to be 

done? What has happened? What incidences have happened 

that would cause these changes to be necessary? Mr. Speaker, 

one can’t wonder what the government’s hidden agenda is here 

when they want to make these changes without any support as 

to why these changes are necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the government know these are the 

changes that’s required? How does the government know that 

these are the changes that are required? What consultations 

were carried out by the government? Who did they consult 

with? Who did they talk to about this? Who made 

representation to the government? Who was it that called for 

these changes? 

 

How was the consultation done? Was the consultation done by 

a group that travelled around, that talked to local governments, 

local government officials? Or was it done by officials carrying 

out a form of communications with local government? That 

communication is either by letter, perhaps email, maybe even a 

fax? Was there a questionnaire sent out to glean the information 

required by the government to determine that (a) the changes 

needed to be done, (b) these are the right changes, and (c) what 

are the results of these changes? 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what can’t help but be a question that one 

asks. What consultations were carried out by the government? 

What did they do? Who did they talk to? Or did they talk to 

anybody? Or did they simply bring these changes forward 

because they believe that it is in their best interests politically to 

limit the participation in democracy by limiting the number of 

people who will come out and vote, making it more difficult for 

those people who feel embarrassed perhaps because they don’t 

have a photo ID or simply don’t have a mechanism to be able to 

identify themselves in a clear and concise way. And they feel 

uncomfortable about this, and therefore they would rather stay 

home and avoid taking part in the democratic process. And if 

that is the case, Mr. Speaker, then what we see is a weakening 

of democracy, not a strengthening of democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government did do any consulting, then my 

question would be who did the government consult with? Who 

did they talk to in this whole process? Who did they talk to that 

gave them the information that led them to believe that these 

changes were, first, necessary but secondly that these were the 

correct changes to be able to meet the needs out in a local 

government election process? Who did the government talk to, 

Mr. Speaker? That is the question. 

 

Did they talk to groups? Did they talk to certain groups? Did 

they talk to individuals? Did they talk to elected people in local 

governments? Did they do so through a consultation process, by 

having it open to the public and allowing the public to be able 

to participate in these discussions? Did they have town hall 

meetings? Did they have a town hall meeting in Canora, or did 

they have it in Kindersley or perhaps even in Maple Creek? Did 

they have a town hall meeting there, where the public would be 

able to come out and be able to participate in these discussions 

and would be able to put forward their ideas, put forward their 

experiences, and their suggestions so the government could take 

that back and mould that into changes that would enhance 

democracy, improve democracy, encourage people to 

participate because in order to have a strong democracy you 

need to have strength in participation. 

 

[16:00] 

 

It is the death of democracy when you limit the amount of 

people that can take part in the democratic process. You wither 

democracy on the vine. You shorten, Mr. Speaker, the ability 

for people to be able to express their opinions and make their 

own selection of their representation, which is the basic 

principle of democracy — the right to vote. The right to vote is 

the basic principle of democracy, and I believe any government 

should be encouraging people to vote, encouraging people to 

come out. They should be providing people information and 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6459 

providing the ease of that information, so people can make an 

informed decision when they make their choice of their 

representation, Mr. Speaker, because that’s the way democracy 

simply works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government did do consultation of some 

form, the question is then, what was the reaction of those who 

were consulted with? Whether it be individuals or whether it be 

groups, whether it be organizations or whether it be elected 

bodies — what was the reaction to their proposals from those 

groups? What did those groups have to say? What was their 

reaction to the suggestion of a photo ID in order to be eligible 

to vote? 

 

Did they jump up and salute the idea, or are they saying, well 

oh no, maybe this was not a good idea? Maybe this was not a 

good idea. Maybe a photo ID and the requirement to have a 

photo ID before you participate in an election process would 

limit the number of people who would actually come out and 

take part in local governments. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that we have noted in 

the past, not in all elections but in a number of elections in local 

government, that the participation is low, is low. And that is not 

something that is good. It is not something that builds 

democracy, something that strengthens democracy. In fact that 

is something that we should be working against. What we 

should be doing is encouraging, encouraging more and more 

people to take part in election campaigns, encouraging them to 

get out and vote, encouraging them to become informed before 

they go out and vote so that they can make informed decisions 

of the individual or groups or political parties that might be 

their representation into their future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, often we need to — whether we’re in government, 

elected individuals in this Assembly in debate — we need to 

look at measuring sticks, measuring sticks that can identify 

whether these changes are positive changes or whether the 

changes may have negative effects. So, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

measuring sticks that I would suggest that any government 

should use would be the measuring stick of how will these 

changes, how will these changes affect the people of 

Saskatchewan? How will these changes affect the people of 

Saskatchewan? Will these changes improve the ability for 

people to participate in our election? Will it make it easier? 

Will it encourage them to come out and vote? 

 

Will it encourage people to come out and vote, or will it cause 

certain groups within our society to be reluctant to come out 

and express their opinions at election time — seniors perhaps 

who no longer have a photo ID, no longer have a driver’s 

licence, no longer have a photo ID, those individuals within our 

communities who perhaps have never had a driver’s licence? 

And I know some folks who have never had a driver’s licence, 

Mr. Speaker. They have relied on public transportation to meet 

their needs, are satisfied with that, and they don’t see the need 

to (a) to have a driver’s licence and (b) they’re probably in a 

financial situation where affording a vehicle and maintaining 

and operating vehicle would be tough for them. It would 

probably cause them to make a choice in many cases between 

putting some gas in the car or buying some groceries. So they 

have certainly eliminated one of the costs they believe they can 

live without, and that is the vehicle. And therefore they don’t 

have a vehicle. They never have had a vehicle. And I believe 

they don’t even have a driver’s licence because they just simply 

don’t have a reason for it or a need for it. 

 

Certainly once again, here’s a case where the cost of the 

driver’s licence, the cost of the photo ID might be prohibitive to 

their ability to be able to maintain their family’s standard of 

living. 

 

So certainly, Mr. Speaker, we want to see that what we should 

be looking at was ways and means and making changes to the 

Act that would encourage people to come out and vote, would 

not make roadblocks or stumbling blocks for seniors who no 

longer have a photo ID or people who never had a photo ID or 

people who find themselves perhaps disabled and don’t drive a 

vehicle and therefore don’t have a photo ID . . . would have the 

ability to come out and vote without any hindrance. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I think these changes do just 

the opposite. They do just the opposite. They make it tougher 

for people to participate. They make it tougher for people to 

want to come out and participate in the elections at election 

time, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh you’ve got 

to be kidding. 

 

There’s a real danger, Mr. Speaker, a real danger that a clear 

preference in the photo ID could lead to some people being 

simply no longer allowed to vote. And that would be certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, something that goes against the principles of 

democracy. And I think it’s fair to say that we’ve seen in the 

past where elections are held and because of a lack of good 

turnout, a very small number of people or a small percentage of 

the eligible voting public that does show up does cause a 

narrow band of ideas to be put forward and to be accepted 

because it’s a narrow band of people who’re actually 

participating at election time. And therefore it’s their ideas that 

get representation and not the ideas of the masses or the general 

public which, quite frankly, don’t vote because they felt they 

were prohibited in some way or other. So, Mr. Speaker, it 

simply decays democracy. 

 

And I think you and I would both agree that there are many 

examples around the world where we’ve seen democracy. And 

throughout our history, it has showed us many examples around 

the world, even some today, some in our history where 

democracy was in its very infant stage, was taking hold and 

starting to be developed. It was being nurtured and was being 

supported by those people who really wanted to see a 

democratic system work. 

 

But it was eroded by individuals, unscrupulous perhaps, 

individuals who gained political power through the democratic 

process to gain political power. And then they used that power 

to erode the democracy of our country by eliminating or 

reducing the number of people who were eligible to vote and 

therefore causing a narrower, narrower group who were able to 

cast their ballots and therefore restricting it to those groups or 

those individuals perhaps who supported the powers to be. And 

what happened then? You would see democracy and free 

elections being postponed, not being totally shut down but 

being postponed until at some point in time they’re postponed 

out of existence. And that, Mr. Speaker, would certainly be a 

sad and unforgivable thing to allow to happen. 



6460 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

After all, history has showed us that democracy has its pitfalls, 

and it has its shortcomings, but at the end of the day it’s 

certainly the best system available to govern human beings. I 

believe it was Winston Churchill, I believe it was, who once 

said that democracy is not the best form of government, but it 

certainly beats whatever’s in second place. And I think we’ve 

seen that. 

 

I think the history has shown that we have travelled down that 

road of attempting to use other forms of governance. And those 

forms of governance have not been as effective as democracy, 

as the government for the people by the people. It certainly has 

proven to be the, at the end of the day, the best form of 

government to ensure that it benefits all people, and benefits all 

people, I wouldn’t say equally, Mr. Speaker, but allows all 

people to participate in the society, allows all people to 

participate in the economy, and allows reasonable, reasonable 

opportunity for people to be able to enjoy their time spent in 

our society, in our economy, and to do so in a productive way 

and to allow them the comfort of knowing that they will have 

— in some cases, municipal politics I believe is every two 

years, I think, and certainly provincial politics every four years 

— the opportunity, the opportunity to be able to express their 

opinions and be able to, in the case of a government going into 

election, be able to pass a report card on the government, being 

able to grade the government. 

 

The government member will come out and make the 

representation. The government will go to the polls and the 

people will have the opportunity to grade the government. Will 

they gave them an A, saying they’ve been a good government, 

an excellent government, and give them a passing grade? Or 

will they perhaps say, well they’ve been a reasonable 

government but not a good government and therefore we won’t 

give them an A, but maybe we’ll give them a C. They’ll still be 

the government, but they’ll be reduced in numbers. 

 

Or will they say, no, this government has not been a good 

government. It has failed the people of Saskatchewan. It has 

failed me personally or it’s failed my group or it’s failed my 

family. It failed people of Saskatchewan. Enough people feel 

that way, they give the government an F, and they’re out of 

power. 

 

And that’s the way the democratic system works, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is good. That is what we want to see happen. We want 

to see more and more people participate in the democratic 

process to be able to grade government, to be able to grade a 

government, to say, yes, it’s been a good government or no, it’s 

been a government that has failed. And in that case, Mr. 

Speaker, we have the ability to change government. And when 

that happens, to change direction. 

 

And that’s what the democratic process is about. That’s what 

people enjoy in a democratic system. That’s something that we 

should be looking at improving at every opportunity. We 

should be looking at ways and means that we can improve 

democracy, improve the way that democracy operates so that 

people will participate. The best way to do that is to encourage, 

encourage as many people as possible to participate and to do 

so as informed voters. 

 

So what we want to do is look at making changes when 

necessary to the electoral process that would, that would make 

it easier for people to get involved in the system, for people to 

be able to take part in elections. And you want to encourage 

people to take part in elections. 

 

As I have said, we have seen in the past where the turnout at 

election times hasn’t been as great as perhaps we would like to 

see it. And each time we see less and less people involved in a 

democratic process, really what we’re seeing is a weakening of 

our democracy. And that’s a scary thing, Mr. Speaker, because 

we have, I think, a wonderful, wonderful opportunity when we 

have suggestions through political parties. Suggestions of, here 

are the issues; here are the problems facing our province. And 

political parties will make suggestions as to how they would go 

about addressing these problems. 

 

Really, the difference between political parties is that the 

problems are the same. The problems are the same. The 

difference is how would we address the problems? Political 

parties will pick different routes or different ways to address 

those problems. And that’s what the democratic system’s all 

about. 

 

We go to the public. We give the public out there the 

opportunity to make a choice, make a choice in which vehicle 

will be used to address the problem, which route will be chosen 

to address the problem, and which way would it reflect in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the concerns that I 

have here with the suggested changes to the Act, because I 

would not want to see anything that would limit the ability for 

democracy to grow. Not just to stay stable, but to grow in 

strength. Because a democracy, and the foundations of 

democracy, is something that we lay not just for ourselves, but 

we lay for the future; we lay for future generations. And the 

stronger the foundation you lay for democracy, the better off, I 

think, future generations will be. 

 

So I think it’s important that we be very, very careful on the 

changes that we make when we take in due consideration, 

because we don’t want changes that’s going to weaken that 

foundation. What we really want to do is work towards 

strengthening the foundation of democracy. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one more measuring stick, I think, is required 

when you look at these changes that are being put forward here 

or suggested here by the government is that, how will these 

changes improve? The question that I would have for this 

government is, how would these changes improve the welfare 

and the lives of Saskatchewan people? How will the changes, 

how will the suggestion of photo ID that’s going to be a must in 

order to participate in the local government election process, 

how will that improve the lives of Saskatchewan people? . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the minister is adding 

his comments. And I’m sure that the minister would have a lot 

to say about this particular Bill. And I think that, Mr. Speaker, 

that the minister should be in a position to be able to inform the 

legislature as to how these changes, how these changes to this 

particular Act, how they would really improve the welfare and 

the lives of Saskatchewan people. 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6461 

And I’m hoping that during this debate, before this debate 

concludes in total, that the minister will give us the opportunity 

of giving us 10 or 15 or 20 minutes worth of his wisdom and 

his experience on this particular Bill to be able to describe to us 

how these changes, how it is that having a photo ID, making a 

photo ID as a must requirement in order to vote at a local 

government, how that is going to improve the process of 

democracy, how that is going to encourage people to come out 

and take part in the elections. 

 

How will this work, Mr. Speaker, when we say, in order to 

participate in an election you must have a photo ID? And if you 

don’t have a photo ID, you might not be able to vote. How is 

that going to improve the lives of Saskatchewan people? How 

is that going to encourage people to come out and take part in 

an election, to express their opinions, to share with us their 

thoughts so that we can strengthen democracy and make those 

decisions that are informed decisions, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I’m looking forward to hearing from the minister, who has 

obviously a lot to say because he’s been adding to my 

comments on a regular basis here. And I’m looking forward to 

hearing what he has to say on this particular piece, Mr. Speaker, 

because I would like to know. I would like to know, once again, 

who asked for these changes? The minister would know that, 

being the minister. The minister would know who it was that 

asked for these changes, that asked for these changes that 

resulted in the introduction of this particular Bill, Bill 162, An 

Act to amend The Local Government Election Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s one of the questions I would like to know, was who 

asked for these changes. And I’m sure the minister has a long, 

long list of individuals and a long, long list of groups that have 

been knocking on his door, have been ringing his phone, have 

been sending him emails asking for these changes, insisting that 

the government makes changes to include having a photo ID as 

a must document in order to participate in elections in local 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the minister can also help us in 

telling us how it is, how it was, how he and his department, his 

officials determined that these were the changes that were 

necessary, that these were the changes that were needed, needed 

to ensure that democracy would be strengthened in our great 

province of ours. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what 

the minister is talking about when he is chirping from his seat 

and wanting to add to my comments on a regular basis. 

 

And I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that I’m looking forward to, at the 

first opportunity the minister will have, he will get to his feet 

and he will share that knowledge. He will share that wisdom 

with the rest of us so that we can all be informed as to how it 

was that these . . . it was determined that these were the changes 

that were necessary — the necessary changes to improve 

democracy, to improve the voting process, to allow people of 

Saskatchewan in greater numbers to participate in local 

governments. That, Mr. Speaker, is something that I’m looking 

forward to hearing from the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that, Mr. Speaker, would be an attitude that I’m sure that 

the minister would have no problem to share with us a long, 

long list or the very, very thick file that he has on what the 

consultations were that were carried out. How were they carried 

out? How were these consultations done? Who did they talk to? 

What groups did they talk to? What individuals did they talk to? 

What representation has the minister had, in growing numbers I 

am sure to his office, from those groups across this great 

province of ours who are virtually demanding that these 

changes take place? That they want to see a photo ID put into 

place in order to have people participate in an election process? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am looking forward to hearing the minister 

enlighten us on that, because I know that the minister must have 

a very, very thick file of the names and addresses and the 

contact people in various groups that have been knocking on his 

door, have been ringing his phone, have been sending him 

emails or writing him letters on an ongoing basis that has just 

caused the minister to say that this has to be done and it has to 

be done as soon as we can get it through the legislature so that 

the democracy will be protected, so democracy will be 

improved, so democracy will be enhanced by having more and 

more people participate in elections rather than having less and 

less people take part in local government selections, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just some, that’s just some of the questions 

that I have. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that when we have the 

opportunity to have the minister get to his feet in this debate 

and share with us his knowledge, to share with us his 

experiences, to share with us his list of those people who have 

been after the minister to make these changes, we will all be 

quite enlightened when that day comes, if the day comes. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

join in in the debate this afternoon on Bill No. 162, An Act to 

amend The Local Government Election Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts. And it’s a pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, to follow the member from Regina Northeast after 

he made his comments about Bill No. 162. A pleasure, Mr. 

Speaker, because I enjoyed the opportunity to hear the remarks 

that the member had to make about this Bill and, judging from 

the extended applause from the other side, it’s clear that 

members opposite appreciated his remarks as well. And I would 

like to echo the comments of the member. Certainly I too look 

forward to hearing from the minister at some future opportunity 

to answer some of the many questions that the member from 

Regina Northeast presented, some of his thoughts about what 

this Bill potentially means for access to the democratic process 

for many individuals. 

 

When we look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill 162, An Act to 

amend the Local Government Election Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts, we see this, Mr. 

Speaker, as part of another Bill also introduced by the 

government which would require individuals to have photo 

identification in order to vote in an election. This piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, applies to the municipal level. There 

are other changes in addition to the photo ID requirement, other 

changes that I will address also in my remarks. But the main 



6462 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

point that the member from Northeast and individuals who have 

spoken before me have addressed is the point about the photo 

identification and implications that has for the democratic 

process here in our province. And as I said, this Bill 162 

addresses the municipal level, and there’s been other legislation 

has been presented before this House to address it on a 

provincial scale. 

 

When we think about the democratic process, of course voting, 

the right to vote — the ability for individuals from a variety of 

backgrounds, individuals regardless of where they come in life, 

how rich they are, how poor they are, what sort of occupation 

they may have, whether they come from a large family or a 

small family, whether they’ve recently moved to this province 

and are eligible, or whether they’ve been here for many 

generations — Mr. Speaker, the right to vote is the basis of our 

democratic process. It’s so essential and vital to the vitality of 

the democratic system that we have here in Canada and in the 

province of Saskatchewan and in our cities, towns, and RMs 

that we may live in. 

 

Not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, here in the Assembly we took 

time around Remembrance Day to remember the sacrifice that 

men and women from our country and the free world all over, 

Mr. Speaker, have made to bring us that right, to bring us the 

privilege of being able to vote and to live in what is designed to 

be a fair and equal society. Individuals that have sacrificed in 

the past through paying the ultimate sacrifice, or through 

service in the armed forces or in other support capacities. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to remember that many individuals 

continue to serve at home and abroad, giving of themselves, 

making sacrifices in the area of family life and other goals that 

they may have and things that hold near and dear to them in 

order to defend the right that we have in Canada, in 

Saskatchewan, to live free, to participate in free and fair 

elections. 

 

And, I think, Mr. Speaker, around Remembrance Day of course 

we take extra time to stop and pause, but throughout our city 

and on the legislative grounds here there are other reminders 

that we need to look at throughout the year to remember how it 

is that we, as elected members, get to this Assembly and how it 

is that we are held accountable for our decisions by the masses, 

by the individuals who vote for us when election time comes 

around, whether that is at the municipal, provincial, federal 

level. 

 

When we look at the issue of elections and holding the values 

of our democracy paramount, there have been some actions, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’ve seen from members opposite that I 

know leave many people in the province rather uneasy about 

their commitment to free and fair elections and their 

commitment to maintaining the standards of our democratic 

system. 

 

I’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn’t too long ago that the issue 

of the role of the Chief Electoral Officer and who that 

individual is was a major discussion that we had here in the 

Assembly. And it’s still a discussion that deserves a great 

amount of attention, I think, by members in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to have free and fair elections that would 

occur, as suggested in perhaps in elements of Bill 162, it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, that the elections that occur — whether 

they at the provincial, municipal, or federal election — it’s 

important that they be free and fair. And in our democratic 

system, what we’ve established is a process where there is a 

non-partisan individual, the Chief Electoral Officer, who 

oversees, who oversees the conduct of elections, does all the 

planning outside of the election period because of course an 

election can be a very focused and narrow window of time in a 

three or four year election. But there’s a tremendous amount of 

work that occurs before and after an election in order to 

maintain the democratic system that we have. 

 

Well when we’re looking at Bill 162 and changes to The 

Election Amendment Act, we have to ask ourselves what other 

actions have taken place by members opposite that would allow 

us to have, on the opposition benches and people in the broader 

public, a high degree of confidence that members opposite are 

putting forward the changes that they suggest in Bill No. 162 in 

good spirit, good faith, wanting the best for the electoral 

system, the democratic process here in our province. 

 

When we look at some of those actions, Mr. Speaker, the one 

issue — there are many — but the one issue that stands out to 

me as the clearest and most troubling action that they’ve taken 

in undermining the democratic process was the tremendous 

amount of politics we saw from the Premier and the 

government benches when it came to the selection and the 

endorsement of a Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

What we saw, Mr. Speaker, that there was a decision made, a 

recommendation put forward that an individual would be 

selected as the Chief Electoral Officer, that that individual 

would be the permanent person. And, Mr. Speaker, as I 

mentioned, this individual has a very important role in the 

democratic process because it’s up to him or her to ensure that 

the work is done — before an election, during an election, and 

after an election — the work is done to ensure that things are 

done fairly and honestly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a recommendation was put forward by a 

committee that makes the recommendation, an all-party 

committee, that a certain individual should in fact be the 

permanent Chief Electoral Officer here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Well, and this decision, Mr. Speaker, I should 

add was endorsed by the Minister of Justice, someone who is 

bringing forward very important legislation and someone who 

should have, at the centre of his convictions and centre of his 

actions, a desire to have the democratic process and the rule of 

law and due process strengthened, not weakened. And this 

decision was endorsed by the Minister of Justice. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Well we learned, Mr. Speaker, that when the Minister of 

Justice’s colleagues heard about this recommendation, when it 

went to the broader caucus of the government benches, for 

some reason there was a great amount of concern and trouble 

with the recommendation, even though members from both 

sides of the House had made this suggestion that the individual 

should be put into the position even though the Justice minister 

endorsed the position as well. But the individual that was 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker, was described as the ideal candidate. 

A person who would do the job very fine. 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6463 

So when we saw the . . . I don’t know if it was outrage. I 

obviously wasn’t in the government caucus room when the 

discussion occurred. But I imagine the Justice minister was put 

in the hot seat about why he would go down this path because 

for some reason, members opposite had a problem with this 

decision. 

 

So when we’re looking at motivation as to why members 

opposite would put forward a particular piece of legislation that 

affects the democratic process such as Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Act, I think it’s important to look at it 

within the context of broader government actions that have 

occurred on this front. 

 

And I think the example of the interference, the political 

interference, by the Sask Party caucus on the selection of an 

individual who is described as the ideal candidate to fill the 

position and do the job duties that are required to ensure that we 

have a strong and vibrant democratic process on the provincial 

level. When we see that kind of interference on that decision, it 

causes me to have great concern about what the motivation is 

on Bill No. 162. Because both of these decisions, both of these 

actions have a tremendous amount to do with the democratic 

process and the right of individuals to participate in the 

democratic process. 

 

Now members before me, Mr. Speaker, have commented on 

what we have seen in a number of recent elections where we’ve 

seen voter turnout decrease in certain elections, Mr. Speaker. I 

think all members of this Assembly, whatever side we sit on, 

would agree that that is a bad thing and that we want to work as 

a society to have higher levels of participation in the democratic 

process. We want to work to ensure that individuals who may 

not feel like they want to participate for whatever reason, that 

they see the value in participating in the democratic process in a 

free and fair way. 

 

We can think of many examples around the world, Mr. Speaker, 

where there are individuals who are struggling for that right to 

be able to vote in elections, the ability to vote in a process and 

know that their vote counts, their vote matters. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I know that’s a concern for many people. So I think 

when we look at the members opposite suggestion of requiring 

photo ID at the municipal level, as suggested in 162, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to ask what is their motivation for doing so? 

Is it consistent with other actions we’ve seen, especially the 

actions that we saw around the selection of a Chief Electoral 

Officer when the government caucus rejected a decision that 

was put forward by an all-party committee and endorsed by the 

Justice minister. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a topic of question period on a 

number of days, where we’ve talked about the shortage of 

affordable housing for many individuals and how the need for 

affordable, quality housing for people has caused many 

individuals in society to be moving around to different locations 

on a fairly regular basis as they seek out a safe and affordable 

place to live. And we know that ties in to this issue of photo ID 

and that is a concern as well. 

 

There are other aspects to Bill 162, Mr. Speaker, that go beyond 

the direct issue of photo ID. One change that is suggested, Mr. 

Speaker, is an extension of the term from a three to four year 

for elected officials at the municipal level. And based on the 

minister’s remarks, I understand that this has happened. This 

has occurred in consultation with SUMA and SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. And that 

of course is a good thing when consultation does occur. 

 

We certainly know that in too many occurrences we’ve seen the 

opposite occur, where consultation has not occurred on a 

variety of issues. So it’s my sincere hope that the consultation 

that occurred on the term limits included other aspects and was 

not narrow in its focus in the consultation that occurred. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, extending the duration of the term from 

three to four years, in my opinion, it makes decent sense. 

Certainly a lot of the work that municipalities do, there requires 

a plan that extends more than one or two or three years and 

beyond four years as well. 

 

But I think the opportunity to have a four-year term makes 

sense to me. It allows newly elected individuals to become 

familiar with the position, go through the different annual 

cycles a few times to gain a better understanding of their role, 

what the issues are, and how they can respond to their 

constituents’ needs in the best way. And it also provides 

perhaps a bit more duration for the establishment of positive 

relationships, Mr. Speaker, between municipalities and other 

levels of government and/or organizations that are active in the 

community that would have interaction with the municipality. 

 

There was also a discussion or some sections of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, that . . . Well I’ll frame it this way. There’s also, we 

know, other changes that are perhaps a good idea when it 

comes to encouraging greater participation in the electoral 

process. One issue that has been talked about has to do with the 

hours that polls are open for voting. 

 

We know in . . . Well in urban and rural areas, people live very 

busy lives, and people are juggling many different 

commitments and might be at many, many different places in 

one day. And so having polls open an appropriate length of 

time allows individuals the flexibility to get to the voting 

station as they need to. We also know in many rural areas that 

people are working, perhaps maybe they’re living on a farm but 

working in a nearby town or city. That of course too, that may 

involve a significant amount of driving and amount of time of 

being on the road during the day. So I think when we’re looking 

at the hours that polls are open, it’s important to keep those 

considerations in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I’ve appreciated the opportunity to share a few of 

my thoughts and views on Bill No. 162, An Act to amend The 

Local Government Election Act and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts, especially happy to do it, Mr. 

Speaker, after the member from northeast who has been elected 

more than once and has served as an elected official for some 

time and has some very strong and important points that he 

made in his speech . . . so I was happy to follow the remarks 

that he had to make. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 162, I would now move to 

adjourn debate on it. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 



6464 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to An Act 

amending The University of Regina Act, Bill 159, before the 

House. Mr. Speaker, the Bill in a nutshell . . . And my remarks 

might be a little larger than that, but they will be relatively 

brief, I think. But the Bill in a nutshell really, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And I think when you boil it down, the minister’s second 

reading remarks, this is what they say . . . is that the governance 

procedures, some of the governance procedures — particularly 

around the election of chancellor and the senate — are different 

now for the University of Regina than they are for the 

University of Saskatchewan because those procedures were 

changed in an earlier sitting of this Legislative Assembly. And 

the effect of this Bill, The University of Regina Act Bill, is to 

make those procedures consistent between the two universities. 

And that in a nutshell is the purpose of this legislation as far as 

I can determine. 

 

I’m not sure that that is necessary, and I’m not sure that it’s 

necessarily desirable. The universities are different in many 

ways. I think the province is strengthened by having two 

universities that serve different functions, do different jobs, and 

do them well and complement each other. 

 

I’m not arguing that the governance should be not identical. For 

a long time, it’s been the consistent practice of successive 

governments that the governance of the two universities would 

be similar, if not identical. I’m not arguing that they shouldn’t 

be. But I’m not sure, since the government did not bring 

forward changes to The University of Regina Act at the time 

they brought forward the changes to The University of 

Saskatchewan Act, I’m not sure that the government thought 

that they needed to be identical. And I wonder, for the purposes 

of this debate and this discussion that will probably carry on 

into the spring, as to whether in fact the governance had to be 

identical for the two universities. 

 

But it would be the effect of this Bill, as I understand it, to 

make those governance procedures identical, as least as far the 

elections, and to change the inconsistency that now exists in the 

way the institutions choose certain offices and, specifically, the 

chancellor and the senate. 

 

In this respect, the news release of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, November 24th, 2010 is, I believe, misleading. 

And I’m sure not intentionally so, but I think at least potentially 

fairly misleading in this respect. The news release states that 

amendments to the Act have the effect of “enabling the 

university to adopt new processes for election of the Chancellor 

and Senate representatives.” And that’s not what the Act 

actually does because the news release suggests that the 

university is being given some discretionary power to choose 

how the chancellor and how the senate is elected. They will be 

enabled to adopt new processes. That’s not what’s happening, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m not saying that that should happen. That would be 

interesting. It would be unusual, and it would certainly be 

inconsistent with what this Assembly did in the case of the 

University of Saskatchewan. But what the Bill does is it has this 

Assembly adopting a new process and mandating a new process 

for election of the chancellor and the senate. 

 

I hope that is the only misleading part of the news release, Mr. 

Speaker. But when the government goes on to say that this 

search for consistency was not on the behest of the government, 

which, you know, if you read the implications of the press 

release, did not care that the University of Saskatchewan, 

University of Regina are governed the same way, but at the 

behest of the University of Regina, is that accurate, Mr. 

Speaker? Because the description of the Bill is not quite 

accurate, is the process that’s set out for consultation here, is 

that accurate, Mr. Speaker? And perhaps it is. 

 

As I said, I’m sure that the clumsy or inaccurate wording of the 

press release to what the effect of the Bill is was not intentional. 

But whether it’s intentional or not, misleading is misleading, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we would want to assure ourselves that in fact the 

university and the participants, the stakeholders in the 

university community, did see some difficulty with inconsistent 

legislation governing the two universities or saw some 

advantage. And I think the minister referred in his remarks to 

the cost advantage of changing how the chancellor and the 

senate are elected. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And did that initiate with the university? And was the 

university just, as sometimes happens here, not as concerned 

about the issues of how these elections were conducted as the 

University of Saskatchewan was, but seeing that the University 

of Saskatchewan had made these submissions, that the 

Assembly had passed the legislation, said well we might as well 

catch up and we should catch up? There are advantages to 

catching up and having a consistency. Is that what happened? 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker. And if that’s indeed the case, I don’t 

imagine that the opposition in the long term would have a lot of 

difficulty with agreeing with this legislation and making the 

two institutions consistent in how they elect the chancellor and 

the senate. 

 

As I said, I’m not sure. I’m not sure that we were concerned 

when The University of Saskatchewan Act was put before this 

Legislative Assembly that there was no corresponding 

University of Regina Act. Perhaps some members raised that 

concern, but I don’t remember that in the debate. And I don’t 

remember that in the minister’s second reading remarks on The 

University of Saskatchewan Act that, well we’re reluctant to do 



December 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6465 

this without having similar presentations made by the 

University of Regina, but we’re going to go ahead. I don’t 

remember any remarks along those lines, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t 

seem to be too pressing in fact to do this, and perhaps it’s not, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in any case, I’m sure the Assembly won’t finally deal with 

this matter in the two days that are still in front of us or the 

remainder of one day and one more day, Mr. Speaker, in 

debate. I’m not sure we’ll finally deal with this. 

 

The governance of universities is not a small issue, and it can 

be a very controversial one. Universities are amongst the oldest 

surviving institutions in our society — not quite as old as the 

Catholic Church but as old, perhaps older than parliament itself, 

Mr. Speaker. Universities have been around for a long time. 

And in some cases, in the conflict between church and state that 

shapes a lot of English and European history, universities found 

themselves in conflict with both those powerful institutions in 

trying to maintain their independence, both from the church or 

from the state. 

 

And as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, if indeed that’s what we 

do over time is move forward, as we’ve moved through time 

and perhaps move forward, Mr. Speaker, into an industrial 

society, an education became increasingly important and not 

education in the sense that education existed at the time — the 

founding of universities hundreds of years ago, arguably for an 

elite — but mass education because increasingly our society 

realized in human capital and productivity that comes from 

technology, but also just from human skill and human ability, 

human creativity, and human innovation the universities played 

a far different role in modern society and became far more 

public institutions. 

 

And so the conflict that existed in the ancient institutions of 

universities now has a new face to it, Mr. Speaker, a conflict 

between government that sees universities as a tool and 

instrument of developing human capital, developing skills for a 

modern industrial economy, and a university potentially that 

sees itself in a broader, more humanistic, not entirely economic 

role in serving society, serving humanity. 

 

That’s a conflict that’s not always apparent. And when we can 

not have that conflict, it’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. When we 

can serve the purposes of our economy and the broader goals 

and visions of universities as they have developed over the 

centuries, that’s a good thing. But that conflict does arise. 

 

And as the members will know, I served on the board of 

governors in the University of Saskatchewan for some seven 

years and as Chair of that board of governors for three years. 

And one develops perhaps a more nuanced view of the broader 

goals and purposes of a university there than members of 

government might otherwise bring because it’s a different view, 

a more nuanced view perhaps than members of the public 

would usually have. And there has been over time a lack of 

understanding, I say we’d had a lack of understanding about the 

role of the university, all the roles of the university in our 

society, on the part of government. 

 

We recently had condolence motions in this Legislative 

Assembly for a number of former MLAs who have passed 

away. And one of them was Senator Davey Steuart, not a 

literally towering figure, but a towering figure in Saskatchewan 

politics and Saskatchewan political history . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I’m glad I’m amusing the member from Regina 

South. 

 

And one part of a big part of Mr. Steuart’s history was the sense 

of, the belief of the Liberal government of the day that the 

universities of Saskatchewan were too autonomous, too 

independent, not directed at the priorities of the economy and 

the priorities of the government, and that the universities were 

largely funded by the public. 

 

And in those days — we’re talking about the ’60s more so than 

now, Mr. Speaker, more so than now — students increasingly 

pay a greater proportion of their education than they have. I 

mean, the time of the greatest subsidy was probably in the ’70s. 

Some of us, some of us were born then, but some of us in this 

Assembly received their university education in that decade and 

in the early ’80s and were the beneficiaries of that sort of high 

point of public funding of post-secondary education, that we 

benefited from that. 

 

Now today we are again getting to levels that we haven’t seen 

since the ’30s in student funding of their own education. And in 

the case of an art student, a liberal arts student, arguably close 

to 100 per cent of the cost of their education is being paid by 

them. Certainly with some other faculties and sciences 

requiring a large capital costs and very skilled and expensive 

faculty, much, much lower percentage. 

 

But across the board, Mr. Speaker, we were the beneficiaries — 

and not my generation — of a time of high public funding by 

the universities and relatively low public funding by the 

students themselves. And at that time the governments may feel 

even stronger that they were paying most of the way and they 

should have more control and direction over how universities 

conduct themselves and what they do and what their priorities 

are, even to what they teach. I mean that’s actually when you 

get to the nub of it, what is taught because what skills, what 

knowledge, what needs to be imparted to people? Should it be 

directed primarily at human productivity and the economy or 

should have it a broader purpose? And what should research 

be? I mean how much pure research, how much research should 

we be able to see some economic benefit from in the very near 

future? 

 

And these are the kind of conflicts between universities and 

governments, and not unique to the days of Davey Steuart and 

Ross Thatcher. Different ministers responsible for universities 

over the years have believed that the university should be more 

like a polytechnic, more like SIAST, more controlled by the 

relevant ministry or department of the day that’s responsible for 

the university — less independent, less complex and serving 

more primarily an economic role in an industrial society. 

 

I suspect that, although never involving governance of the 

university per se, given the experience of the current minister 

responsible, that there may be a more nuanced view in the 

minister’s office of the role of the university than there has been 

at some times in the past in Saskatchewan. I’m not sure that that 

view extends much beyond the minister in this government, but 

I expect that that may very well be the case, Mr. Speaker. 



6466 Saskatchewan Hansard December 8, 2010 

That is all to say that the issues that are raised by the Bill about 

governance are very important issues for our society, not just 

for our economy. Universities play an important role and 

perhaps a more important role now that they’ve become 

somewhat mass institutions to which many people attend and 

many people are served, not just the students but as members of 

the public, that the role that universities play in our society 

continues to be important.  

 

Their independence and respect to deciding about what should 

be a matter of research or what should be a matter of teaching, 

what should be a matter of outreach is important, and very 

likely not to be appreciated as much by members of the public 

and including members of this Assembly as, Mr. Speaker, one 

might hope. And that’s understandable. That’s completely 

understandable, Mr. Speaker. But I think those of us who have 

perhaps a broader view of the university need to raise these 

issues when we have the opportunity, as I do today in the 

House, and comment on these matters. 

 

When I was Chair of the board of governors of the University 

of Saskatchewan, I had occasion to make some remarks to 

members of the faculty, to the council that governs the 

academic matters of the university, the board of governors 

governing the financial matters. And I freely admit, Mr. 

Speaker — and this is one of my concerns about legislation and 

decisions and policy decisions around the university — that I 

managed to obtain two degrees from the University of 

Saskatchewan without ever giving much thought to how the 

institution was governed. 

 

But being part of the government of the University of 

Saskatchewan, I did have some occasion to give some thought 

to it. And I was trying to explain, and I think in a critical way, 

the difficulty that the university has explaining its mission, its 

broader mission to government. Even though I was appointed 

by that government of that day to the Chair, to the board, 

elected to the Chair by the board. 

 

My children were younger then, Mr. Speaker. And I said, my 

children like to have their vegetables, their potatoes, their meat, 

everything so they can avoid the food they don’t like and so 

none of their food contaminates the other food. And children 

don’t like casseroles, Mr. Speaker, because you never know 

what you’re going to find buried in there. They don’t like 

finding food in their food. And government’s a bit like that, Mr. 

Speaker. Government doesn’t like finding food in their food. 

 

And the university is a complex institution with a complex, 

complicated history. It has a role in the development of citizens. 

It has a role in the ongoing transmission of culture. It has roles 

and concerns and mandates and historical rights and privileges 

that go beyond purposes of government and certainly the 

concerns of government over a four-year term, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s this autonomy of the university that doesn’t get very 

much voice.  

 

I think, in institutions like this, Mr. Speaker, there’s nobody 

really mandated here to rise in the Assembly and say, if not the 

minister, but some ministers perhaps haven’t had much 

appreciation — I’m not saying this minister, Mr. Speaker, I 

think I’ve said otherwise already in my remarks — much 

appreciation or concern about that broader purpose for the 

university. But nobody is specifically mandated to do it. The 

university is lucky if it has defenders in this institution. And 

when it does have defenders, the defenders, whether they’re in 

government or they’re in opposition, should rise and speak. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I did want to take this opportunity in 

discussing this Bill and this particular legislation, I wanted to 

take this opportunity to talk about, set a broader context in 

which this Bill is enacted. And that is the governance of the 

University of Saskatchewan or the governance of the University 

of Regina. whether or not they should be identical or not, and 

why that governance is not direct . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., the Assembly is adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6435 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6435 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6435 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6435 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6435 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6435 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6436 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6436 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6436 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6436 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6437 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6437 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6437 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Breast Friends 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6437 

 Climate Change 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6438 

 Biggar and Area Fundraiser 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6438 

 Veterans Memorial Hall 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6438 

 The Salvation Army 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6438 

 Crown Corporations 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6439 

 A Candidate’s Brochure 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6439 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6439 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6439 

 Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6440 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6441 

 Personal Health Information 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6442 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6442 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6443 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6443 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Women Build Program to Construct Habitat for Humanity Home 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6444 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6444 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6445 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6445 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6445 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Stewart ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6445, 6446 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6446 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6445 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6446 



 

 Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6446 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6446 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 The Same Question Rule 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6447 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 6447 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6447 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6448 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 163 — The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6448 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6448 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6456 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6461 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6464 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


