




















































Hansard: December 02, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 21A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6341 

 December 2, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and then through you to all 

members of the Assembly today some special guests that have 

joined us in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the 29th of October, the members of the 

Saskatchewan Party in the constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford 

gathered to nominate a new candidate for the coming election. 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you, Larry Doke and 

his wife Valerie have joined us today in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Larry and Valerie currently live in the resort 

village of Metinota where he serves as a councillor. He has 

done so, Mr. Speaker, since 2000. He’s also currently the 

director of the West Yellowhead Waste Resource Authority, 

and Chair of the Jackfish Lake West Water Utility and waste 

water utility, Mr. Speaker. Prior to moving to Metinota, they 

lived in North Battleford, where he was involved in the 

chamber, where he was involved in the . . . for 14 years, where 

he was involved in the golf course and the park and recs board 

for that city and where they operated a business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Larry has a number of interests other than politics. They 

include, interestingly enough, restoring muscle cars and golfing 

and fishing — all very commendable activities I would say, Mr. 

Speaker. And may I just say that while we will very much miss 

the current member for Cut Knife-Turtleford when he takes his 

leave of politics, we very much look forward to working with 

Larry on this side of the House and ask all members to 

welcome him to his Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with the 

Premier in welcoming Larry and Valerie Doke to the legislature 

today. Indeed the Premier’s comments are absolutely correct. 

Larry has served the city of North Battleford and the 

surrounding area very well over the years, Mr. Speaker. I think 

the public in that Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency recognize 

the hard work that Larry has done and is continuing to do, and 

would like him to stay there and continue to do the work that he 

has done so well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that having been said, I acknowledge the good work that 

Larry and Val have done in our community. And on behalf of 

the official opposition, I welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, the Minister Responsible for First Nations Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s with great pleasure that I introduce a special guest 

that we have seated in your gallery today. With us is Mr. 

Douglas Gamble from the Beardy’s and Okemasis First Nation. 

Doug, if you want to stand and give us a wave. 

 

Mr. Gamble recently was honoured at the 12th annual Circle of 

Honour Awards. I know members from both sides of the House 

had an opportunity to attend those awards. And he was the 

recipient for the individual award for the justice initiatives in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Gamble has devoted his life to the area of 

justice, from being instrumental in the construction of the 

Beardy’s Justice facility to being an active participant in the 

well-known pilot peacekeepers program on his First Nation. His 

hard work and dedication has helped make his community a 

safer place, and I look forward to having the opportunity to 

speak with him after question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate all Circle of 

Honour recipients for their outstanding contributions, and today 

I ask all members to help me in joining Mr. Gamble in this, his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming Douglas Gamble to his 

Legislative Assembly. Certainly the Circle of Honour is one of 

the highest awards that First Nations can bestow upon people 

that have served the people in this province, and it was with 

great interest that I saw Mr. Gamble win this award back at the 

awards in October. 

 

So I congratulate him for that and I congratulate him for the 

work that he does every day in terms of furthering the important 

cause of justice for First Nations in Saskatchewan. So it’s good 

to see Mr. Gamble here, in his Legislative Assembly. The 

Gamble name of course is a famous First Nations name in the 

province of Saskatchewan, not just in Beardy’s Okemasis. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I want to say Ta wow and 

hay-hay. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d just like to point out as well to members 

that the Acting Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Dave Wilkie, has 

joined us this morning, and extend a welcome as well, please. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the safety of our highways. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ll read the prayer of this petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 



6342 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Regina, Melville, and Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. But we 

know that when governments reduce spending, often supports 

for social programs are cut first. Citizens in the province living 

in poverty have long identified affordable solutions such as the 

Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty Dignity for All campaign. They all call for a 

comprehensive poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Regina, Saskatoon, and Hafford. I do so present. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for Saskatchewan 

post-secondary students in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition from Furdale residents. A government 

ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies of water for 

domestic use to Furdale customers. The same government 

ministry has directed that customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater 

for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for 

livestock and irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

referred to by a government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to residents of the hamlet of Furdale, 

causing great hardship with no suitable alternatives; to 

exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further water service 

cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause under The 

Environmental Management Protection Act, 2002 and The 

Water Regulations, 2002; and that this government fulfills 

its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude specifically to the two consecutive deficit 

budgets, the billions of dollars of debt growth, Mr. Speaker, 

both occurring and projected under the Sask Party — an 

alarming 55 per cent of debt growth over the next four years 

which is $4.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, and of course comes at a 

price to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners here today are . . . Petitions are signed by 

concerned residents from the Southeast of our province, 

specifically Carievale and Fillmore. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6343 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Seated in the east gallery, Blair McDaid, 

a friend and former staff person in my ministerial office and his 

daughter, Ophelia. And I understand Ophelia will be three 

tomorrow. Blair’s other great accomplishment in life is having 

a partner by the name of Danielle Chartier who’s a member of 

the legislature from Saskatoon. So welcome to the Assembly, 

Blair. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

International Day of Persons With Disabilities 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, tomorrow is December 3rd. It’s International Day of 

Persons with Disabilities. The theme this year is Keeping the 

promise: Mainstreaming disability. And we know that people 

who live with disabilities too often live in poverty. Worldwide 

they suffer high rates of unemployment and often lack access to 

adequate education and health care. Here in Saskatchewan, we 

know that well over half of those who receive social assistance 

are people who live with disabilities, and that number continues 

to grow. 

 

But despite these obstacles, persons with disabilities have 

displayed great courage and resilience. But even as we continue 

to be inspired by those who reach the highest levels of 

achievement, for example, in the Paralympics, such successes 

must not obscure the difficulties faced by those who live in 

desperate conditions and lack the rights and privileges and 

opportunities available to their fellow citizens. 

 

We as legislators need to do more to support people with 

disabilities. This means not only fully implementing the UN 

[United Nations] Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities but also its Optional Protocol agreement. 

Tomorrow and every day, let us pledge to keep the promise of 

the UN goals alive in the community of persons who live with 

disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities as we all work to 

make Saskatchewan a much better and inclusive place for all of 

us to live. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal Ceremony 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise today to acknowledge the contribution of 

Saskatchewan’s outstanding protective service personnel, who 

were recognized yesterday in the Protective Services Medal 

ceremony at Government House. The Protective Services 

Medal recognizes exemplary long service from individuals who 

work to ensure the safety, security, and protection of 

Saskatchewan citizens. Each individual recipient has a 

minimum of 25 years of experience in either a volunteer or 

full-time capacity, and this year there were 73 recipients. 

 

The recipients came from a number of protective services 

including the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the Whitewood 

Fire Department, the Regina Fire and Protective Services, Mr. 

Speaker, Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, Estevan Fire 

Rescue Services, Ministry of Environment, the Regina Police 

Service, the Weyburn Police Service, the Fort Qu’Appelle Fire 

Department, Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 

Association, the Swift Current Fire Department, Glen Ewen 

Fire Department, the Moose Jaw Police Service, and the Moose 

Jaw Fire Department, Correctional Service of Canada, and the 

Canadian Forces. 

 

It is true that their success comes from years of hard work and a 

commitment to the province that is unrivalled. And I want to 

thank them not only for the work they have done but for the 

example they have set throughout their communities and in our 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Celebration of Hanukkah 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday at sundown was the 

beginning of the celebration of Hanukkah, the eight-day Jewish 

festival of lights. Jewish families in Saskatchewan, throughout 

Canada, and around the world gathered to light the first candle 

on their menorahs to enjoy one another’s company, the latkes 

and sufganiyot, and to celebrate their rich heritage and deep 

faith. 

 

The Hanukkah story is the earliest recorded struggle for 

religious freedom — the triumph of the Maccabees. It’s a story 

about the miracles that come to those with great courage and 

great faith. It’s a story about peace and perseverance, and it’s a 

story about hope shining through darkness. Throughout the 

entire year, but especially at times such as Hanukkah, we join 

with one another to celebrate hope and to celebrate life. And we 

join with one another to celebrate freedom, to embrace 

diversity, and condemn all types of discrimination and hatred, 

including anti-Semitism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Legislative Assembly to 

join with me in sending warm greetings to all those celebrating 

Hanukkah. To all Jewish families in Saskatchewan, I wish 

peace, joy, health, and happiness during this festival and 

throughout the coming year. Happy Hanukkah. Chag Sameach. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatoon Physician Receives Award 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise in this House 

today and recognize Dr. Anne Doig and her naming as one of 

Canada’s 100 most powerful women. These awards are 

presented by the Women’s Executive Network and are 

Canada’s most recognizable awards for the country’s highest 

achieving female leaders in the private, public, and 



6344 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

not-for-profit sectors. 

 

Dr. Doig is an alumna of the College of Medicine at the 

University of Saskatchewan. In 1976 she completed 

postgraduate training in family medicine in Saskatoon, and 

attained certification from the College of Family Physicians of 

Canada in 1978. She began full-time family practice in 

Saskatoon in 1978 and is a founding member of the College of 

Medicine’ s alumni association and one of its past presidents. 

 

In 2003 the alumni association honoured Dr. Doig as the 17th 

alumni lecturer at the 50th anniversary reunion of the College 

of Medicine. In 1990 she was named Clinical Teacher of the 

Year in Family Medicine by the medical house staff at 

Saskatoon City Hospital. In 1996 she was the Saskatchewan 

recipient of the Excellence in Training Award of the 

Association of Professors of Obstetrics and Gynecology. She 

then went on to become to president of the Canadian Medical 

Association. 

 

Her contributions to Saskatchewan make us all hopeful what 

can be achieved through hard work and dedication. On behalf 

of this House, I want to congratulate Dr. Doig on her recent 

award and thank her for her work in this field of health care. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Cultural Centre Renamed 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Tuesday evening, November 30th, 

Saskatoon’s well-known artistic venue, The Refinery Arts and 

Spirit Centre, held a dedication ceremony naming its 

performance centre the Angie Tysseland Theatre to honour one 

of The Refinery’s founding members. Adjacent to St. James 

Anglican Church, The Refinery has been a warm, intimate 

setting for dance, drama, literary readings, and music for the 

past decade. 

 

Saskatoon musician Angie Tysseland has been a founding 

member, creative director, and frequent performer at The 

Refinery. Angie is also a former music director for St. James 

Anglican Church where she directed the 40-voice St. James 

Refiner’s Choir. 

 

The dedication ceremony honours Angie while she’s receiving 

treatment for ovarian cancer. Though Angie could not attend 

the ceremony, she was able to participate through Skype. 

 

Angie’s first album was released 10 years ago, followed by a 

decade of composition and directing music for theatre and 

church. She has directed three choir recordings of the Refiner’s 

Choir, a choir which toured St. Mark’s Church in-the-Bowery 

in New York city. Angie also wrote three musicals: New York is 

Big but This is Biggar, The Girl Who Was Saved by Jazz, 

starring Andrea Menard, and The Dreamriders. 

 

Throughout her life, Angie has worked for peace and social 

justice. She has directed an inner-city choir and worked with 

the Saskatoon chapter of Integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in congratulating Angie 

Tysseland for her many accomplishments and in thanking her 

for her rich contributions to Saskatchewan’s cultural life. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Lumber Mills Opening in Carrot River Valley 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

have good news for Carrot River Valley constituency. We have 

lumber mills opening up and, you know what, Mr. Speaker? We 

didn’t have to put $100 million of taxpayer money into them. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, these companies feel that Saskatchewan is a 

good place to do business in, and they actually think it’s 

prudent to use their own money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Weyerhaeuser strand board plant in Hudson 

Bay is up and running as I speak. Edgewood Forest Products 

has purchased the stud mill in Carrot River and the plywood 

plant in Hudson Bay. They have given a firm start date of July 

4th for Carrot River and November the 1st for Hudson Bay of 

next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser has been in this province a long 

time, but Edgewood Forest Products is a new player in town. 

Mr. Speaker, this company is a division of C&C Wood 

Products Ltd., which have mills in BC [British Columbia] and 

Alberta. They see Saskatchewan as a place to invest, a place 

with a positive attitude, a province going down a new road — 

not the old potholed one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on November the 4th, the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote said, and I quote, “The Premier had no plan 

for forestry. It went in the tank.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our forest industry is moving forward in this 

province without the NDP plan of squandering 100 million in 

taxpayer money. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Fiscal Management 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s fiscal 

record is one of mismanagement and deception. It includes two 

consecutive deficits, debt growth, and inappropriate accounting. 

They raided the rainy day fund and the Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, and the fact is that debt is increasing by an 

astonishing 55 per cent over the next four years. That’s an 

increase of $4.2 billion, and this does not include the hundreds 

of millions of dollars being hidden off balance sheet through 

deals like Amicus or private power or for-profit health care, Mr. 

Speaker. And it is Saskatchewan people that will pay the price 

now and well into the future for this mismanagement through 

their power bills, through harmful cuts to education and health 

care, as but a few examples. 

 

The Provincial Auditor weighed in yesterday on the 

government financial reporting in his volume 2 report. I quote 

various phrases: “inaccurate and incomplete”; “Because of this 

inappropriate accounting, the statements report the net debt and 

annual surplus inaccurately”; “. . . does not use Canadian 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6345 

generally accepted accounting principles for the public sector 

. . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re the only province not to report from a 

summary basis. We’re offside with accounting standards. Quite 

simply, Saskatchewan people deserve one set of books and the 

straight goods. 

 

A Leader-Post columnist stated, I quote, “The debt graph 

presented by Wall’s strategists in their propaganda was at best 

misleading and at worst downright deceitful.” Mr. Speaker, it’s 

no wonder that Saskatchewan people do not trust this Premier 

and the Sask Party to manage our finances. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people deserve much, much better. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I ask the member why the member is 

on her feet, I’d just like to remind members of the terms that 

members would use, whether quoting, and remind members 

that under parliamentary rules and forms, language used in the 

House should be temperate and worthy of the place in which it 

is spoken. It’s been a long-standing tradition and ruling of 

previous Speakers. 

 

Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Humboldt has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

member from Humboldt. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you 

and through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly I 

am very honoured to be able to introduce 40 grade 12 students 

from Humboldt Collegiate. Accompanying them are their 

teachers, Jillian Hamilton and Dave Millette, and a chaperone, 

Gisele Classen. I’m truly looking forward to meeting with them 

a little bit later, and I hope they enjoy the proceedings. So may 

all members welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, seated in the 

east gallery, Mr. Speaker, I see two individuals walk into this 

gallery that are in fact constituents in the fine constituency of 

Cannington, Mr. Speaker. From the community of Carlyle, I see 

Todd and Connie Gervais. 

 

Todd is the reporter with the Carlyle Observer in Carlyle, Mr. 

Speaker. Connie works in the RM [rural municipality] office, 

Mr. Speaker. These are two fine constituents in Cannington, in 

a thriving little centre there of Carlyle with a great community 

and two individuals that offer a lot of leadership, Mr. Speaker, 

to their community. 

 

And I always enjoy watching the coverage as well in the 

Carlyle Observer as it relates to the cuts of long-term care beds, 

Mr. Speaker, the challenges of the rural doctor shortage — all 

challenges under this government, Mr. Speaker. I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join with me, two individuals and 

leaders within their respective communities, Mr. Speaker, and 

welcome them to their Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on May 17 the Minister of 

Health, in reference to the Amicus deal, told this Assembly, and 

I quote, “We’ve looked into it through the Ministry of Health 

and no, we don’t look at this as a loan guarantee.” To the 

minister: does he still stand by those words today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I raised an 

issue regarding use of a person’s name, Bill McMorris, and the 

fact that my mother had been called by the opposition. The day 

that that name was raised in this House, my mother was phoned 

at home — a 90-year-old. I want to know who on that side had 

the nerve, or if it wasn’t anyone on that side, who in your 

employment would be phoning a 90-year-old mother to ask her 

information on a political question you wanted to ask? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the minister is trying to 

divert from the question. That’s what the minister is trying to 

do. I asked the minister a very simple question: does he still 

stand by his statements that he made in this Assembly on May 

the 17th that there wasn’t a loan guarantee to Amicus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that member has been 

asking questions for six weeks now on Amicus. I find it 

absolutely amazing that the opposition critic spent time in rural 

Saskatchewan, supposedly found or uncovered all these 

problems in rural Saskatchewan. I’ve talked to people in rural 

Saskatchewan. Their number one issue isn’t Amicus, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they have issues, but it’s not Amicus. It’s 

not whether it’s a loan guarantee or not a loan guarantee, Mr. 

Speaker. KPMG, an accounting firm, reputable accounting firm 

in this province, has weighed in and said it’s not a loan 

guarantee. I stand by my words and the words of KPMG. 



6346 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister, the Minister of 

Health said that his officials looked into the Amicus deal and 

said there was no loan guarantee. That’s what he said. But on 

April 14th, an email from one of his minister’s own, one of the 

minister’s own officials reads in part, “Agreeing to pay out the 

mortgage, I would suggest, effectively amounts to a contingent 

liability.” That’s not my interpretation of the agreement. That’s 

one of the minister’s own officials, the same officials that he 

said told him that there was no loan guarantee. 

 

So to the minister: how is an agreement to pay out the mortgage 

not a loan guarantee? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said this before; I’ll 

say it again. Under the NDP [New Democratic Party], 16 years, 

not one new long-term care bed in this province. Absolutely 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. They’d rather have people . . . 

[inaudible] . . . in acute care settings, Mr. Speaker, not living in 

appropriate settings. 

 

Amicus, through the Catholic Health Ministry and the 

Saskatoon Health Region have entered into an agreement to 

supply some of the first new long-term care beds in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. It’s good for seniors, Mr. Speaker. This 

agreement has been weighed into by many others that will say 

that it is not a loan guarantee. An agreement set in between the 

Saskatoon Health Region and the Catholic Health Ministry 

who’s provided care in this province for many years, excellent 

care in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a good deal for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

When it comes to long-term care and improvements in 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, our government is getting it done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

boasted that the Amicus loan guarantee is an innovative funding 

model. It’s so innovative, Mr. Speaker, that his own policy and 

governance adviser says, in an email dated April 14th, and I 

quote, “It was never contemplated that regional health 

authorities or affiliates would provide guarantees to third 

parties.” In the same email, Mr. Speaker, they say of the loan 

guarantee, “This provision is contrary both to the spirit and the 

intent of the provisions contained in The Regional Health 

Services Amendment Act, 2007.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did this minister innovate his way into 

signing off on an agreement that violates an Act that he is 

responsible for enforcing? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this agreement, as I 

have said before, will provide long-term care arrangements for 

seniors. We’re getting them out of acute care centres in 

Saskatoon, out of City Hospital. Anywhere from 60 to 70 

seniors are living in an acute care centre. Absolutely 

unacceptable. We don’t accept it. Under the NDP, it was 

acceptable. They didn’t increase the number of beds, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had a Patient First Review that identified some of these 

very problems and said, you need to look at different funding 

models. Mr. Speaker, that’s what this is. Through Samaritan 

Place, the actual facility, the Catholic Health Ministry and the 

Saskatoon Health Region will be supplying appropriate spaces 

for seniors to age together as couples, Mr. Speaker, something 

that was never done under the government opposite. It is 

state-of-the-art. It’s looking at new concepts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, I’ll weigh in on what KPMG says in a letter dated 

May the 12th, that this is not a loan guarantee arrangement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s own official says in 

the same email, and I quote: “The Act specifically requires the 

approval of the Minister of Finance to approve borrowing 

above specific amounts.” 

 

The agreement to guarantee the borrowing to finance the 

Amicus deal, Mr. Speaker, counts as a government liability. 

Debt is debt. Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us if he 

complied with the Act by seeking the Minister of Finance’s 

approval for the specified amounts in the Amicus loan 

guarantee? And if so, when? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote from the letter 

from KPMG. It states here as such: “The contractual obligation 

under the agreement would not be defined as a guarantee,” Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they keep trying to spin this and trying to spin 

this, Mr. Speaker. I find it amazing because there are issues in 

health care — absolutely. Mr. Speaker, we’re working with 

communities on physician recruitment. We’re working with 

communities regarding long-term care. We’re working with 

communities, Mr. Speaker, to make sure there’s a proper 

complement of health care professionals. 

 

Not once have I heard in rural Saskatchewan — and members, 

correct me if I’m wrong — was the issue of Samaritan Place as 

to whether it was a loan guarantee or not. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t pretend he 

doesn’t have to meet the Act’s requirements in this case. As 

opposition Health critic, he was very involved in the debate 

around the amendments to the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that same email says that once the Amicus loan 

guarantee payout precedent is set, other health care affiliates, 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6347 

and I quote, “. . . could reasonably be expected to argue that 

they should be provided with the same benefit.” In other words, 

Mr. Speaker, once the minister’s proposed loan guarantee 

language lets Amicus trigger a payout of the mortgage, others 

will come looking for the same treatment, setting a dangerous 

precedent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the minister not listen to his officials 

when they warned him against setting this dangerous 

precedent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we came to power 

in 2007, we certainly looked at the facilities across this 

province, realized that many of them were dated. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, just prior to the 2007 election, the opposition in all 

their wisdom hired a firm to look at every facility in 

Saskatchewan. It’s called the VFA report and looked at the 

shape of the facilities, Mr. Speaker. And that report is really 

quite humbling when you look at the deterioration over 16 

years of NDP government, Mr. Speaker. The facilities, some of 

our facilities are absolutely dated. 

 

That’s why this government, early on, looked at 13 long-term 

care facilities that will be constructed — replacements, Mr. 

Speaker. It also is looking at other funding arrangements to 

ensure that we have proper facilities throughout the province. 

This is a first of its kind, Mr. Speaker, a pilot project. I think 

it’s going to serve the people of Saskatchewan very, very well, 

but more importantly it’s going to serve the seniors of this 

province that deserve appropriate care at the end of their life, 

Mr. Speaker. It will serve them extremely well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — We can’t be taken off track from the questions, 

the way that these questions are being put to the government 

and on behalf of the public. The public needs to know where 

their money is being spent. 

 

On the tour that my colleague from Fairview and I took this 

summer, we visited 10 of the 13 facilities that are promised 

upgrades or replacements. And there’s no doubt that they need 

them. But they didn’t have a clue that there was a new funding 

arrangement in town. They did not have any idea. And they are 

interested in knowing, does this apply to them? And do they 

have to stop their local fundraising, levying health taxes, having 

bake sales? Can they stop that now because this new funding 

agreement is in place? Or is it only in place for friends of the 

Sask Party and from the Premier’s office? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly glad that 

that member opposite with her friend toured the long-term care 

facilities and finally admits, when they’re in opposition, that 

these facilities are badly needed of repair or replacement. 

Excuse me, where were they for 16 years? Did these facilities 

age in the last two years? Or had they been deteriorating year 

after year after year because of underfunding by the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker? I’d say it’s the latter. 

Mr. Speaker, this government is getting it done. I’ve had the 

opportunity to meet with all 13 of those communities after that 

member had her little tour. And absolutely there are some 

concerns with funding. But when it comes to levying taxes to 

put towards a health care facility, is this new in the province 

under the Saskatchewan Party? Absolutely not. In fact in 

Redvers they got zero cents from the NDP. They funded a 

hospital 100 per cent under their community fundraising 

initiatives. 

 

But there are communities under the NDP that have levied 

taxes for health care facilities for many, many years, Mr. 

Speaker. That is continuing under the Sask Party government, 

Mr. Speaker, because we’re making sure we have the proper 

facilities in the proper communities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Provincial 

Auditor said this. I quote: 

 

Because the Government uses inappropriate accounting 

policies, the GRF financial statements report net debt and 

annual surplus inaccurately. If the Government had 

accounted for all transactions properly, the statements 

would have recorded net debt of $8.46 billion instead of 

$3.64 billion at March 31, 2010 . . . 

 

My question is this. This Amicus insider deal is just another 

way for the Premier to hide debt by moving it off the 

government’s books. How can he stand for this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to provide an update here. We welcome the 

Provincial Auditor’s extensive report and appreciate the effort 

the auditor has put forward throughout his review. It serves as a 

helpful guide in identifying areas that we need to improve upon, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly regarding this issue, like the last government, we 

produce a general revenue statement that provides an accurate 

and clear picture of government expenditures and revenues. We 

also produce, as the last government did, summary statements 

twice a year which includes activities of the Crown 

corporations and other government bodies. Mr. Speaker, this is 

consistent with what has happened in the past, Mr. Speaker. It 

provides a sound and transparent financial framework for the 

people of this province and reassures them that their finances 

are in fine shape. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we see is a quote from the Leader of 

the Opposition recently saying, “It’s exciting times in 

Saskatchewan. I don’t want to make it sound like there’s a huge 

problem because there isn’t,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



6348 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll stand behind the 

record of New Democrats any day of the week as it relates to 

improving financial reporting, accounting reporting, and as well 

the fiscal health of this province, Mr. Speaker. These aren’t 

static pieces, Mr. Speaker. We need to be moving to summary 

finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s rhetoric doesn’t match the reality 

that is emerging from the documents that are leaking out of this 

insider deal. An email from the CEO [chief executive officer] 

of the Saskatoon Health Region says, I quote: 

 

This deal provides Amicus with funding to cover both 

their operating costs (which are higher than the per diem 

provided to any other SHR affiliate) and their debt 

servicing charges, with protection to the bank that the 

region/ministry will assume the debt if the deal falls apart 

or Amicus defaults on its loan. 

 

A loan guarantee, Mr. Speaker. That’s the truth about the deal 

and what it means for our finances, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister: why isn’t the Sask Party listening to the Provincial 

Auditor, and why are they continuing to engage in trickery and 

trying to hide the true state of our debt. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker again, we’ve been 

around this many, many times. I guess we’ll be around it a few 

more times with four more days after today. And I’m sure it’ll 

be asked each and every day. 

 

What I would say though, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve been very 

upfront. The cost, Mr. Speaker, for Amicus is the daily cost that 

it would cost for a senior, that we’re reimbursing the Catholic 

Health Ministry along with some capital. Mr. Speaker, as we 

move forward. The Catholic Health Ministry through Amicus 

and Samaritan Place is putting up 100 per cent of the capital. 

There is no exposure for the government. We are paying it off 

over time, Mr. Speaker, on a capital piece. 

 

And if the member opposite is saying trickery is the letter from 

KPMG, then Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what further authority 

that we could go to that would confirm that or satisfy that 

member opposite. Because quite frankly I don’t believe when 

we get a letter from KPMG, that would be classed as trickery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The letter of reference, will the minister 

table that? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are starting to see this 

deal for what it is, an insider deal with untendered contracts and 

benefits for the Premier’s friends, and all of it trying to be 

hidden off the government’s books so that the true state of our 

provincial debt is hidden from Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Provincial Auditor criticized the Premier for inappropriate 

practices back in June and now again yesterday. But the 

Premier continues to ignore the admonishments of the 

Provincial Auditor and to ignore public sector accounting 

standards, Mr. Speaker, expectations. And he just keeps adding 

up debt and hiding it from the public, a whole bunch of deals 

off the books, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: will he commit 

today to listen to the Provincial Auditor and come clean on 

what the Amicus deal really means to Saskatchewan people as 

it relates to our finances. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for an 

opportunity to provide a summary about the financial state of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. When this party came to power, Mr. 

Speaker, we inherited $6.8 billion in debt, and there was $1.2 

billion in the savings fund. Mr. Speaker, what we have is more 

than a debt reduction of more than $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, and 

more than $1 billion in the savings account, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s more than $2 billion improvement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to that, we see employment going up. More jobs, 

more people, higher wages, Mr. Speaker — that’s what the 

people of this province have come to expect and appreciate 

from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — What people have come to expect from 

this government, Mr. Speaker, are deficits. Two consecutive 

deficits, Mr. Speaker. Debt growth, Mr. Speaker, $4.2 billion 

over the next four years alone, not counting all the other debt 

that we’re talking about here today, Mr. Speaker. And as has 

been reported, inappropriate accounting standards. What are 

people saying about this? Well it’s been called misleading by a 

columnist in the Leader-Post. It’s been called downright 

deceitful by a columnist in the Leader-Post. By the auditor, the 

words “inappropriate” have been used. “Inaccurate and 

incomplete,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the member opposite to quit bouncing around the issue 

here with all the flowery rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that 

this government is adding billions of dollars of debt to the 

people of Saskatchewan. In addition to that, they’re hiding 

hundreds of millions of dollars of debt in off balance sheet here, 

on private power deals, for-profit health care, specifically on 

this Amicus deal. What does this mean for Saskatchewan 

people? Come clean, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As far 

as flowery rhetoric what I’ll do is I’ll quote the MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina Dewdney, who on 

September 30th offered this: “Saskatchewan is a great place to 

live. People move to where the jobs are,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand what’s going on here. Mr. Speaker, 

employment has gone up by 5,200 jobs year over year, Mr. 

Speaker. For six straight months we’ve had First Nations and 

Métis people having more jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve seen employment gains in manufacturing, in trade, in 

utilities, in transportation, and warehouses. We have the 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6349 

average weekly earnings going up, Mr. Speaker, and year over 

year we continue to see improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Scotiabank has just come out and said, 

“Saskatchewan is expected to be one of the country’s strongest 

performers in 2011, with economic growth of 3.3 per cent,” 

said Scotiabank in its latest provincial economic forecast. Mr. 

Speaker, you can see from independent analysts as well as 

citizens from across this province. They’re satisfied that there is 

more work to do, but they have right party in power, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Earlier 

this week the Premier accused one of my colleagues of being 

the mistress of conspiracy theories. So we’d like to give him a 

chance to clear it up. 

 

To the Premier: did the Premier ever have a conversation with 

the chair of the Saskatoon Health Region about the Amicus deal 

prior to the Saskatoon Health Region vote on May 12th to 

approve it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, day in and day out, they 

come into this Assembly and try and first of all smear peoples’ 

names, Mr. Speaker, misrepresent letters from KPMG, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think we need to look at the real record of when they were in 

power, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s really quite interesting. The 

Health critic and her seatmate, the member from Nutana, had 

quite a bit to say when they were the Health minister and the 

member opposite was the associate Health minister. In fact in 

2000, 10 years ago, they sent out a news release talking about 

the health care under their watch, Mr. Speaker, under their 

watch. 

 

This news release talks about 50 long-term beds being closed 

with another 40 possible closures, Mr. Speaker. But what did 

the associate minister say about that? Here is her exact quote in 

her own news release: “These plans will lead to a better quality 

of long-term care in the province,” Mr. Speaker. Yes, closing 

90 beds in the province always leads to a better quality of 

long-term care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, no one has ever questioned the 

goal. It’s the road this government is taking to get there that is 

questionable, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have already seen 

that this government goes to some very elaborate lengths to 

hide the truth, including censoring 1,800 pages of information 

about this Amicus affair. 

 

So I want the Premier to be absolutely clear about this to the 

Assembly. Did he ever have a conversation with Jim Rhode, 

Chair of the Saskatoon Health Region board, about the Amicus 

deal prior to the approval and agreement being made public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition put in a 

freedom of information request to the Saskatoon Health Region. 

The Saskatoon Health Region answered that freedom of 

information request. They redacted a number of pages, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it sounds like some of those members have got 

their hands on those redacted pieces of information. That’s 

really quite interesting. I’d be interested obviously to know how 

they got their hands on redacted information from the 

Saskatoon Health Region. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, regardless of how they 

received that information, what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we’ll have 100 seniors, some with their spouses, being able to 

live the last years or months of their life together in a new 

facility in Saskatoon, something that has not been done in this 

province for years, especially 16 years under the NDP 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the FOI [freedom 

of information] was redacted under the legislation of the 

provincial government. So the minister needs to quit dumping 

this on the Saskatoon Health Region because it falls clearly in 

his lap. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the FOI request includes a legal memo from the 

Saskatoon Health Region. The government censored this memo 

in response to the original FOI request. But the uncensored 

version reads, and I quote, “Jim Rhode spoke with the Premier. 

This is a deal.” To the Premier: why has he repeatedly claimed 

that he and his office had nothing to do with this deal when a 

legal memo from the Saskatoon Health Region confirms that he 

did? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 

members opposite, they’re saying that it was our government 

that redacted the information. Who did the opposition put the 

freedom of information request to? Was it the Government of 

Saskatchewan or was it the Saskatoon Health Region? I believe 

it was the Saskatoon Health Region. 

 

It’s the Saskatoon Health Region’s decision to redact whatever 

information they so choose, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon Health 

Region is acting under the Act that is in front of them, Mr. 

Speaker. It is well within their rights to redact the information 

they feel would be inappropriate to go into the public record, 

Mr. Speaker, because of tendering issues and other issues, Mr. 

Speaker. It is their decision to redact that information. That’s 

what they have done. 

 

They continue to use all their question period time on an issue, 

Mr. Speaker, that quite frankly I don’t think will get any 



6350 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

traction. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Increased Support for People With Disabilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

tomorrow is the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, 

and I ask all members of this Assembly to join with the United 

Nations, with people and governments around the world to 

recognize this very important day. The International Day of 

Persons with Disabilities has been observed around the world 

every year on December the 3rd since 1981. The 

commemoration is intended to promote a better understanding 

of the disability issue. 

 

Later this morning, in the spirit of the International Day of 

Persons with Disabilities, our government is once again 

demonstrating our commitment to people of Saskatchewan with 

disabilities. Our government will be announcing increased 

supports for people with disabilities who are clients of the 

Saskatchewan assured income for disability program, or the 

SAID program, and the Saskatchewan assistance program. 

 

Effective February the 1st, people with disabilities who are 

clients of this program will receive an increase to their earning 

exemption. The inheritance exemptions for SAID clients are 

also being raised to $100,000 per household. 

 

Raising the exemptions on earned income and assets such as 

property inheritance recognizes the unique and the long-term 

nature of income replacement required by clients of our 

ministry with disabilities. Earning exemption limits will 

increase by $100 a month for single persons with disabilities 

and $125 a month for a childless couple with disabilities. An 

estimated 540 people with disabilities will benefit from the 

earnings exemption increase. 

 

This announcement will be the latest in a series of multi-year 

initiatives that . . . It will respond to the recommendations of the 

2009 community-government task force on income support for 

people with disabilities. This announcement is also part of our 

overall government effort to put money back into the pockets of 

those who need it the most. 

 

For example, we’ve reduced provincial income tax and 

removed 80,000 additional low-income people from the 

provincial tax rolls. Low-income single parents can now save 

up to $2,800 annually, thanks to tax reduction. And low-income 

families will save up to $2,600 annually, thanks to tax changes. 

 

We’ve also moved to create tax savings for people with 

disabilities and families with disabilities. We’ve increased the 

caregiver tax credit, the infirm dependant tax credit, and the 

disability tax credit. And finally, we’ve increased the rental 

housing supplement for people with disabilities and indexed it 

to the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the steps we have taken to 

put more money back into the pockets of vulnerable people in 

our province. And today we celebrate a new step, a step 

towards a more inclusive and equal Saskatchewan. 

 

We know there’s more work to do, and we recognize there are 

still inequalities for people with disabilities that must be 

addressed. That’s why, as part of this announcement, our 

government has also allocated an additional $100,000 to 

finalize the research and development of a disability impact 

assessment tool that will be used as the basis for determining 

eligibility for the SAID program as we go forward. 

 

This work will set the stage for a significant expansion of 

enrolment in the SAID program, and it will be another 

significant milestone on the road to be a more inclusive and 

equal province. And that’s why I’m proud. And I encourage all 

members of this Assembly to join us downstairs in the 

Qu’Appelle Gallery at 11:30 for this important announcement 

on behalf of the Saskatchewan people with disabilities. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And thank 

you, Minister, for the advanced copy of her comments and also 

for the invitation at 11:30. We appreciate that, and many of us 

hope to be down there and meet with the folks. 

 

And of course the SAID program is one that offers a lot of hope 

to people who live with disabilities. And we have a lot of hope 

and we look forward to many more announcements as we move 

along this road of full inclusion in Saskatchewan because this 

has been set by a goal. And earlier today in my member’s 

statement, I talked about the UN goals. Of course they talk 

about the millennium development goals where they want to 

see inclusion met by 2015. So I’m hoping that we can start to 

see some benchmarks for this. 

 

Some very specific comments about some of these 

announcements. Of course the exemptions for inheritance is a 

very important thing to see, and that’s a good thing. I know 

parents are very concerned about that. 

 

Good to see about the earning exemptions, but I do have some 

questions about the earning exemptions. Why could we not do 

it sooner? Why not December 1st? December 1st recognizes 

that, for many people who are living in poverty, the Christmas 

season is an opportunity to make a few extra dollars, spend a 

few extra dollars on loved ones, either travelling . . . It may 

mean a bus ticket; it may mean an extra gift. 

 

But in February the holiday season is past, and I think that just 

by changing it up to December 1st would be much more 

meaningful to people. And so we think that’s an important step 

and of course $100 is a good first step. It adds to the $200 

exemption I think that’s there right now. I would like to see this 

even increased a little bit more. But as I said, the big deal, the 

big question mark I would have is, why not December 1st? 

 

The minister referenced the 80,000 people taken off the tax 

rolls. And I’ve submitted written questions, and I know others 

have, to determine the proof of this claim. We have not seen 

any proof that there are 80,000 low-income people taken off the 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6351 

tax rolls. And as this announcement has been made for several 

years now, still we have not seen any proof, and we would hope 

that that proof is forthcoming. 

 

And the $100,000 around the assessment tool, that’s an 

important job to get done, but no date to when that actually will 

be accomplished. We know this announcement was made some 

time ago, and why are we not seeing this done? 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, you know, yesterday some people were 

talking about the upcoming day tomorrow, and they said there 

is one thing that this government can do. It’s called Rosa’s 

Law. Barack Obama introduced this law in the United States, 

talking about removing all offensive language from the 

legislation, and I would encourage this government to do. 

There’s one piece of legislation that still refers to mental 

retardation in this province. And it’s one that we could act 

really quickly to remove that language, make it more inclusive. 

And I know people in the community, people living with 

intellectual disabilities, would like to see that removed. And so 

I’d ask the government to think about Rosa’s Law and do that 

in the spirit of tomorrow. 

 

So with that, I would close my remarks and look forward to 

many more announcements from this minister on the SAID 

program. Thank you very much. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, pursuant to 

subsections 6 and 7 of The Election Act, 1996, I lay on the table 

the report of the Chief Electoral Officer with respect to the use 

of the Chief Electoral Officer’s emergency powers during the 

Saskatoon Northwest by-election October 18, 2010. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Funding for Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

remarks, I will be moving the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 

government for undermining our health care system by 

failing to negotiate in good faith with health care 

providers, including physicians, medical residents, and 

interns, while devoting taxpayers’ dollars to untendered 

contracts and inside deals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had a lot of debate in this legislature 

around the Amicus deal in Saskatoon and I think, to begin my 

remarks, I would like to remind the House and the people 

watching that the questions are on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan who have a right to know. This is their money 

that is being spent and they have a right to know where. And 

they have a right to know the answers to the questions that are 

being asked, and they have a right to know the answers are the 

truth, and they have a right to know them in all the detail that 

they’re being asked. 

 

These aren’t frivolous questions and it’s not a frivolous deal. It 

is something that goes to the heart of how the government is 

operating. It goes to the heart of how deals are done. It goes to 

the heart of how people can trust them. It goes to the heart of 

their promise for transparency and accountability. It goes to the 

heart of many things that the people of Saskatchewan deserve 

to know about their government. 

 

And the Minister of Health has been openly, made openly snide 

comments about the tour that we had over the summer. My 

colleague from Fairview and I, we visited 55 communities and 

we visited 10 of the 13 long-term care facilities that are on the 

list to be replaced or upgraded or renovated. And the 

government in the ’09 budget announced funding for these 

facilities — $156 million — and in the 2010 budget took that 

funding away. So communities on the tour that we visited were 

interested in the status of these construction projects. They had 

the plans on the wall and on their desks, and they were very 

proud of the plans and how far they’d come. And there was no 

doubt that those facilities needed to be replaced or upgraded or 

renovated. There was no doubt, and that’s never been the issue. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The issue is that these long-term care facilities in these 

communities should be able to get the same innovative deal that 

the Amicus deal is getting in Saskatoon. And the fact that the 

minister said no one cares about it out there is because he’s told 

no one out there about it. So when we went out and told people, 

they were very interested. They wanted to know why they in 

their communities were putting health levy tax on for building 

facilities, why they were having sales, why they were taxing 

surrounding municipalities and having people contribute in all 

sorts of ways to raise their 35 per cent. 

 

And yes, that has been the standard. The government provides 

65 per cent; 35 per cent is raised by the communities. But now, 

by the minister’s own comments, this is an innovative, new 

funding arrangement, and those 13 communities want to know 

why they’ve not heard about it, why it’s not being offered to 

them. 

 

What did they need to do to get into the lineup for this 

innovative funding so their communities don’t have to have a 

health tax, don’t have to spend years raising money, when they 

can have their facility right now like Amicus did? The shovel 

was in the ground before the deal was even approved by the 

Saskatoon Health Board. Well that’s the kind of service I think 

those 13 communities would like to see, and they wonder why 

they can’t. 

 

So when questions are asked here in the legislature, those are 

valid questions and valid concerns from communities and from 

citizens of Saskatchewan who deserve to know. And to laugh 

about it or make fun of it or otherwise say that it isn’t important 

or shouldn’t be asked, is wrong. It’s wrong. And the people 

deserve to know, and they will get the information from us as 

best we can put it out. 

 

The role of the opposition is to speak for the people because 

frankly the government is not listening to people. They’re not 



6352 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

listening to people who are coming to the bargaining table over 

the last three years, coming to bargain for health workers in 

SEIU [Service Employees International Union], SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union], 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees], that provide the 

basic services in all of our facilities. They are the licensed 

practical nurses, the special care aids that look after people like 

my father in long-term care, who cook the meals, who clean the 

rooms, who keep the facility running. And these are the people 

that keep it all going. 

 

And to say that, like the Premier said, he’s going to go to war 

with working people and then put in Bill 5 and 6 and bog down 

collective bargaining and frankly set it back decades, and to put 

such an atmosphere of mistrust, disrespect into the bargaining 

process, has done irrevocable damage to the health system and 

the people working in it. And by extension then, the patient care 

and the people that receive the care will suffer. 

 

The contract that was reached with those providers was not 

satisfactory. It was basically driven at them and to them, 

because two and half years is a long time to be bargaining. But 

they’re not going to forget what happened. They will not forget. 

 

Now we have Health Sciences, representing 3,000 professional 

people in this province who don’t have a deal, and they’re 

saying the same thing. You don’t value us. You don’t respect 

us. Two years is not acceptable to be bargaining. 

 

We have physicians who don’t have a contract. They have 

started to do job action. We’ve not seen that, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

never seen it. I’ve never seen doctors so frustrated — in their 

own words — that they were taking this kind of job action. And 

in Swift Current, which is a message in itself. This is Premier’s 

riding. They wanted to speak directly to the Premier and they’re 

not happy. 

 

And I think that this is . . . Actually it’s an MO [modus 

operandi]. It’s the way the government is operating. They do 

not respect people who come to the table to ask for decent 

wages, decent working conditions. They don’t respect that. 

 

And now we have the interns and residents, doctors who are 

training here to be specialists and to be working in our 

communities. They have come to the legislature to say they feel 

disrespected. They’ve sent a petition of 225 signatures saying 

the minister was wrong when he said his remarks in the House 

about, they would not be leaving. He’s wrong, and they said 

that. It was pretty clear. They do not believe what the minister 

said and they have said so in the petition of 225 doctors. That’s 

a pretty stark statement. 

 

And now the SMA, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 

which represents all the doctors in the province, are saying the 

same thing. We’re not getting a contract and we can’t work 

without a contract. And no doctors are going to come to 

Saskatchewan if this is the kind of atmosphere that they come 

to. 

 

The kidney transplant program was on hold for over a year 

because there was no agreement on how the doctors would be 

paid. The minister dragged his heels, didn’t do a thing, let that 

program languish and people suffer. And we saw those people 

come to this legislature. 

 

And people have to come to the legislature now to make any 

movement happen on their issues. We’ve had many, many 

people speak out, and the Premier and the government are just 

not listening. 

 

My colleagues talk about children in care. They talk about 

highways. They talk about the North. They talk about suicide 

rates, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] rates. Nothing is 

being heard. 

 

The big story of the day yesterday was there was a Sask Party 

candidate that’s a Roughrider. What happened to the children in 

care story? What happened to the auditor’s story? What 

happened to the HIV story? Those are the stories that make the 

difference to people. And those are the things that we have to 

bring out in this legislature because people are listening and 

they are paying attention and they do deserve to know. 

 

And now we’re seeing that there’s no contracts. Chiropractors, 

there was a contract reached with the chiropractors, with the 

government, and it was ripped up. So this sends a message 

through the whole workforce in the health sector particularly 

that there’s no trust with this government. There is no trust. 

 

We’re not hearing what is actually happening. We’re having the 

minister stand up day after day, not answer questions, talk 

about our record of 16 years. The people want to know about 

the government’s record of the last three years. And heaven 

only knows if we try to put a magnifying glass on it or shine a 

light on it, the minister gets quite angry. And now he’s brought 

his mother into the whole debate. I mean, he has reached an 

all-time low of searching for answers, searching for answers. 

 

I mean it’s actually, it’s actually kind of pathetic. And it’s really 

. . . I’m starting to feel sorry for the minister because I don’t 

think he has anything. He doesn’t know his file. He doesn’t 

know his file. He has a lot of fun laughing and looking around 

for answers from his friends. It’s like being on do you want to 

be a millionaire — throw out a lifeline. Ask the audience. Call a 

friend. He is the weakest link, Mr. Speaker. He is the weakest 

link. 

 

He’s got no answers. He’s got the same pat answer, that 16 

years. Well people don’t really want to know about 16 years 

ago. What they want to know is today. And when my colleague 

and I from Fairview are on our tour, what they wanted to know 

was tomorrow. What’s going to happen tomorrow? What’s 

going to happen in rural Saskatchewan, in small communities 

tomorrow? What’s the plan? 

 

There isn’t a plan. Closing long-term care beds in Wawota, 

cutting ambulance services, cutting dietary services, cutting lab 

services, cutting housekeeping services. That’s not much of a 

plan to appeal to rural Saskatchewan. And if the minister has 

talked to people out there, well that’s what they’re saying. 

 

And it wasn’t that we heard it in one or two places that we 

selected to go and hear certain information. We went to 55 

communities and many more facilities because some of those 

communities, we went to two, three, and four facilities in each 

community. And the message was clear: we’re disrespected, 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6353 

underappreciated. What rural communities were telling us from 

their mayors and their RM administrators and their business 

people was that they’re on their own. This government does not 

pay attention to them. 

 

And Wawota people have come here. That’s a symptom of 

what’s going on in this province. They’re not being listened to. 

The auditor had some interesting comments about Sun Country 

and this particular issue around the Wawota thing. And I think 

it’s worthwhile reading the auditor’s report. And I hope the 

people in Sun Country are paying attention to what the auditor 

said about them and their operation. It’s actually quite 

shocking. 

 

But I think that people of Saskatchewan need to hear the 

answers to their questions. They need to know that as working 

people . . . 80,000 people belong to the SFL, the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour, 25,000 health care workers. And if 

you’re telling 25,000 people in this province that they don’t 

matter and you don’t care about them, that’s a dangerous thing 

to be saying to people. 

 

The people that work in those professions and in those jobs and 

in those facilities, they contribute to our life and how our life is 

lived and how happy we are, how safe we are, how healthy we 

are. They contribute so much to the fabric of our society and to 

have this message . . . In Swift Current one of the managers told 

the people there — this is again the Premier’s riding — they 

told them that if they didn’t like the job, they could go and 

work at . . . Tim Hortons was hiring. 

 

Well like I said, Mr. Speaker, I like a good cup of coffee and 

some Timbits, but I also want to know that the people looking 

after my father in long-term care like to be there, want to be 

there, and are qualified to be there. And I think that they are 

getting the message from management because it has come 

directly from the Premier. We’re going to war with working 

people. That message has filtered down now to the management 

level. So people are being disrespected in their workplace. 

 

Every district was underfunded this year, Mr. Speaker, and they 

were told to find efficiencies in workers’ compensation, sick 

time, and overtime. Well it’s simply not going to make up for 

the huge deficit these districts are running. But immediately to 

find efficiencies, you look at the workers — why are they 

phoning in sick? — and start looking at punitive measures for 

that. Some of them are pretty draconian, some of the measures 

that have been taken. 

 

Why is overtime so high? Well basically if you’re looking at 

why is overtime so high, you have to look at how the ward or 

the unit or the facility is managed. Do you have enough staff? 

Do you always have to call in overtime when you have to fill a 

line? But now we’re finding out that sick time, the reason 

they’re saving money in sick time is because they’re not 

replacing people who are sick. If eight people are on a shift and 

one person phones in sick, they are saving money by not filling 

that eighth position. And people are working short. That is an 

artificial saving, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you’re looking at sick time too, people are telling me 

now that they’re being told to come to work sick. And they’re 

making it pretty onerous to actually be sick, to be off sick 

legitimately. And it’s interesting that the first thing the districts 

were told to do was find efficiencies and . . . along the backs of 

the workers. To accuse the workers of abusing sick time, 

abusing overtime, and of abusing workers’ comp. This is where 

they first started to look. 

 

In fact I was out at one meeting and we asked . . . It was 

specifically asked from the audience that, did they look at 

administrative savings? And the CEO was actually there, stood 

up and said no, they hadn’t. They hadn’t even looked at any 

administrative savings. They were looking at basically cutting 

the ambulance service. They didn’t even look at administrative 

savings. So first of all they looked at cutting services. 

 

And they thought basically in those communities . . . And 

communities have said that. They thought that the government 

thought and the health districts thought . . . Because truly, Mr. 

Speaker, the health boards are appointed by the government. 

They’re selected by the government, funded by the government. 

There’s no line separating them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government is responsible for SAHO [Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations] bargaining. They’re 

responsible for the health districts. The buck stops with the 

minister and the Premier. So the people know that if their health 

district is underfunded, the government has made that decision. 

They know that the people around the cabinet table voted for 

that budget. They know that. And if they don’t know it, we’re 

going to tell them. 

 

So I’m thinking that this motion basically speaks to the mood 

of the people that we had found. So, Mr. Speaker, with those 

remarks, because I know I have a couple of colleagues who 

want to make remarks as well, I will move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Sask Party government 

for undermining our health care system by failing to 

negotiate in good faith with health care providers — 

including physicians, medical residents, and interns — 

while devoting taxpayers’ dollars to untendered contracts 

and inside deals. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved a motion condemning the government for undermining 

our health care system by failing to negotiate in good faith with 

health care providers. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just a 

pleasure for me to enter this debate; it’s imperative, Mr. 

Speaker. Because I’ve never seen a motion in front of this 

House that was more . . . a greater example of a collective 

memory loss on the part of an opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Saskatoon Eastview 

very carefully, and there are a couple of things she said that I 

can agree with. This is the people’s business. This is the place 

to have these kinds of debates. And I think we need to deal with 

these issues honestly and forthright. 

 

But she said that one of the things they didn’t want to talk about 



6354 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

was their dismal record of 16 years of government. All they 

wanted to do was focus on three years of Sask Party 

government. Now, Mr. Speaker, when I look back on the 

record, I’m really happy to make that comparison. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I think it’s an important time in the history of this province to 

talk about the initiatives that this government has undertaken, to 

look at how much progress we’ve been able to make in three 

short years. And to draw that comparison between the 

Saskatchewan Party and the NDP record is a real pleasure, 

because in three years we’ve been able to accomplish more than 

the previous administration did in the whole time that they were 

in office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the feigned outrage that we’ve already heard, and 

which we are going to hear as this debate continues, is 

somewhat offensive. And I just, I just want to point out some of 

the realities of the situation that previous members left this 

governing party with when the election took place in 2007. 

Here’s a little bit of the labour relations history from the 

previous members, the previous government. 

 

On April 9th, 1999 the NDP threatened to throw striking nurses 

in jail. That’s a good way to get started on a positive foot in 

terms of labour relations. And later, Mr. Speaker, they 

legislated all of the nurses back to work. I’m sure that the 

nurses took a little umbrage at that. I think they saw the NDP as 

their friends and found out how reliable friendship could be 

with those people. 

 

Early in their first term the NDP closed 52 hospitals, fired 600 

nurses, and cut the feet out under dozens and dozens of doctors 

practising in rural communities and rural hospitals around the 

province. In May of 2004, May 19th exactly . . . I’m sorry, May 

18th — I want to be sure we get the facts right — the NDP fired 

92 nurses with 160 more health-related job firings expected. 

And on August 26th, 2004, 93 physicians left Saskatchewan 

while every other province saw increases. On November 15th, 

2006 Saskatchewan had a shortage of over 700 nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are some of the statistics and facts that the 

NDP accrued in their tenure. And that was the situation that 

was left to the Saskatchewan Party government. We saw a rural 

health care system in disarray and despondency throughout the 

communities of rural Saskatchewan as a result of the 

emaciation and the emasculation of rural health care delivery in 

communities all around the province outside of urban centres. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as far as the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview, who sponsored this particular motion today, she has a 

particularly difficult record to defend. Because early in her 

tenure, after serving as the president of the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses, she came to this House and served as the 

associate member of Health. I’m sorry, the associate minister of 

Health. And during her tenure, between 2001 and 2006, the 

associate minister of Health suffered through some of the 

highest losses of health care workers in the country. She 

oversaw the loss of 455 registered nurses and registered 

psychiatric nurses, 173 physicians, 155 pharmacists, and 95 

physiotherapists, and that information is according to the 

Canadian Institute of Health Information. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned previously that shortly after 

their arrival on the scene in 1999, the NDP closed 52 rural 

hospitals. But it didn’t stop there. In 2000, the NDP 

commissioned the Fyke report which recommended the closure 

of close to 50 more rural hospitals. 

 

Now I hear about the rural tour of many of the communities 

that the members talked about where they visited facilities that 

were still in existence. She didn’t, however, mention the 50 

communities that had their hospitals closed by the 

administration under the NDP. So, Mr. Speaker, if the Fyke 

report had been accepted, we’d have lost 100-plus hospitals in 

rural Saskatchewan — all at the hands of the NDP. 

 

Now that is part of the record of disillusionment that folks in 

rural Saskatchewan have dealt with. I want to talk a little bit 

about the positive record of the Saskatchewan Party in just the 

first three years of the mandate that were given to us by the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, we had a nursing shortage of somewhere around 

800 people, maybe 800 nurses about the time the election 

happened. And the previous administration would never 

address that shortage in any specific or targeted way because 

they were afraid they’d never be able to meet their targets. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think from the experience of most of us, 

we know that if we don’t set goals, we’re not likely to achieve 

much at all. 

 

And one of the first things that this government did when we 

were offered the opportunity to govern by the people of 

Saskatchewan was to set a goal of hiring up to 800 nurses over 

the first four years of our administration. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to stand here and report that we’ve met 100 per cent 

and more of that target in just three years. I believe at this point 

we are enjoying the addition of 830 nurses in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that’s a real accomplishment. 

 

We committed $3.5 million for a physician recruitment strategy 

and the establishment of a recruitment agency which is helping 

to address the shortage of rural physicians. We’ve added more 

training seats at the College of Medicine, the same college that 

just about suffered closure because of its loss of accreditation. 

That College of Medicine was so close to losing its ability to 

train doctors that it was a tragedy, a pending tragedy for the 

province of Saskatchewan. Under the NDP’s watch, that was 

the reality for medical training in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What have we been able to accomplish in the short three years 

that we’ve been here? Well not only did we reverse that 

situation, the funding situation that was affecting the 

accreditation reality facing the College of Medicine, we added 

more training seats. We went from 60 to a promised 100. We’re 

well on our way to achieving that. For residency seats, we’ve 

gone from about 80 or 100 to 120, which is good news for 

residents that want to train right here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve created some new opportunities for rural practice 

training for doctors in the city of Swift Current. A brand new 

clinic has been opened up, and young doctors are coming out to 

a smaller community to practice family medicine. And we’re 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6355 

looking at expanding new opportunities throughout 

communities of a similar size throughout the province so that 

doctors will get a feel for smaller communities, smaller 

practices and maybe, as part of their long-term plans, decide to 

settle in some of these smaller communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things I want to talk about quickly in 

the time I have left is the 13 long-term care facilities that we’ve 

promised the people of Saskatchewan. In the constituency of 

Cypress Hills we have one new facility under way. There is 

planning in progress right now. Functional planning has been 

done. There’s additional planning under way, and there will be 

sod-turning in the next little while. I know the community of 

Watrous, they’ve had a sod-turning. I think construction is 

under way in a very progressive manner right now. That’s two 

facilities I can name. 

 

We’ve funded the $200 million requirement for the Children’s 

Hospital in Saskatoon. We have more rural facilities that are 

well on their way to both fundraising and planning, and we 

expect that some of those facilities will become reality in the 

very near future. That is in marked contrast to the record of the 

previous government that didn’t create a single new long-term 

care bed anywhere in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re hearing constantly about the money that is going to 

go to build the new long-term care facility in Saskatoon. That is 

a blemish on the previous government’s record that we are 

trying to address in a creative and sustainable way, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m happy with the progress that we’re making in 

that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue that is before us is much more 

comprehensive than I’ve been able to address, and so I’ll allow 

some of my colleagues to continue the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Carrot River Valley has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I would like to introduce to this Assembly a person 

who is no stranger to this Assembly, Mr. Sherwin Petersen, 

who is a former member. 

 

Sherwin comes from Rose Valley and is actually a shirttail 

relative of mine, Mr. Speaker. He is my brother’s wife’s cousin 

so that’s a real shirttail. But we welcome him to his Assembly 

or back to his Assembly. And enjoy the proceedings. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Funding for Health Care 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my 

colleague in this 75-minute debate because I think it’s an 

important debate that we’re having, and it has to do with how 

we devote public money to our health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in question period today, the opposition spent the 

entire question period on details surrounding the Amicus deal 

that the government has entered into in the city of Saskatoon. I 

want to put it on the record, Mr. Speaker, because the 

opposition has tried to claim, over and over again, that there 

were no new nursing home . . . Or the government has claimed, 

over and over again, that there were no new nursing homes 

built during the entire 16 years of the NDP. 

 

I want to say this. There was a nursing home built in the city of 

Melfort. There was a nursing home built in Saskatoon — not 

one, but two of them. Mr. Speaker, there was a nursing home, 

an integrated facility built at Outlook. There was a facility built 

at Ile-a-la-Crosse, Moosomin, Maidstone, Preeceville, Mr. 

Speaker. Hudson Bay, there was an addition. Wynyard, Mr. 

Speaker. Wynyard is a beautiful nursing home. So for the 

opposition to say day in and day out — and those are just some 

examples — that nothing happened under 16 years of the NDP, 

is simply incorrect. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a nursing home agreement that has 

been entered into by the government. And today in question 

period we tried to outline, for the benefit of the people but also 

the government, that there are some serious issues surrounding 

this deal. And I want to go through what those serious issues 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under The Regional Health Services Act it is quite 

clear — and this Act was amended in 2007 — it’s quite clear 

that assets are only paid for when the health authority 

terminates an agreement with a third party. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

not the kind of agreement the government has entered into with 

Amicus. What the government has entered into is an agreement 

where Amicus can tell the health region that they want to 

terminate the agreement and they want the government to pay 

out the mortgage, Mr. Speaker. Now Mr. Speaker, that causes 

some significant concerns. Not only do we have an agreement 

with Amicus that provides a loan guarantee, but we also have 

an agreement that clearly violates the legislation. And that’s 

what we were trying to get at today. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health had been advised this 

by his officials, but they chose to ignore, they chose to ignore 

the advice that they were getting. And they entered into an 

agreement, an agreement with some of their friends. And they 

did so at the expense of legislation. 



6356 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we introduce pieces of legislation into this 

Assembly for a reason. We introduce pieces of legislation into 

this Assembly hopefully to protect the public and public tax 

dollars. And we, as the people who introduced this legislation 

and passed this legislation, we should be honour bound as 

legislators to follow that legislation. And in this case, Mr. 

Speaker, the government chose not to follow its legislation, and 

it’s clearly in violation of its legislation with this Amicus deal. 

That’s point number one. 

 

There are many problems with this deal. Second point, Mr. 

Speaker, the officials were concerned about a clause in the 

agreement where essentially the government of Saskatchewan, 

at Amicus’s discretion, would take over the mortgage of this 

nursing home should they not be able to pay for the mortgage. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the officials in the government’s own 

ministry advised the government that by doing this this was a 

contingent liability and there would be issues with the auditor. 

There would be issues with the auditor and that never before 

had government agreed to basically guarantee a third party and 

their facility and their debt, Mr. Speaker. That is a huge 

problem because I suspect what the government is trying to do, 

among many issues they’re trying to do, they’re trying to take 

debt off the books of Saskatchewan and put it on a third party 

and enter into an agreement which in essence will pay for that 

debt over a 25-year period. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the officials were saying that is a contingent 

liability which means that the province in essence has this debt. 

 

Now there are many other examples of the government being in 

some difficulty when it comes to capital. One of the difficulties 

we will see shortly is schools. They’ve announced millions of 

dollars of new school construction, but they took away, they 

took away school boards’ ability to tax. And they have to 

determine how the school boards are going to pay for their 

share of that school construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the worry is, the worry is that once again they will 

try to take this off the books of the province. Because they’ve 

certainly indicated this in their Throne Speech a year ago and 

their budget that they were going to treat Treasury Board 

Crowns differently. And school boards are part of Treasury 

Board Crowns. But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, debt is 

debt. And whether you pay for it in one year or 25 years, debt is 

debt. And that’s the difficulty we got into in the 1980s when 

there were attempts made to take this debt off the books. And 

when we finally figured out through the Gass Commission how 

much we owed, Mr. Speaker, it was tens of millions of dollars, 

hundreds of millions of dollars, billions of dollars more than 

what we were being told. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting about Conservatives. If you 

look at the Conservatives in Ottawa, they have added billions of 

dollars of debt to this country’s bottom line. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a government that continues to try and spin that they’re 

reducing the General Revenue Fund debt. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

they are adding to Crown debt. And when you put it altogether, 

it’s debt that is still owned by the people of this province. 

 

And we know that debt in this province is rising. Debt in this 

province is rising. And you can’t sort of be . . . You can’t just 

say, well this is GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt. You can’t 

just say, it’s GRF debt. You have to include Crown debt 

because that’s what the financial houses look at, Mr. Speaker. 

And they look at these kinds of deals. And the Provincial 

Auditor is there to look at these kinds of deals. 

 

Now the minister today said that KPMG gave him a legal 

opinion that this is not a loan guarantee. Well, Mr. Speaker, it 

depends on how you ask the question. And, Mr. Speaker, it was 

the Government of Saskatchewan . . . And he says, oh this is up 

to the health region. They blacked out all of this material. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at the 1,800 pages of documents, it 

indicates under which piece of legislation all of this information 

was redacted or blacked out. And, Mr. Speaker, the vast 

majority of the 1,800 pages were blacked out under the 

province’s legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know because I was in contact with the 

privacy officer of their health region, that third parties were 

asked to respond to my request. I am shocked that a third party 

is considered the Government of Saskatchewan, but they are. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was the Government of Saskatchewan that 

had this information blacked out. Mr. Speaker, the question will 

be, how will the Provincial Auditor treat this? That will be the 

question. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat appalling that somehow 

because we ask questions in this Assembly about loan 

guarantees and debt and insider deals that somehow this is a 

bad thing. Mr. Speaker, I learned in the 1980s that we should 

have asked a lot more questions about debt and deficit because 

we spent the 1990s trying to get ourselves out of this mess. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats are fiscal conservatives. We 

know that you cannot be in charge of your own destiny if you 

have debt and deficit that prevents you from advancing public 

policy. Mr. Speaker, I can’t say that about the members 

opposite. We’ve seen a significant . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to enter 

into the debate today. I do find it a bit interesting that the NDP 

would initiate a debate on health care considering what their 

record has been. But I know that they don’t want to talk about 

their record. They’ve said that numerous times that we 

shouldn’t be talking about the 16 years of NDP government. 

They’re happy to go way back to the ’80s — the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana did it again today — to go way back to the 

’80s and talk about that, to talk about our record today. But the 

years in between apparently are just supposed to disappear, and 

we’re not supposed to talk about them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to talk about the NDP record 

today. My colleague has already touched on some of the things 

that I’m going to mention, but I think they’re worth repeating. 

 

I did find it interesting that the member for Saskatoon Eastview 

talked a lot about respect in her speech. Well, Mr. Speaker, in 

1999 when the NDP were threatening to throw nurses in jail, I 

wonder how much respect they felt from their government then. 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6357 

And, Mr. Speaker, in April of 2000 when the NDP were raising 

fees on seniors in long-term care homes, I wonder how much 

respect those seniors felt from the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to carry on with their record, in September of 

2002, the average surgical waiting time in Saskatchewan was 

32.6 weeks — the absolute worst in Canada. March 2004, the 

NDP cancelled most surgeries in Saskatoon hospitals. 

 

In April 19th, 2004 . . . And, Mr. Speaker, this one is a pretty 

infamous one. I remember my dad having a good time with this 

one considering the ridiculousness of this statement. The 

member for Saskatoon Eastview had actually called on seniors, 

apparently, to die quicker as a cost saving measure. 

 

In May 18th, 2004, the NDP fired 92 nurses, with 160 more 

health care related job firings expected. In August 26th, 2004, 

93 physicians left Saskatchewan while every other province 

saw increases. 

 

October 18th, 2005, Saskatchewan suffered the longest waiting 

lists in Canada, almost double the national average. 

 

June 5th, 2006, the NDP planned to close emergency rooms in 

Arcola and Kamsack. July 12th, 2006, Saskatchewan’s wait 

times were actually too unreliable to even be published. 

November 8th, 2006, the NDP closed the Preeceville Hospital 

due to lack of doctors. November 15th, 2006, Saskatchewan 

had a shortage of over 700 nurses. November 27th, 2006, the 

NDP closed the Broadview Union Hospital for patient 

admissions. 

 

January 3rd, 2007, the NDP closed emergency rooms in Regina 

for January and February. June 25th, 2007, the NDP cancelled 

emergency medical services at the Maidstone Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is their record, and we have been working the 

last three years to overcome the abysmal record that the NDP 

left when it comes to health care, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 

take a few moments to discuss some of the initiatives and 

progress that we have made to overcome that. 

 

But further to some of their record, Mr. Speaker . . . Because I 

know one of their concerns was the contract negotiations with 

doctors. And, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, the Health Sciences 

Association of Saskatchewan was on strike for 28 days and 

bargained for 18 months before reaching an agreement. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Eastview had mentioned SEIU and 

SGEU today. In 2004-2005, they had to bargain for 22 months 

with the NDP government before reaching an agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. So their record speaks for itself. 

 

And I find . . . I think the one thing that was running through 

my mind when I was listening to speeches and their feigned 

outrage was hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. Their record does not give 

them a leg to stand on to criticize what we’re doing when we 

are actually improving health care for the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from a Leader-Post article 

from April 20th, 2004, and the article says, the message is . . . 

And this is to do with long-term care beds: “The message is that 

long-term beds, of which Saskatchewan has more than the 

national average, are not the answer to the needs of all seniors.”  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, here’s a direct quote from the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview: “I often say to them that if you make 

different choices even after 60, which the literature supports, 

that you will live healthier lives and die quicker.” Mr. Speaker, 

we’re not looking for our seniors to die quicker. We are looking 

for an opportunity for them to live out their last years with 

dignity, surrounded by family members, with their spouses. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard over the last few weeks in this 

Legislative Chamber the discussion over long-term care beds 

and that through an innovative funding model with the Catholic 

Health Ministry that we’re going to see 100 new long-term care 

beds in Saskatoon — an opportunity for seniors to age with 

their spouses, which for any of us who have seniors in our lives, 

understand what an absolute necessity that is. 

 

It actually extends their life, Mr. Speaker, going back to the 

opposite . . . the attitude from the members opposite. We don’t 

want them to die quicker. We want them to die, to go into their 

last few years with grace and dignity and being able to be 

surrounded by their spouses, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s 

important. 

 

What we are looking for, Mr. Speaker, in our initiatives is that 

residents of Saskatchewan both need and deserve quality health 

care, and that’s what we’re looking towards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we faced when we took over 

government in 2007 was a massive infrastructure deficit. It was 

the health care system that was on life support, Mr. Speaker. 

And our government has taken steps towards improving on our 

health care system. We have strengthened cancer care. We are 

adding more training seats for doctors and nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in February of 2008, we signed an historic 

partnership agreement between the government and the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. It was the very first of its kind 

in the entire country. This agreement set out a framework for 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the ministry to work 

with health regions using dedicated funding to hire 800 

registered nurses and registered nurse practitioners. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had set in the 2007 election a goal of 

hiring 800 nurses over four years. Well, Mr. Speaker, in three 

years we have hired 830 nurses. We have gone well beyond 

what we promised we would do, Mr. Speaker. We are not afraid 

to set targets, as opposed to the members opposite who don’t 

want to set targets because they don’t believe they can actually 

reach them. And, Mr. Speaker, we saw what happened under 

the NDP with that kind of attitude. We lost health care workers 

throughout our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been saying, we’ve heard over the last 

little while from the members opposite, specifically the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana, conspiracy theories over this long-term 

care building that’s going to be built in Saskatoon, offering 

opportunities for our seniors to age with grace and dignity. Mr. 

Speaker, she’s been going on a fishing expedition, and as the 

Health minister has pointed out, she’s come up empty. It’s 

because there’s no fish in that particular pond, Mr. Speaker. But 



6358 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

she keeps trying. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a saying that I think we’re all 

familiar with, and it’s called the pot calling the kettle black, 

which of course, Mr. Speaker, denotes hypocrisy. So perhaps at 

some point the member for Saskatoon Nutana could explain to 

us whether or not she has a close relative who not only works 

for but owns shares in a construction company that got 

significant work under the NDP when the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana was a cabinet minister with the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a very important initiative that our government 

undertook was in answer to the many calls, letters, emails, and 

face-to-face conversations that I think we’ve all had with 

friends and family and constituents over MS [multiple 

sclerosis]. We know that our province has some of the highest 

rates in the country.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, recently there’s been new treatments, the 

liberation treatment into MS, which has shown improvements 

in some of those people that are suffering with this, Mr. 

Speaker. And I was very proud to be part of a government 

who’s investing $5 million to fund clinical trials for MS 

liberation procedure. Mr. Speaker, we are the first province in 

the country who is going down this road. We understand that 

there is the potential for groundbreaking discoveries when it 

comes to MS treatment. 

 

And like I said, this is very important step for the people of this 

province. I’m sure that we’ve all been in contact recently with 

folks that are afflicted with this horrible disease. They are 

looking for hope and some reassurance that their government is 

listening to them. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t go into this 

believing that this the 100 per cent cure for MS. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it is incumbent upon us to do what we can to 

help those who are suffering with MS to see if this is a potential 

option for those people to have a better quality of life as they 

move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other initiatives. I’ve got pages of 

initiatives when it comes to wait times and surgeries, surgery 

lists, and doctor recruitment, and other things. But the list of 

improvements that we’re working on is too long for the time 

allotted to me today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as I said, it was a privilege to be able to stand and speak of 

our government’s record on this issue, Mr. Speaker. There is 

more work to be done. But I think our record over the last three 

years has proven that this is a priority for our government, and 

we’ll continue to do good work for the people of our province. 

Thank you. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. It’s a pleasure to rise 

and enter into this debate of the motion that’s before the floor 

that . . . or that’s currently on the floor speaks to this 

government’s total disregard for maintaining a health care 

system and the employees I think especially that are the main 

force of action and support within that health care system. 

Mr. Speaker, it condemns the government for really 

undermining the health care system and failing to negotiate in 

good faith with health care providers — and the list is long, Mr. 

Speaker — and while they’re also devoting taxpayers’ dollars 

to untendered contracts and inside deals such as the Amicus 

deal that we were speaking about this morning and asked 

questions about. Still waiting to receive answers, Mr. Speaker, 

but asking the questions because the people of the province 

need to know where their tax dollars are being spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to add just a quick comment. The 

member for Cypress Hills talked about the new facility, the 

Cypress Regional Hospital, and I want to say to him, he’s 

welcome. 2006-2007 was the budget year that the money was 

dedicated for the Cypress Regional Hospital because the 

government of the day realized that it was needed. There was 

money set aside for it to be done. And I’m very pleased to hear 

that it is serving the people of that community because it was 

needed and is needed, Mr. Speaker, and we were glad to be able 

to put money and dedicate towards new facilities across the 

province. 

 

And even though the Minister of Health seems to be ignoring a 

fair bit of investment that went on during the former NDP 

government’s time, Cypress Regional Hospital is just one 

example. Outlook Integrated Facility, Ile-a-la-Crosse Integrated 

Facility, Moosomin, Maidstone, Preeceville, Humboldt, 

Saskatoon Mental Health, which is very important, Oliver 

Lodge, Hudson Bay — Mr. Speaker, these are all very, very 

important. 

 

And the member from Cypress Hills also spoke to hospitals that 

were closed down during the early ’90s. While they refer to 

them as being closed, Mr. Speaker, there is some very long lists 

that talk about health centres. Many of these facilities were 

converted, and they are active in communities as health care 

centres and special care homes across the province and 

providing very good service in those communities. So when the 

member opposite, the previous speaker, Mr. Speaker, was 

saying that we needed to be factual, well I think she needs to 

look in the mirror and take her own advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the motion about this Sask Party 

government undermining the health care system by failing to 

negotiate in good faith, we know that the vast majority in 

people in Saskatchewan and in Canada support a publicly 

funded, publicly administered health care system. And I’ve just 

lately seen some recent polling that spoke to . . . a recent poll 

where 90 per cent of citizens across Canada that were surveyed 

supported public solutions to the current problems within the 

health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to buy in to this line from the right 

wing, that the only way to fix health care is to privatize and get 

rid of it because it is somehow a flawed system. It’s not. It 

provides very good care, and I would say a vast majority of 

cases across this province and across Canada are treated in a 

very timely fashion with quality care. And people across this 

country appreciate that. I know in Saskatchewan we do. 

 

Yes, there are still problems. Yes, there are issues that need to 

be dealt with. But, Mr. Speaker, it is quite conceivable that it 

can be accommodated within the medicare system and that 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6359 

people of Canada can, and Saskatchewan will, continue to be 

grateful for this system that is in place and really I think 

highlights who we are as Canadians in many cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 2007 election campaign, the 

Saskatchewan Party spoke of managing the health care system 

and protecting Saskatchewan families. Very nice words, Mr. 

Speaker, but you really need to walk the talk. 

 

People in this province expect this government to keep their 

commitments. And they expect . . . They elected this 

government and put it in place with good faith and expectations 

that those commitments would be kept. But instead we are 

seeing mismanagement of the health care system and families 

concerned that protection and their health care protection is 

quickly disappearing and being eroded by some moves that are 

highly suspect by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And instead of managing a health care system and protecting 

families, the Saskatchewan Party government is letting resident 

doctors leave the province, almost forcing them to by total 

disrespect. Health Sciences Association represents 3,000 health 

care professionals. Their negotiations with this government 

have broken down. 

 

We all remember just prior to last spring’s budget, Mr. Speaker, 

when chiropractors, after a year of negotiations, the president of 

the Chiropractors’ Association signed an agreement on behalf 

of all chiropractors with the Ministry of Health. The president 

of the association was told that the minister would sign this 

agreement within days. The ministry even went so far as to 

prepare a news release about signing the agreement, and the 

minister was even quoted in that proposed news release by 

saying, “I am pleased that we have reached a deal with the 

Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan.” 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just short days before the budget was 

released, the minister ripped up that contract and said there was 

no deal. They eliminated chiropractic care from any coverage, 

and I think many people believed that it was well, underhanded 

for one thing, but extremely short-sighted in that what it did 

would just shift people. If they couldn’t afford to go see a 

chiropractor, they would be showing up at their doctor’s office 

or at the emergency wards in hospitals across the province, 

trying to access care. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on. Health Sciences, 

chiropractors, the doctors, the resident doctors that are still in 

contract negotiations that seem to be not moving along very 

quickly. We can look at SEIU, CUPE, SGEU, that were just 

health care providers. Very divisive, Mr. Speaker, when you see 

some pretty substantial agreements go to nurses and then 

everyone else in the system be hung out to dry. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a real problem when you cause divisions like 

that within a workplace. And I’m sure the minister is hearing 

more and more reports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of days talking about Amicus, 

the last few weeks, we have raised issues with this deal. And I 

have to say there’s some very good reasons. My community, 

we have had a levy on our property tax for the last few years to 

raise our portion, our 35 per cent, of the cost of a new health 

care facility. And it’s just . . . Initial proposal is for an addition 

on to our current Moose Jaw Union Hospital. So our 

community has set aside the levy. The city of Moose Jaw is 

collecting that money. And like the other communities across 

the province that the Minister of Health has made a 

commitment, that has a commitment to 13 long-term care 

facilities, which they have since pulled back on, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’re kind of waiting in the hopper. Those communities 

are out raising money, looking for donations, holding bake 

sales, running concession stands. We know how it’s done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It happens right across this province except, Mr. Speaker, in the 

case of one facility in Saskatoon, Amicus, which is getting a 

loan guarantee from the regional health authority. The deal 

appears to have been initiated in the Premier’s office. We are 

seeing all kinds of meddling that has gone on. It is unfair to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. It is unfair to other contractors when 

untendered deals are put out for this kind of money. And it is 

unfair to other communities across this province who are still 

expected to raise the 35 per cent share of capital costs of 

improvements and expansions or new builds in their own 

communities, Mr. Speaker, and that is a huge issue. 

 

Now I know the minister likes to say this is innovative 

financing. Well a bit of creative financing seems to be maybe a 

better word. Mr. Speaker, I will wholeheartedly be supporting 

the motion put forward by my colleague . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 

honour and a privilege to join in with this debate. Before I do 

carry on too much further, I just want to speak on . . . Before I 

speak on our record I just want to review, as my colleagues 

have but very briefly, the NDP record for some more 

perspective. And members opposite, I know they’re getting 

tired of hearing this, but the length is quite long and unending 

so they have nobody to blame but themselves. 

 

Again in April ’99 the NDP threatened to throw striking nurses 

in jail. April 5th, the NDP raised fees on seniors’ long-term 

care. September 19th, 2002, the average surgical wait time in 

Saskatchewan was 32.6 weeks, which was the worst in Canada. 

March 4th of ’04, the NDP cancelled most surgeries in 

Saskatoon hospitals. May 18th of ’04, the NDP fires 92 nurses 

with 160 more health-related job firings expected. August of 

’04, 93 physicians left while every other province saw 

increases. October 18th of ’05, Saskatchewan suffers the 

longest wait-lists in Canada, almost double the national 

average. 

 

June 5th of ’06, the NDP planned to close emergency rooms in 

Arcola and Kamsack. July 12th, ’06, Saskatchewan’s wait time 

too unreliable to be published. November 8th of ’06, NDP 

closed Preeceville hospital due to lack of doctors. November 

15th of ’06, Saskatchewan had a shortage of 700 nurses. 

November 27th, ’06, NDP closed Broadview Union Hospital 

for patient admissions. January 3rd, ’07, the NDP closed 

emergency rooms in Regina in January and February. June 

25th, ’07, the NDP cancelled emergency medical services at the 

Maidstone hospital. 

 



6360 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite always are accusing this 

government of being at war with labour, and I take exception to 

that. They’ve talked over and over about not valuing the quality 

of service and the jobs and the service that these health care 

providers do provide to the people of this province, including 

my family and the families of all our members around the 

House, on both sides of the House. 

 

And I know it’s always difficult, Mr. Speaker, negotiations, 

times. You know, things happen and games get played to a 

certain extent. But at no time did I ever hear any member on 

this side of the House disregard or discredit any member in the 

employment chain of our health care providers. 

 

Whether it was myself meeting with approximately 25 union 

employees during the SAHO negotiations, wanting to talk and 

have their voices heard, sitting over a cup of coffee and some 

hot chocolate and some cookies and talking about what they 

want to talk about, Mr. Speaker . . . And I was very clear in 

vocalizing my feelings that I don’t care if it’s the custodial 

staff, if they’re cleaning the floors or keeping the place clean 

and contamination free, whether it’s the nurses, the LPNs 

[licensed practical nurse], the care aids, which my daughter is 

one and currently accepted to go on for her nursing career. So 

I’m very proud of her. She’ll be visiting me a little bit more 

often in Regina, I presume. 

 

And all the way up the labour chain, Mr. Speaker — whether 

it’s doctors, nurses, the lab techs, everybody is very important. 

Without any member of that very important chain, the system 

can break down. So again, at no time did I hear any member on 

this side of the House ever, ever speak to that. 

 

But I will say that it’s kind of the standard tactic that I’ve seen 

in my short three years here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. The 

fear, the fearmongering driving by fear. And fear is an amazing 

motivator; we know that. The problem is when that fear’s 

unfounded, it does nothing but create problems. 

 

I think that led to a lot of the stretched out negotiations that we 

did see in the past SAHO negotiations, Mr. Speaker. The 

member for Eastview constantly talked about negotiations, just 

deplorable negotiation; length of time going on for two years, 

better than two years. 

 

Let’s look at their record, Mr. Speaker. Health Sciences 

Association of Saskatchewan, on strike for 28 days and 

bargained for 18 months prior to that agreement. Not quite the 

two years we saw. Again not driven by as much fear as we saw 

through these . . . [inaudible] . . . negotiations. SEIU, SGEU 

had to bargain for 22 months with members opposite in ’04 and 

’05 before reaching agreement. That’s pretty close to the 

two-year goal there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The evidence is true of the members opposite in regards to 

senior health. You know, I’ll quote from an article of James 

Wood, Leader-Post article from April 20th of ’04 that “The 

message is that long-term care beds, of which Saskatchewan 

has more than the national average, are not the answer to all the 

needs of seniors.” 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now you know, that’s something I just won’t speak to any 

further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I’m really focusing on here is the memory of the 

members opposite are very selective. Again, the member from 

Martensville pointed to the fact they don’t like speaking about 

the past. But I’m a very firm believer, Mr. Speaker. We learn 

from the past. We work for today and we plan for the future, 

which the members opposite have no plan. They had no plan 

and they continue to have no plan, other than fearmongering 

and trying to make things look as bad as they possibly can for 

their own political and their own benefit. 

 

The NDP rhetoric and fearmongering never helped in 

negotiations with SAHO, but again, fear always seems to serve 

them well and . . . At least that’s what they seem to be reverting 

to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I want to just touch on a couple of comments that I 

heard from members opposite, and again sort of what I’ve come 

to see over the last, specifically the last year — insults, 

character assassination. It seems to be the norm or the rule 

rather than the exception. The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview referred to our Minister of Health as the weakest link 

and I find that insulting, Mr. Speaker. Again, character 

assassination as we’ve seen character assassination maybe on 

the part of our Minister of Justice and other members in the past 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is one weak link or the weakest link in this Assembly and 

I know that’s been clearly identified through polls. And the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana referred to the Preeceville 

hospital, the sod-turning; we built the Preeceville hospital. Mr. 

Speaker, sod-turning after sod-turning after sod-turning equates 

to cultivation, not to a hospital, Mr. Speaker. What we saw was 

announcement after announcement from the member from 

Regina, the former Health minister, and what we did see was 

actually on the part of this Deputy Premier and that Minister of 

Health that got it done, Mr. Speaker. So I just wanted to clear 

that up before I go too far and run myself out of time because I 

do have a lot of things to speak about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I mean not to beat a dead horse, but we’ve got to keep 

looking at what the attitude of the members opposite was. 

Member from Saskatoon Eastview, again her quote, “I often say 

to them that if you make different choices, even after 60, which 

the literature supports that you live a healthier, longer life, and 

die quicker.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know about those 

members; I know members on this side of the House have never 

asked for their loved ones to die quicker. We firmly believe that 

Saskatchewan communities both need quality health care and 

health care where needed. 

 

So that’s their record and from what I’ve understood is sort of 

their attitude. But let’s examine our record, Mr. Speaker, on 

health. When we came into power in ’07, we inherited a huge 

infrastructure deficit from the previous government. And that’s 

well documented. We don’t need to speak that much more. I’ve 

heard the health care system as being — by media members, I 

believe — a system that was on life support. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that’s taken 

actions to make steps to improve health care. We see 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6361 

improvements in cancer care. We see improvements in cancer 

information and working with not only the Heart and Stroke 

Fund, but the heart and stroke association, Mr. Speaker, but the 

Canadian Cancer Society and others in stepping forward and 

more awareness and better treatments as they’ve been asking 

for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve added training seats for doctors and nurses. In fact, in 

February of ’08 we signed a historic partnership with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses which I think went a long way 

to build a relationship and sustain our nurses and grow the 

nurses that we needed in this province, Mr. Speaker. This 

agreement set out a framework for the SUN [Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses] and the ministry to work with health regions 

as dedicated funding, using that dedicated funding to hire what 

we . . . Our goal was 800 nurses and RPNs [registered 

psychiatric nurse] with annual targets set out for achieving 

those goals over four years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again as been spoken about — and I’ll talk 

about it again — three years in, Mr. Speaker, that target has 

been exceeded: 830 and counting. And I know the members 

opposite, the former Health minister refused to set targets 

because he . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The 65-minute debate period has ended. Now 

we’ll take the 10-minute question period. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I’d like to ask the 

member from Yorkton: how is leaving resident physicians 

without a contract for almost two years, leaving them working 

long and sometimes unsafe hours, managing the health care 

system and protecting residents and patients? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll admit, I mean 

talks are ongoing. I mean talks went on with health care 

providers in all different aspects of health care over the years, 

Mr. Speaker. But those talks haven’t broken down. The talks 

are continuing. And we’re very confident that shortly there will 

be an agreement with our physicians and the health 

organizations to continue on with quality health care in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. In her motion she says that 

the current Sask Party government is undermining our health 

care system, yet that government . . . And she was part of that 

government that closed 52 hospitals, fired hundreds of nurses 

and other health care providers. 

 

And she wasn’t content, Mr. Speaker, to dismantle the health 

care system while she was part of government. In opposition 

she, last year when Saskatchewan, Canada, and the world was 

facing the H1N1 health crisis, she continued to criticize the 

Health minister for the manner in which the vaccination 

program was outlaid, rolled out. I would like to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the member to place the question, ask 

the question. Okay, I’ll recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the motion is that we were talking 

about the Sask Party’s record. And the Sask Party’s record is 

clear in the last three years that they have undermined the 

system. They’ve cut lab services, ambulance services, 

underfunded the health districts this year, significantly 

underfunded the health districts that they are now starting to 

make cuts, do closures. 

 

And speaking of closures, there’s been over 80 beds closed by 

this government in this March budget alone — 80-some beds 

and long-term care beds. And somehow that’s going to make a 

difference in you putting 100 into Amicus? That’s supposed to 

make a difference? And they totally are ignoring the fact that 

those beds are closed in this budget alone, that’s 2010. So the 

question and the motion is on their record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Cypress Hills. Fairly short and 

to the point, Mr. Speaker. Thirteen long-term care facilities 

were announced, which the member from Yorkton was just 

criticize . . . then pulled back. Now they’re sitting in limbo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Cypress Hills: when will a 

long-term care — in Maple Creek — facility be under 

construction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

have had that question directed to me, Mr. Speaker, because the 

news is good news for the community of Maple Creek. They 

are currently in the process of doing their functional planning, 

Mr. Speaker, and with the conclusion of that process, sod will 

be turned. 

 

The community of Maple Creek are not going to sit around 

waiting for some arbitrary time to start. They’re going to move 

as quickly and as progressively and as aggressively as possible 

to get that new facility built. They raised their money in just a 

matter of two short months. They had their plans and their ideas 

in place. Mr. Speaker, they are very aggressively pursuing the 

completion of this facility. And when they do, it’ll be the most 

modern facility in all of rural Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Saskatoon Eastview has made comments regarding seniors that 

is unbelievable. In a morally reprehensible statement in 2004 in 

this Assembly, she suggested that Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens could alleviate the NDP’s mismanagement of the 

healthcare system by dying quicker. I remember this comment 

very well, Mr. Speaker. So does my mother. 

 



6362 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

To the member from Saskatoon Eastview: will the member use 

this opportunity to apologize to the Saskatchewan seniors for 

this callous comment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the member 

from Yorkton actually read the whole quote, and it was that if 

people make different choices, even after 60, they can live 

healthier longer. And everybody wants to live healthier longer. 

My mother’s 85, and she’s living healthier longer. And they die 

quicker . . . is you don’t want to linger in dying. My father is in 

a nursing home having a stroke; I can see the difference. And I 

think they had a John Gormley show in which John Gormley — 

who is not NDP-friendly — was pretty darn clear that he 

understood what I was saying and he thought it was 

disingenuous if not downright stupid to have the comments 

being made that were being made by the Sask Party at that time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

directed towards the member from Cypress Hills. And as the 

member will know that all of these nursing homes that have 

been announced, all of the communities have to raise the 35 per 

cent and they’re busy trying to get municipalities on board. 

Some municipalities are. Some aren’t. They’re doing local 

fundraising initiatives — bake sales, car washes, you name it — 

to try and raise their 35 per cent. In Saskatoon there is a new 

long-term care facility being constructed where 100 per cent of 

the cost of that construction is being guaranteed by the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess the question is this: why would you force those 

communities like Maple Creek which you represent, Prince 

Albert, Biggar, where I come from, to have to raise the 35 per 

cent? And some of them are having a hard time. They have to 

raise the 35 per cent to replace aging facilities but . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Member’s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again I’m pleased to 

address the question in a factual manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the community of Maple Creek and the 

surrounding RMs and towns that support that general area were 

more than happy to contribute to a new facility. They knew 

what the rules were. The rules didn’t change. The 35 per cent, 

the 35 per cent requirement is exactly the same requirement as 

existed under that administration. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it 

was a such burden, I suppose, to the community of Redvers that 

they went out and raised all the money themselves. The NDP 

refused to put a nickel into that new facility. 

 

The people of Maple Creek saw a need for a new facility. The 

surrounding RMs and communities came to the table with 

monies to support that project. They raised that 35 per cent in 

just a matter of a couple of months or less, Mr. Speaker. Now 

there are going to be new and creative financing options 

available I’m sure. The pilot project in Saskatoon will set the 

template for another number of projects. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 16 years that 

the NDP were in power their health care policies devastated 

rural Saskatchewan. When they weren’t ignoring rural 

residents’ concerns regarding health care, they were closing 

hospitals. The NDP closed 52 rural hospitals. To the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana: why did the NDP create a two tiered 

health care system in Saskatchewan — one for rural residents 

and one for urban residents? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m really happy that I’ve been 

asked this question. First of all, if the member wants to look at 

the facts of the . . . She talks about 52 rural hospitals. I believe 

the number was 51 hospitals and 50 . . . No, just the facts. They 

can laugh at the facts. Fifty-one hospitals. Fifty were converted 

to health centres, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact let me give you an example. Kincaid received a 

health centre; Ponteix, a health centre; Vanguard, a health 

centre; Bengough, a health centre and special care home; 

Pangman, a health centre; Radville, a special care home; Cupar, 

a health centre; Ituna, a new special care home; Beechy, a 

health centre; Eston, a health centre and special care home; 

Macklin, health centre, special care home; Smeaton, health 

centre; Arborfield, health centre and special care home; Climax, 

health . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. Next question. 

Next question. I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Question is to the member from Yorkton. Mr. 

Speaker, they stand up and they read off all these old clipped 

facts without the story behind it, Mr. Speaker. And if the 

member from Yorkton is upset with these hospitals being 

changed into health care centres, why hasn’t this government, 

with the largest budgets in the history of this province and all of 

the complaining they have done, why haven’t you opened them 

up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the first 

thing I’d like to say to that, it’s a poor exchange — a health 

service centre for a hospital. 

 

And I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker, you know, at least we’ve set 

goals. We’ve set plans. We see from the members opposite 

there is absolutely no plan, no plan. If you fail to plan, you plan 

to fail, Mr. Speaker. Again with . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Time for the 75-minute debate has 

elapsed. Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — To rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6363 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney and ask him to state his point of order. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

question period today, the Minister of Health was quoting from 

a letter he said was from KPMG. We can clearly see that the 

letter was totally unredacted. There was nothing blacked out as 

he held the letter up. He was asked to table the letter. He said he 

would, Mr. Speaker. We ask officially now, because it hasn’t 

been tabled, that the letter from KPMG that the minister quoted 

from be tabled. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

did indeed say he would table the letter and he will do so today, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s no time frame that you need to have in 

place on tabling of a document and it will be done today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order 

and the response from the Government House Leader, and as 

we see in rule 495 in parliamentary Rules and Procedures, if 

ministers are asked to table documents they quote from, the 

minister is obligated to. I take the word of the minister that that 

document will be tabled and I trust that it’s tabled shortly. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Motion No. 3 — Saskatchewan’s Resource Sector 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak to a 

very important motion. At the conclusion of my remarks I will 

be happy to read a motion into the record and to move a motion 

which will state words to this effect: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP’s ongoing support 

for nationalizing Saskatchewan’s resource sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1944 . . . And my remarks may sound a little bit 

like a Robert Mitchum novel at times, Mr. Speaker, but you 

can’t fully appreciate — I won’t be going quite back to the 

Stone Age — but you can’t, you can’t fully appreciate the 

effect that nationalization and the threats of nationalization 

have had on the economy of this province, and how it has 

devastated the progress of our people without a little history 

lesson, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1944, as I said, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had a million 

people; much as it is today or was in 2007 at least, at the point 

when our government took over the reins of power. We had 

little or no debt in the province. We had in Regina the oil 

industry for the country. We had Canada’s flour milling 

industry at that time, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, to put that 

into perspective, Canada’s flour milling industry not only filled 

our domestic needs, but it was a huge export industry as well, 

Mr. Speaker, so a very important industry. We had nearly half 

the farmland in the country, which of course we still have, Mr. 

Speaker. We had limitless coal reserves. And another 

perspective on that, Mr. Speaker, coal was in 1944 the main 

fuel that powered economies and certainly was extremely 

important for Saskatchewan. The list goes on. 

 

We were, frankly, Mr. Speaker, the shining star of Western 

Canada as well as the breadbasket of the world. 

 

At about the same time, Mr. Speaker, Alberta had only 750,000 

people, no oil industry — none — a much smaller ag sector, no 

oil, no gas, virtually no industry of any type, a staggering debt, 

Mr. Speaker, in fact so much debt that the province was 

insolvent and proceeded to do business only by virtue of a very 

large loan from the federal government. 

 

At about that same time in history, Mr. Speaker, there were two 

elections. In 1943 Ernest Manning was elected in Alberta, and 

they chose a free enterprise, a private initiative, an individual 

freedom course. And just a few months later than that, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1944, there was an election in Saskatchewan. And 

at that time a young Tommy Douglas was elected as the 

premier of Saskatchewan under the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] banner, which of course later 

became the NDP, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan chose a 

different course, a different course altogether from that that 

Alberta had chosen and a different course from any which had 

been ever chosen to that point in North America. 

 

Saskatchewan chose a course of high taxes, less liberty for 

individuals, more government and taxpayer involvement in the 

economy, nationalization of our businesses and industries, and 

disincentives for investment in the province, not the least of 

which, Mr. Speaker, was the threatening rhetoric which often 

involved threats of nationalization. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the period leading up to the most recent 

election in Saskatchewan, the period leading up to 2007 when 

things have started to improve for us, before that time, Alberta 

had the head offices for the oil and gas industry in Canada. 

Most of the heavy industry in Western Canada was in Alberta. 

They had 4 million people, Mr. Speaker, and building 

infrastructure for 6 million. They had clearly been the Western 

Canadian success story, at least up to the time when our 

government took the reins of power in Saskatchewan in 2007. 

 

Up until 2007, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan still had 1 million 

people, the same as we did in 1944 when Tommy Douglas and 

his CCF took over government. We had no oil and gas head 

offices in the province at that time. We had one of, if not the 

slowest, economies in Canada — no growth, crumbling 

infrastructure. No interest in investing in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and no revenue for the government to even begin the 

job of fixing our crumbling infrastructure and our devastated 

social programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are reams of material that has been written 

about the anecdotes that happened following that election in 

1944 when Tommy Douglas took power and devastated the 

economy of this province for 63 years, Mr. Speaker. There is 

lots that has been written. There is lots that has been written, 

Mr. Speaker, and I commend the members opposite to read 

some or have it read to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one very important and telling story that came out 



6364 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

of that election. The Atlantic No. 3 rig at election time, on 

election day was drilling at Davidson, Saskatchewan, in the 

heart of what was then the oil country in Western Canada. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that Atlantic No. 3 rig, which was contracted to 

Esso, on hearing of the election of Tommy Douglas and the 

CCF party, pulled their steel out of the ground. Didn’t even 

finish the hole they were drilling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So afraid were they of this CCF, later NDP, that had already 

threatened to nationalize the oil industry on numerous 

occasions — Tommy Douglas was famous for that — they 

were so afraid of what would happen in this province, as were 

other industries. But I use this as a shining example of how 

nationalization, or even the threat of it, can destroy an 

economy. On hearing of the election, they pulled their steel out 

of the ground and went to a place then unknown to most of the 

oil industry called Leduc, Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they drilled three holes at Leduc, came up empty 

in the first three attempts. And there was confusion. Esso didn’t 

have their orders really straight, so the foreman didn’t know 

whether he was supposed to start on the fourth hole or not. And 

so having unclear orders and being a diligent sort of a guy and 

convinced of the likelihood of finding oil in the Leduc area, he 

undertook to give the order to start drilling a fourth hole. 

 

Well Esso apparently had not intended to drill a fourth hole. 

They were going to give up after three attempts. And as fate 

would have it, when Esso found out the hole was half drilled 

and they said, well go ahead and finish that one, and then if it’s 

not successful, move on. It was successful, Mr. Speaker, and 

was the beginning of the oil boom in Alberta that could have 

been ours and should have been ours and is ours now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But that is one anecdotal case and only one. And there are 

hundreds, Mr. Speaker, of how nationalization or even the 

threat of it can devastate an economy. And, Mr. Speaker, these 

members opposite are still threatening it. They still threaten it. 

They threaten it with potash. They threaten it with oil. They 

never stop, Mr. Speaker. They don’t relent. Their philosophy 

means so much more to them than does the future prosperity of 

this province that we love so much on this side of the floor, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the next few minutes, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have a number of 

examples to cite you of their callous disregard for their 

province and their dedication to their socialist philosophy. I’ll 

start with the Leader of the Opposition’s response to the Throne 

Speech in 2009, Mr. Speaker, in which I quote the Leader of the 

Opposition as saying, and I quote: 

 

Many people don’t know this, but 29 of the top 50 oil 

companies in the world are not privately owned but are 

owned by government or state — 29 out of 50. They are 

Saudi Aramco which is the largest oil company in the 

world. They produce about 10 million barrels of oil a day. 

They have tens of thousands of employees. You have 

Petrobras which is one of the leading drillers in the world. 

They drill offshore in some of the deepest water in the 

world. Ecopetrol in Columbia. 

 

And on and on. He also espoused Soviet-like plans, Mr. 

Speaker, and he goes on and on. He also espoused Soviet-like 

plans when he called for an energy strategy that we’d base our 

economy on for the next five years as well as extolling the 

strength and effort of state-owned oil companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In April 9th, 2009, StarPhoenix article reported that: 

 

In a campaign speech delivered last week [it says; I’m 

quoting now again, Mr. Speaker] in Moose Jaw, 

Lingenfelter [and I’m quoting] reportedly promised that, 

as premier, he would create a provincial government oil 

company.  

 

This came after that member, and I’m quoting again, Mr. 

Speaker, “. . . a player in the oil business by virtue of a well on 

his family farm near Shaunavon.” And after he went into the oil 

business full-time in Alberta. 

 

Man, you know I’ve got to stop here, Mr. Speaker, and talk 

about how Mr. Lingenfelter got into the oil business in Alberta. 

 

At that time in the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP had 

nationalized a number of small oil companies and formed what 

was then known as Saskoil, a government-owned oil company, 

Mr. Speaker, under the Blakeney administration. Eventually 

that company was sold to Canadian Occidental or became 

Wascana Energy and then Wascana Energy was sold to 

Canadian Occidental, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That was about the time — and I’m jumping ahead here, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll go back and forth a bit — but about that time, Mr. 

Lingenfelter’s political career was clearly, clearly over in 

Saskatchewan and he was looking for a job. And so he lobbied 

members of this Assembly to give up the golden share that 

Saskatchewan held in what was then Wascana Energy, formerly 

Saskoil, Mr. Speaker. The golden share gave Saskatchewan 

some rights and some say in what happened with Wascana 

Energy, formerly Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, including a head office 

in Regina and a number of other very important pieces that that 

member, the Leader of the Opposition lobbied this Assembly to 

give up. And the NDP having the majority at that time, the 

golden share was given away. 

 

And that’s where I get back to my story here, Mr. Speaker. 

Shortly after that, the Leader of the Opposition resigned his seat 

and went looking for a job. Or maybe he went looking for a job 

and then resigned his seat. I suspect that’s more like it. But in 

any event, Mr. Speaker, he moved on to Alberta to become 

vice-president with Canadian Occidental which later became 

Nexen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but let’s get back to what that member actually 

said during his now infamous speech. And I, you know, I’d be 

the last one to ever suggest that Mr. Lingenfelter or that that 

member, that the Leader of the Opposition would ever use his 

power as deputy premier to get himself a job, but there are 

those that have suggested it. In any event, Mr. Speaker, getting 

back to what that member actually said during his now 

infamous speech, and according to an article by Murray 

Mandryk, that member is quoted as saying: 

 

What I regret in many ways is that we didn’t fight harder 

the privatization of some of those things that we did in the 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6365 

former NDP Allan Blakeney era. We fought it, but I think 

there’s a question of whether we fought it hard enough. 

 

Now let’s keep that in context and not forget my little story 

about how Mr. Lingenfelter got his job with Nexen. He didn’t 

. . . 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member knows 

that we should not be bringing the . . . We should be talking 

about the member’s constituency, not the member’s name. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recognize that that 

is the protocol. And I was jumping in and out of quotes so often 

that I got a little sloppy, and I’m sorry about that, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ll attempt, I’ll endeavour not to let it happen again. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, he said, I’ll repeat myself a little bit: 

“We fought it, but I think there’s a question of whether we 

fought it hard enough.” And then the now Leader of the 

Opposition, remember, Mr. Speaker, had not fought it at all but 

he had actually lobbied this Assembly to give up the golden 

share so that he could get a job — some think — that he could 

get a job with Nexen in Alberta. But anyway that’s what he 

said. 

 

He said, we should get back to the point of setting up an energy 

company that does our own drilling and exploration for gas in 

this province. He said, I’m committed to do that if I’m the 

premier. Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of a statement that 

without any follow-up casts a pall on investment in any 

jurisdiction in which it’s made if they believed him, Mr. 

Speaker, and if they thought he had any credibility or the ability 

to carry through on that threat. 

 

On November 8th of this year, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview demonstrated exactly why the NDP can’t 

be trusted if it were in charge. He said, in reference to 

Saskatchewan’s potash, he said, don’t sell this resource. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, how can we benefit from potash if we don’t sell 

it? Even, Mr. Speaker, even little kids who set up a lemonade 

stand know that the lemonade is only valuable if it’s sold. The 

kids, Mr. Speaker, with the lemonade stand know that you have 

to sell the potash to get the money to build the schools, to pay 

the health care workers, to build the roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine. Imagine if that member were in charge. 

Buyers of potash from China and India and places like that, you 

know, would approach him. And his response would be, they’d 

approach him to try and buy some potash, and his response 

would be, we don’t sell our resources. You know, the kids with 

the lemonade stand know that you must sell lemonade and/or 

potash in order for the enterprise to be profitable. But 

apparently that member didn’t run a lemonade stand either. 

 

We’ve always sold our resources, Mr. Speaker. There’s a huge 

difference in selling our resources though and fighting the sale 

of one of our largest resource companies. That’s the distinction 

that the member from fairway needs to make. I encourage the 

Leader of the Opposition to explain to the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview how an economy works, even a lemonade 

stand, for simplicity’s sake, or the resource sector for that 

matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in an article by James Wood in The StarPhoenix, 

October 7th, 2010, I quote, Mr. Speaker. He says: 

 

The NDP wants a review of the government’s royalty and 

taxation structure around potash and Lingenfelter [I’m 

quoting, Mr. Speaker] said the ownership issue could be 

looked at as part of the review. 

 

He stressed he was not discussing nationalization of the 

company, although he did note the success of state-owned 

resource companies such as Norway’s Statoil, and Brazil’s 

Petrobras. 

 

In 1936 and up until 1944, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the 

third most populous province in Canada with a population of 

one million people. And Saskatchewan is now the sixth largest 

province, Mr. Speaker, with respect to population. And up until 

2007, there was absolutely no growth from 1936 through all of 

the NDP and CCF years. Sixty-three years, Mr. Speaker, of 

mostly NDP government from 1944 until 2007. 

 

This is in sharp contrast to our two neighbours. Alberta under a 

different program, pro-business program, Mr. Speaker, a 

program of individual liberty and freedom and the right to 

invest and encouragement to succeed, Alberta has grown 

fivefold in that same length of time, Mr. Speaker, from 750,000 

to 3.7 million. And Manitoba, even Manitoba, who have had 

their setbacks, Lord knows, with some NDP issues of their 

own, have grown more than 70 per cent from 700,000 to 1.2 

million during the same period. 

 

“Various factors explain Saskatchewan’s stagnant population 

growth, but no doubt its anti-growth public policies . . .” I’m 

quoting again, Mr. Speaker, when I say: 

 

Various factors explain Saskatchewan’s stagnant 

population growth, but no doubt its anti-growth public 

policies have been of little help.  

 

These policies are the same ones often found in Third 

World countries with overbearing governments that 

nationalize companies and bring in job-killing labour 

regulations and uncompetitive taxes on capital investment. 

Saskatchewan is as close to a socialist economy as one 

could get in Canada. 

 

But that’s all changing now. I’m still quoting James Wood, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Even PotashCorp serves as a good example. It was 

originally a Crown corporation that could hardly earn a 

dime. After privatization, the company grew quickly, 

generating far more revenue for the Saskatchewan 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the end of the quote. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan has generated many times more revenue every 

year than it ever did on its best year as a Crown corporation 

since it’s been privatized, Mr. Speaker. 



6366 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

Here’s an interesting quote from the Toronto Star. And I don’t 

have the edition, but it’s in 1987. They talk about the federal 

NDP convention. And at the federal NDP convention, the 

article states, “An unnamed Saskatchewan delegate called for 

the nationalization of the five major chartered banks in Canada 

should an NDP government rise to power. We don’t know . . .” 

Now I think this is a bit tongue in cheek. It states, “We don’t 

know who the Saskatchewan delegate was.” Maybe it was a 

current member of the NDP caucus. Who knows? Oh wait. We 

do know. “The current NDP candidate for Saskatoon 

Greystone.” 

 

Now this is in 1987. And Mr. Speaker, ironically, I think that’s 

the same candidate that we have for the NDP in Saskatoon 

Greystone right now: Peter Prebble, recycling ideas from the 

’70s and politicians from the ’70s, I guess, over there. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, this is the same convention that such 

socialist gems as a call for the elimination of all corporate tax 

expenditures and confiscating personal earnings of more than 

$200,000 came to play, Mr. Speaker. I think even they would 

be confiscating income from some of their own members, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly the member from Nutana. 

 

This same NDP candidate — and we know who that is now — 

went on to rant against the non-existent threat of casino 

capitalism, he calls it. Now I don’t know what that means but 

anyway, I bet he does. In a treatise, Mr. Speaker, that would 

make even Karl Marx blush, he went on to say, and I quote: 

 

It’s not sufficient to simply talk about government 

procurement or certain taxation policy. We need a precise 

mechanism for channelling regional capital investment 

and there’s no other mechanism than a clear transfer of 

economic capital from private, central multinationals to 

decentralized, regionally based institutions. 

 

Now that man is running. He wants to be a member of this 

honourable Assembly, Mr. Speaker. He knows the history that 

I’ve been talking about, He knows what those kind of threats 

can do to an economy. He knows what they’ve already done to 

this economy for 63 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the now defunct non-partisan research group that 

used to call itself the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise 

hired a firm of accountants from outside of the province in the 

late 1980s. And it discovered — that firm of accountants that 

was hired by this Saskatchewan-based research group — 

discovered that the real value of PCS [Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] as a nationalized enterprise was a bust for this 

province. That’s pretty much as succinctly and factually as I 

can put it, Mr. Speaker, in condensing a lot of volumes of 

information. 

 

They found that despite the initial heavy investment by the 

government, the cost of maintaining each job annually was the 

salary of the employee plus $50,000 each, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

inefficiency and then there’s NDP inefficiency . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Maybe that is. Maybe that’s it. Maybe that’s 

casino capitalism. I hope not. 

 

This is what the Leader of the Opposition wants to return to, 

Mr. Speaker. While the member from Regina Rosemont decries 

fiscal mismanagement, his own boss wants to return to a time 

when Saskatchewan citizens paid an additional $50,000 per 

PCS employee out of their tax money for the privilege of being 

an owner of PCS. In fact the NDP leader was House leader for 

the NDP in 1989 when he orchestrated a failed filibuster 

designed to maintain the nationalization of Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s a well-known fact that in 1944, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

population was larger than Alberta’s by 25 per cent. The 

country’s oil capital was Regina. But since then, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP have frightened off businesses with their economic 

nationalism and wholesale nationalization of industries. And on 

average, 1,700 people were leaving this province each year over 

the last 63 years that the NDP were government for most of the 

time and since the first election of a CCF government in 1944. 

 

Just to give a sense, Mr. Speaker, of the anti-prosperity policies 

that former NDP . . . An independent report issued in the 1990s 

painted a grim picture for Saskatchewan families. Through this 

independent report, Mr. Speaker, it was revealed that 

Saskatchewan had the second highest personal and corporate 

income taxes in the country. Quebec was higher. The average 

family in the province had an income of only $54,490 and paid 

taxes on that $54,490 of $27,053, leaving a disposable income 

for the whole family, Mr. Speaker, of only $27,437. 

 

The average family’s income in Regina, Mr. Speaker, this was 

at a . . . In Alberta, I should say. And this was at a time when 

Alberta was just beginning to cut taxes and so the results got 

much more stark after this, but even this is telling. The average 

family’s income in Alberta was 65,897 and the provincial take 

or the total tax take was 29,314, leaving a disposable income of 

36,583 or 9,146 a year more in Alberta than in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. Rounding off, $10,000 advantage a year for living 

in Alberta even before they did most of their tax cuts, Mr. 

Speaker, and it got much better after that. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The Saskatchewan NDP grabbed, in the form of taxes, almost 

the entire average income increase of 3,769 between 1997 and 

1998. The average tax bill in Saskatchewan increased $3,215 

over that period, Mr. Speaker, according to this report. 

Meanwhile in Alberta, incomes went up by 2,516, and taxes fell 

by $619. In Canada as a whole over that period, Mr. Speaker, 

incomes went up $1,629, and taxes only went up by $215. 

Three thousand dollars, that’s $3,000 less net advantage to 

living in Saskatchewan in those years, Mr. Speaker, than any 

place else in Canada on average. 

 

An article states, and I quote, “Why is Iran importing 

gasoline?” This is in 2007, 2007 and up to the present, Mr. 

Speaker. Iran’s parliament in 2007 approved legislation to curb 

the use of cars in that oil-rich country. I know, Mr. Speaker, 

you want to shake your head. It doesn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker. Why? Iran, Mr. Speaker, is the country with the 

world’s third largest oil reserves and they could no longer 

afford to import costly gasoline. 

 

Well that, you know, that poses a couple of questions, doesn’t 

it, Mr. Speaker? That flies in the face of common sense. Why 

wouldn’t they have their own gasoline since they’re the third 



December 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6367 

largest oil producer in the world? Why couldn’t they afford to 

do just about anything they wanted to do, Mr. Speaker, being 

the third largest oil producer in the world and a relatively small 

country by Canadian standards? 

 

Here’s why, Mr. Speaker. Iran has effectively nationalized their 

oil production. Because of their anti-internationalist policies 

and as a result of the country’s aging and inefficient refineries, 

they can’t meet a swelling demand for gasoline. Their 

government has discouraged multinational energy companies 

from making large-scale investments in Iran’s infrastructure, 

and their domestic energy policies encourage waste and 

increased domestic demand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what more needs to be said about 

nationalizing industries and what that can do to economies. 

Iran, the world’s third largest oil producer, can’t afford to burn 

gas in their cars. And that’s because of nationalization policies 

just exactly, Mr. Speaker, like the ones that are promoted on a 

day-by-day basis by those members who sit in their seats and 

heckle me today. 

 

The NDP are going in a different direction in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

than the rest of the world. We’ve seen in our lifetimes, all of us, 

the end of the former Soviet Union. The Cold War went on 

from the end of the Second World War until 1989, Mr. Speaker, 

when the whole Soviet empire fell apart like a house of cards, 

Mr. Speaker. Makes you wonder if the Cold War was necessary 

at all. It was about, the Cold War was about not permitting the 

Soviet Union to expand and destroy the economies and lives of 

people in many more countries, Mr. Speaker. But really all we 

had to do was wait for the whole thing to collapse under its own 

weight and it’s over. 

 

But in any event, Mr. Speaker, communism and the ideas of 

socialism did look like a threat at one time until the Cold War 

and many billions of dollars were spent to stop that, when in 

fact it was about to stop itself, frankly, through bankruptcy, Mr. 

Speaker. And there are no progressive countries in the world 

who espouse the NDP’s philosophy of nationalization of 

industries or resources or frankly much of anything else, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, in the 1970s when they 

nationalized oil companies and created Saskoil and they 

nationalized potash companies and created the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, they were short of money. They 

were short of money, Mr. Speaker, and this was in a time when 

the previous commodity boom was going on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The previous commodity boom started about 1973 and ran right 

through the ’70s. Should have been the most prosperous time in 

history up until that point for Saskatchewan, but it wasn’t, Mr. 

Speaker. And the reason it wasn’t is because those members 

opposite and their predecessors spent that money. Spent all the 

revenue that was available to them to nationalize oil companies 

and potash companies and create little empires for themselves 

to run, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they were so short of money to do these things that they 

unfunded the teachers’ superannuation plan. They do it. That 

created, Mr. Speaker, a $4 billion liability that exists to this day 

against the province of Saskatchewan. 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how many school teachers in this 

province know that they rely on the largesse of government 

now, year to year, for their pension payments when before, 

before their pension fund was necessary for the capital to invest 

in the potash industry, their pension plan was fully funded. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is not well known, but it is a fact just the 

same. I remember well Davey Steuart and others at the time 

railing against that and to no avail, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately. 

 

But my sympathy is with the teachers. If we’re ever in a time 

when we have NDP government in this province again, and the 

economy will take a downturn when that happens, Mr. Speaker, 

I wonder if government will always be able to make the 

payments to pay those teachers their superannuation. I’m 

skeptical. 

 

In 2007, Mr. Speaker, in 2007, Mr. Speaker, we repealed The 

Potash Development Act of 1975. When we did that, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Norm Beug of the Saskatchewan Potash 

Producers praised our legislation for, I quote, “The symbolism 

is that the province is open for all business because investors 

have long, long memories.” 

 

And that is clearly true, Mr. Speaker. They were long enough 

that they, investors that were scared off in the 1940s and the 

1950s and the 1960s and the 1970s, did not return to this 

province to invest again until after 2007 when our government 

came to power, Mr. Speaker, repealed this crazy legislation that 

destroyed the economy of our province. 

 

And since then, $12 billion in newly announced investment in 

the Saskatchewan potash industry, Mr. Speaker, the first major 

investment in the industry since, in Saskatchewan, since the 

early 1970s before the NDP nationalized part of the industry 

and killed investment in the province — and frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, killed the future of this province through that 

nationalization — until the Saskatchewan Party government 

took over in 2007. Zero investment in 16 years of NDP 

governments, $12 billion in investment, announced investment 

in the first three years of our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What does that mean? People ask, what does that mean? Does 

that mean anything to me? It means thousands of jobs in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. It means population growth. It means 

tax and royalty collected by the government to pay for things 

like hospitals, Mr. Speaker, health care professionals, schools, 

highways, social programs, and generally better services for the 

people of this great province. 

 

They haven’t learned anything, Mr. Speaker, from history or 

this socialist philosophy, this socialist experiment that, sadly for 

us, took place in North America right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is running short so I’m going to 

jump ahead. I’m going to read some headlines first, Mr. 

Speaker, and then quote from some articles that have been 

written. Now this is in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP 

were in power and claimed that they didn’t have any money to 

spend to fix our infrastructure and to improve social programs 

and the like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s some headlines for a start, Mr. Speaker. This is out of 

The StarPhoenix, April 24th, 1998, and it states, the headline 



6368 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2010 

states, “PCS quarterly earnings up.” April 2nd, 1998, the 

Leader-Post, it says, “Childers gets eight-figure compensation.” 

Now that was a controversial one with an NDP government, 

Mr. Speaker. Luckily the company was reprivatized by then, 

and they could pay top quality executives to grow the company. 

That would have never happened under a nationalized industry, 

Mr. Speaker. But that was significant in that it meant that Mr. 

Childers was being rewarded for doing a good job in growing 

the company. 

 

February 13th, 1998, Saskatoon StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, the 

headline states, “’97 PCS profits smash records.” Friday, 

February 13th — Friday the 13th, 1998, that was an unlucky 

day for the NDP, Mr. Speaker — headline reads, “PCS breaks 

new records.” Regina Leader-Post, Thursday, October 23rd, 

1997: “Profits up for PCS” the headline reads. Regina 

Leader-Post, Friday, July 25th, 1997: “PCS has record profits.” 

StarPhoenix, Saturday, April 19th, ’97: “Childers worth that 

kind of money” the headline reads. March 29th, 1997: 

“Childers made 2 million.” 

 

All right, Mr. Speaker, I see . . . I wanted to keep going, and I 

see that the members want me to. But I’ll read the motion now, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP’s ongoing support 

for nationalizing Saskatchewan’s resource sector. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Thunder Creek has moved the motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP’s ongoing support 

for nationalizing Saskatchewan’s resource sector. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

privilege to be able to speak to this motion and set the record 

straight on a number of things that we’ve heard from the 

member from Thunder Creek, I believe it is, so far. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard now that the member has a great 

talent for revisionism, and his obvious disdain for the office of 

Tommy Douglas not to mention the success of governments of 

the NDP since then. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 

that Saskatchewan is the strong province that it is today because 

of the fact that Tommy Douglas brought rural electrification to 

this province, because of the fact that Tommy Douglas 

introduced public health care into the province of 

Saskatchewan, which was then emulated right across the 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The time now being 

1 o’clock, this Assembly stands adjourned until Monday at 

1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6341 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6341 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6341 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6341 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6341 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6343 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6345 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6345 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6355 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6341 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6342 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6342 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6342 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6342 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6343 

 Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal Ceremony 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6343 

 Celebration of Hanukkah 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6343 

 Saskatoon Physician Receives Award 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6343 

 Saskatoon Cultural Centre Renamed 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6344 

 Lumber Mills Opening in Carrot River Valley 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6344 

 Fiscal Management 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6344 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6345 

  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6345, 6349 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6346 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6349 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6347 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6347 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6348 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Increased Support for People with Disabilities 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6350 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6350 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6351 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Funding for Health Care 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6351, 6361 

  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6353, 6361 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6355, 6362 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6356 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6358, 6361 

  Ottenbreit ...................................................................................................................................................................... 6359, 6361 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6361 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6361 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6362 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 6363 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 6363 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6363 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3 — Saskatchewan’s Resource Sector 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6363 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6368 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


