




















































Hansard: April 27, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 51A  TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 2010, 8 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5067 

 April 27, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 08:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 131 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 131 — The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to engage in this debate for the last time, and it’s a 

continued pleasure to engage in this debate at this time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Conservation easements. Again the primary purpose — if I 

could recap a bit from my remarks last, Mr. Speaker — the 

primary purpose of this Bill appears to be the enactment of a 

process to create Crown conservation easements. The Act 

provides for the registration of these easements in the land titles 

registry, lays out a process by which a landowner can amend or 

terminate a conservation easement, provides for enforcements 

of the terms of an easement, and lays out penalties for 

violations. 

 

Now the penalties in this Bill have been changed. Previously 

individuals could be subject to fines of $100,000 plus $100,000 

per day. Corporations can now be fined, if this legislation goes 

through, up to $500,000 per day plus another $500,000 per day. 

 

The Act also provides — and members may want to pay 

attention to this — it also provides that conservation easements 

can be granted for the protection of species that are not plants or 

animals like fungi or lichen. And again, Mr. Speaker, this may 

perhaps reflect on a change in sort of perspective on what is in 

fact worthy of protection in terms of our flora and fauna, the 

lowly lichen or the easily forgettable fungi. You know, perhaps 

those weren’t really being anticipated in earlier iterations of 

legislation, but again we’ve come a long way, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve realized that the diversity of our flora and fauna is very 

important and that perhaps conservation should incorporate this 

broader idea of what is worthy of conservation, so fungi, 

lichens, they’re in and we’re glad to see that. 

 

One of the things that does give us a bit of concern, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a government that of course has, you know, 

gone on the world stage to say that they’re going to rag the puck 

on greenhouse gas emissions. I stood on a platform with the 

member from Martensville in 2007 in the election where her 

response to, you know, are you up to the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] greenhouse gas emission reduction targets? 

And what was her response, Mr. Speaker, was me too, me too; 

our party is in favour of the NDP target — nothing to see here; 

please move along. And of course we know, Mr. Speaker, that it 

didn’t take long for them to break that promise. It didn’t take 

long at all. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a piece of environmental 

legislation in front of us here. We look at the legislation and we 

stack it up alongside the record of the government opposite in 

terms of how they actually . . . They can go on a public stage 

before an election, say one thing, you know, clearly break that 

promise, Mr. Speaker. So in terms of legislation that comes 

forward with this in front of this House, you’ll forgive us if 

we’re not entirely convinced of the veracity of their position. 

 

In terms of the promises that they have made, I mean why 

should anyone believe them now? Again in terms of what they 

say in this House as to representing the positions of different 

stakeholder groups, you know, yesterday we saw another piece 

of legislation where that was certainly the case, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the wildlife habitat. We know that out there, there are 

people that haven’t been consulted by this government, which 

again gets into the question of how they’re running the business 

in this House, how they bring legislation forward, how they’re 

consulting or not consulting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in terms of the work that we want to do as the opposition, 

we’re going to try and do that to the best of our ability to get out 

there and to talk to the people who are really affected by this 

legislation, be they conservation groups, environmentalists, 

landowners, or certainly the many communities that would be 

affected by this legislation. 

 

Now in terms of the ability of the Crown to provide oversight 

for this legislative initiative, again something else that is very 

important to take a look at, Mr. Speaker, is the difference 

between what’s in the legislation and what comes through in the 

regulations. Yesterday of course, Mr. Speaker, we saw the 

government make a tremendous power grab in terms of what 

could or couldn’t be done in terms of removing land from 

wildlife protection or from endangered land protection and in 

terms of deeming what is and what isn’t sensitive lands. And 

again, far too often, Mr. Speaker, we see this government 

coming forward saying, just trust us. Trust us with the 

legislation and, you know, give us a blank cheque that we’ll 

cash when it comes to the regulations. 

 

And on this front, Mr. Speaker, in terms of ecologically 

sensitive land, this is, by its very definition, lands that if you 

take them out of that protection, that’s it forever. So we’ve got a 

very precious patrimony here in terms of, you know, the 

heritage of this land. And if you don’t get it right the first time, 

then it’s damaged forever. 

 

Rehabilitating lands to their natural state is, by definition, 

almost impossible. So what you’ve got to do is make sure that 

you’re protecting the land that is there. We’re interested to see 

of course, as well, how the Nature Conservancy of Canada can 

utilize this legislation, utilize the lands that are made available 

under this legislation. 

 



5068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

Previously I had opportunity to talk about Old Man on His Back 

and the remediation and the land that had been brought under 

the egress of protection over the past decade and a half and the 

vital role that people like Sharon and Peter Butala had played in 

terms of helping to assemble that land that constitutes Old Man 

on His Back. I know that the member from Cypress Hills has 

paid a lot of attention to that over the years, as has our leader — 

a person who plays a great role with the Nature Conservancy of 

Canada and whose stomping grounds is very close to Old Man 

on His Back holdings and who played a very productive and 

positive role in making sure that those lands could be brought 

together to provide this incredible piece of natural habitat. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve not been out to Old Man on 

His Back, I mean, it’s now where the buffalo roam. I know 

you’ve got some experience in past with buffalo. I’ll not try to 

buffalo this point any further, Mr. Speaker, but I know that 

you’re someone that follows the buffalo fairly closely. 

 

But again, if we think about where we are here on the prairies 

and the fact that the hundreds of thousands of buffalo that used 

to blacken the prairies, moving back and forth with the seasonal 

patterns of grazing and migration, to think that the Nature 

Conservancy of Canada and people like the Butalas and people 

like our leader from Regina Douglas Park and his deep ties into 

Shaunavon and his ranching roots out in that neck of the woods, 

and the many people that came together to put together 

something like Old Man on His Back. 

 

Again we’re in favour of seeing legislative tools brought 

forward such as The Conservation Easements Act to make sure 

that those people can do their job to defend this incredible 

heritage of ours in terms of the wildlife, in terms of natural 

habitat. And if you think about the fact that now out in this 

tremendous, tremendously beautiful piece of natural grasslands 

that the buffalo are roaming there once again, Mr. Speaker, we 

think this is a good development. 

 

And in terms of trying to learn the lessons of the past, in terms 

of striving to conserve and not to repeat a modern-day rendition 

of the slaughter that took place with the buffalo in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and throughout the Great Plains, if we can learn 

those lessons of the past, it means that we have to take those 

steps to protect habitats such as the native grasslands that you 

find out in a place like Old Man on His Back. 

 

Again if this legislation is something that actually strengthens 

the hand of people interested in being able to pursue that work 

of conservation and protection of natural habitat, if this is 

something that legitimately accomplishes that, Mr. Speaker, 

then, you know, we think it’s certainly worthy of consideration 

and possibly moving forward. If it’s not, Mr. Speaker . . . And 

again yesterday we saw case in point in terms of legislation 

where it comes out, comes out strong in terms of the proclaimed 

intent of legislation, but the real devil, of course, is in the details 

of the regulations. 

 

And in terms of providing . . . These people opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t operate well in an atmosphere of scrutiny 

generally, so of course we know that they want to shuttle 

everything offstage into the secrecy of the cabinet room. They 

want to move decisions offstage so they can, you know, do 

whatever they please. And we know that they don’t like the 

standard process of the House in terms of how a Bill becomes a 

law and how the business of the House legitimately proceeds 

through this Chamber. 

 

And so of course when we see them setting up to carve off a 

bunch of activity into the regulations of this Executive Council 

opposite . . . And we see them not wanting to move something 

through legislation but rather put it into the regulations where 

they can do it by the, you know, whatever the in-group says 

around that cabinet table and then, you know, let alone 

whatever the caucus has to think over there. Of course that’s 

something that’s very much in their interest. Of course they 

want to move it all to regulations. 

 

So in terms of the division between activity that is enshrined in 

legislation with The Conservation Easements Amendment Act of 

2009 versus what happens in the regulations that will follow 

after this legislation is passed, we’ll be watching that very 

closely, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again you wonder about how . . . You know, I’ve talked 

about Old Man on His Back. Another one that was under some 

question yesterday was the situation with the Great Sand Hills, 

and of course there’s been a tremendous amount of work done 

there to try and at once both square the circle of proceeding 

with economic development but also protecting this 

tremendous, wondrous natural habitat that is the Great Sand 

Hills. That has importance to not just the people that are 

interested in the unique biology of the place, but which is of 

traditional, of great traditional importance to the First Nations 

of this province. 

 

And in terms of the work that was done to try and bring people 

together, to try and achieve some kind of common ground, to 

really get the fuller understanding of what happened with the 

Great Sand Hills, I know that various of my colleagues on this 

side were very involved in that. And I know certain members 

over there played a part as well. And I think that’s one of the 

ways that you can proceed to bring forward legislation that, that 

does something like the Great Sand Hills justice, that actually 

lives up to that great worth that is there to be protected. 

 

And in terms of how that relates to The Conservation 

Easements Act, again what seems to be a fairly straightforward 

piece of legislation, we’re not sure how this works with the 

different stakeholders that are coming forward on other pieces 

of legislation that say they haven’t been consulted. They have a 

great stake and interest in this legislation. And in terms of how 

this goes, Mr. Speaker, we are going to be talking to those 

stakeholders to make sure that this legislation does in fact live 

up to its billing. 

 

But, again, to think about something like the Great Sand Hills 

and the planning exercise that was undertaken there, the 

community engagement exercise, the information and 

knowledge gathering exercise that was undertaken there, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a lot of people brought together, a lot of 

resources put to bear, and I think that something very useful and 

durable came out of that process. And I’m very proud of the 

work that different members on this side of the House did in 

that effort. 

 

And again, you know one aspect in particular, Mr. Speaker, the 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5069 

engagement of First Nations on that file in terms of making sure 

that a region of the province that is of great cultural significance 

to them, to make sure that they were engaged appropriately and 

respectively, that was part of that process. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, when you’ve got something that’s up in the light of 

day and you’ve got something that’s up front and it’s not some 

kind of, you know, signing it by fiat through the Executive 

Council regulatory process, when you’ve got something that 

can go through the public process . . . And, you know, what 

more public process is there than this Legislative Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

[08:15] 

 

Again it’s that division between what’s in the legislation and 

what’s in the regulations. And when it comes to this 

government, of course we know that the legislation sometimes 

is only the tip of the iceberg, and that in terms of the regulations 

that come forward, you’ve got to watch them every step of the 

way. 

 

And even in terms of the legislation and . . . You know, you 

think about the optometrists or you think about the 

chiropractors. You think about different stakeholders that are 

integral to the delivery of services in this province, where they 

have legislation or they have different budgetary measures 

coming forward that affect their livelihoods mightily, that affect 

their professional ability to do their jobs mightily, and you hear 

what the members opposite say in terms of the consultation that 

has been undertaken, but then you talk to the people who 

actually . . . have been raised in terms of the consultation. And 

in the case of the chiropractors, Mr. Speaker, you had a joint 

press release that was drafted up to announce this contract that 

had been bargained in good faith that was torn up, you know, 

two minutes to midnight by the members opposite. So that’s 

one case. 

 

Other professional legislation that’s been brought forward in 

this Chamber where they say, of course the due diligence has 

been done, the consultation has been undertaken. And then you 

talk to the group and they have something very different to say. 

Or you look at something like The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act and the work that was done yesterday. And again you’ve 

got a list of people that the members opposite say that they have 

consulted widely and that everybody is fine with this or they 

leave that impression. But then you go and talk to the people, 

Mr. Speaker, and you find out it’s a very different story. 

 

So again in this legislation with The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, we’re going to be looking very closely at who 

they’ve talked to, what the division is between what’s actually 

in the legislation, and what will come in the regulations. We are 

going to be watching what they do very closely. And again 

we’ll be watching them from 8 in the morning till 12 in the 

evening if that need be the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So conservation easements again, while on the face of it would 

seem to be fairly, you know, fairly straightforward involving 

differing tools in terms of title and the ability of the Crown to 

assume different lands, to work with different third parties, to 

ascertain what is in fact a natural ecosystem or wildlife habitats 

or what is in fact a rare or threatened or endangered plant or 

animal species, again the proclaimed intent looks pretty good. 

But in terms of the consultation that underlies it . . . And it’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the first speech that was 

given in this House, or the second reading speech given by the 

minister introducing this legislation, there’s no discussion of 

who was talked to in the development of this legislation. 

 

And again this is a minister who of course in terms of the 

keystone promise of this government around greenhouse gas 

emissions . . . You know federally I had once seen a talk from 

Tom Flanagan where he said — you know in one of the 

immediately recent federal elections — the federal 

Conservatives didn’t have much to say about the environment 

and they knew they needed to have something to say. So 

Flanagan’s approach to it was, well you know you got to put a 

few lights in the window, then you’ve got something to say. 

You know, check it off your list, neutralize the issue, and on 

you go. 

 

And given the time that the member from Martensville spent 

out working with the Harper government and the Conservatives 

and I’m sure, people like Tom Flanagan, I’m sure that was very 

much part and parcel of the approach they brought to the 

greenhouse gas emission targets. That they said, oh yes, us too; 

we’re all on board for the NDP targets. 

 

But like I said, Mr. Speaker, I stood on a platform with that 

member opposite in front of a bunch of young university 

students that were very interested in the election, very interested 

in what was being discussed in the election and particularly 

interested in the environment and what the different parties had 

to say about the environment. And of course the member from 

Martensville, then the opposition critic for the Environment, 

when it came forward for the NDP greenhouse gas emission 

reduction targets, their response was me too. 

 

And again I can’t help but think now, Mr. Speaker, about 

Flanagan saying, you know, you’ve got to get that light in the 

window. You’ve got to neutralize the issue and then move on 

and then do whatever. And of course that’s exactly what we’ve 

seen from this government, is say anything at the election. 

 

And you know in a room full of young people that were 

interested in the issue, that were articulate, that were passionate 

about the issue, the response was, oh yes we’re in for the NDP 

targets. You know, us too. And then it didn’t take months after 

the election, Mr. Speaker, before they jettisoned that and the 

targets seemed to go down, down, down and the criteria for 

greenhouse gas emission reduction targets seemed to change as 

well. 

 

So to draw that back to The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, when this government says 

something is on the up and up, that’s when we start checking 

our wallets on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, because we 

have seen this act before. We’ve seen them come forward and 

say, this is our solemn pledge. This is our sacred undertaking of 

the people. You know, nothing more beautiful than a promise 

kept. And of course they make a great ballyhoo out of the 

promises that they’ve supposedly kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in terms of the reality of how those promises are actually 

kept, we often find it’s a very different thing. And particularly 

in the case of the environment, this is a sector of public policy 



5070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

where those members opposite have a tremendous record of 

saying one thing and doing something entirely different after 

the election. 

 

So again in terms of The Conservation Easements Amendment 

Act, seems to be pretty straightforward, but is this a part of a 

parcel that comes from this government, in terms of saying one 

thing on the environment and doing something entirely 

different? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if there are other members that 

are looking to participate in this debate at this time. There are. 

There are. There are in fact members that are interested in this 

debate, as I might expect of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, and as 

I might expect of my colleagues on a topic such as the 

environment and conservation. Because of course, Mother 

Earth, what’s more important than that? And the fact that we’re 

not just, you know, we’re not leaving this . . . We’re not 

inheriting it from our grandparents; we’re leaving it to the next 

generation. So we’ve got to take care of it. We’re borrowing it 

from our children. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at that point, I will conclude my 

remarks in the debate on conservation easements amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is . . . I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today of course to speak on The Conservation Easements Act, 

Bill No. 131. And it struck me, Mr. Speaker, when looking at 

this legislation . . . well a number of things struck me, but one 

. . . [inaudible interjections] . . . There’s apparently an argument 

or some kind of discussion across the floor, Mr. Speaker, about 

whether I’m a lawyer or not. And although I’m not currently 

practising, indeed I have to admit that I am. And that will 

become abundantly clear I think in the next few minutes, Mr. 

Speaker, because this is about easements — not something that 

one usually hears overheard discussed in the coffee line at Tim 

Hortons, Mr. Speaker, but of some interest to students of the 

law and to lawyers. 

 

And this legislation quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, is of some 

intriguing interest. This institution itself, like our system of land 

ownership, has not been rewritten to say, well we want a 

democracy, and we want private land ownership subject to 

certain rights. And how do you design that, Mr. Speaker? What 

happens is very evolutionary. And over time institutions are 

built, and institutions and practices are built on practices. And 

at the end . . . Well this isn’t the end, Mr. Speaker, but at the 

point, a time where we find ourselves, we have a constitutional 

democracy — one person, one vote, a representative legislature 

— but all working within a constitutional monarchy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so on top of or above or built upon feudal undemocratic 

institutions, institutions developed by people who would have 

found our present system of governing ourselves 

incomprehensible, built on top of those institutions — not 

replacing them, not supplanting them, but adapting them to our 

uses — we have built a democracy within the tradition of a 

monarchy. And we have as our head of state a monarch, and as 

a matter of fact, a monarch that lives in another country and is 

the head of state of another country. Mr. Speaker, very 

interesting arrangement, one that I think our neighbours to the 

south find a little hard to follow sometimes. But a wise person 

once said, it doesn’t have to make sense; it just has to work. 

 

And our method of or our system of land ownership is much 

like that, Mr. Speaker. How people think it works and how it 

actually does work is quite different than the actual structure, 

the actual law, the traditions behind it. 

 

Because again, like our democratic institutions, they are built 

upon, adapted to very feudal concepts of law. Those of us who 

own our own homes, which are most Canadians — and I 

imagine most members of the Legislative Assembly own one 

home or perhaps two if we’re fortunate enough to live outside 

of Regina in some cases and travel here for these enlightening 

debates and discussions, not to suggest that my contribution 

today is going to be particularly so, but some of them are — 

and we think of those as properties that, subject to any 

mortgage that might be on them, are ours absolutely. But in fact 

there is some vestigial ownership by the Crown even in private 

land ownings, and that is where concept of fee simple is. 

 

Fee simple, even in the minerals rights below the surface, is all 

that a private individual can own. And we think of that as total 

ownership, and for all intents and purposes, it is total 

ownership, Mr. Speaker. But it all dates back to when all land 

belonged to the Crown, granted to aristocracy who then 

parcelled it out to others to work on. And it is those institutions 

that were never entirely replaced because they could be adapted 

to circumstances of widespread private land ownership, 

widespread home ownership. 

 

But from those days we have all kinds of interests in land, short 

of the absolute private ownership. And all kinds of interests 

could be granted as land evolved from the Crown down to 

others who were authorized to own land within the feudal 

system, and then they could provide certain rights to people in 

exchange for certain services in return, Mr. Speaker. In all 

these, all these institutions and legal arrangements survive and 

are adapted to very modern circumstances. 

 

And in the case of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, adapted to what would 

have seemed, at the time when we developed our land 

ownership system, probably inconceivable because probably 

completely unnecessary at a time when people were struggling 

to extract some ability to have even some subsistence farming 

from the land around them, from the nature around them, it 

would’ve seemed very strange that that natural world would’ve 

needed any protection. 

 

People at one time thought they needed protection from that 

natural world. And now in the 21st century, and of course even 

in the 20th century, we’ve become to understand that as our 

power and technology develops, it’s the natural world that 

needs protection from us and no longer the other way around. 

And so we have now the use of a rather ancient instrument, the 

easement, intended for the purposes of environmental 

protection and conservation. 

 

And the explanatory notes to the Bill provided by the minister 

give some idea of the recent history of conservation easements 

in the province of Saskatchewan. It was the previous New 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5071 

Democratic Party government, Mr. Speaker, that made it 

possible for non-profit environmental groups to obtain 

easements on key environmental land without having to 

purchase that land, which wasn’t necessarily the desire of the 

landowner to sell the land or in the interests of the non-profit 

environmental organization to own that land. And this was most 

significant when it came to wetlands throughout agricultural 

Saskatchewan on migratory bird routes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it was, as I recall, not controversial, but there was some 

concern that it might be controversial, Mr. Speaker, that 

agricultural landowners as a group might object to the ability of 

individual farmers to provide these easements to organizations 

whose purpose was to sustain and protect wildlife, and 

particularly birds, which can be seen as a threat to farmers 

because they’re not . . . They don’t necessarily differentiate 

between what is grown and what grows on its own when they’re 

looking for food, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure many people in this 

room are aware. 

 

[08:30] 

 

But in fact, Mr. Speaker, the change, the expansion of the 

ability of non-profit environmental organizations to purchase 

easements — not the land, but just an easement on the land or 

right to use the land without acquiring the fee simple from the 

landowner — the ability to do that seems to have been, if not 

widely embraced and welcomed in the agricultural community, 

certainly widely accepted, and that the feared controversy never 

occurred as far as I can tell, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And much is accomplished, I think, for us. Money, money from 

outside the province of Saskatchewan in many cases, Mr. 

Speaker, is used to purchase easements. This is a source of 

revenue, small revenue I expect, Mr. Speaker, but some revenue 

for some farmers in the province. It’s money coming, as I said, 

often from outside the province inside the province, purchasing 

easements to protect wetlands and other environmentally 

sensitive areas. 

 

And of course the wildlife win. That’s the whole point of the 

whole change, Mr. Speaker — the wildlife win and the people 

of Saskatchewan win and the landowner, I think. Obviously it’s 

a voluntary transaction, Mr. Speaker, unlike the provisions here. 

And I’m not being critical of the provisions here. There’s 

substantive difference in what the government wishes to 

propose. 

 

But in the explanatory notes, it does highlight the success, I 

think, of the previous government’s policy in respect to those 

easements, which was really sort of in this respect to allow 

voluntary, non-profitable organizations and private landowners 

to come to mutually agreeable and beneficial arrangements, Mr. 

Speaker. I mean there was no government money involved. 

There was no government direction involved. It was only a 

matter of making it possible for these groups of people to work 

together to protect wildlife to the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan and future generations. 

 

So perhaps inspired, and the explanatory notes would suggest 

that is the case, perhaps inspired by the previous government’s 

success in that venture — well not really a venture, but in 

allowing those ventures to proceed on the parts of others in civil 

society, Mr. Speaker — we have now The Conservation 

Easements Act. And I might return to these interests in land, 

Mr. Speaker, because in government and in the legislature, 

we’re quite familiar with the concept of easement. And of 

course, people who have utility lines running across their land 

sort of understand that somebody has the right to go on their 

land for certain purposes even though they are the owner, and 

that interests aren’t absolute. 

 

But I don’t think we give much of a thought usually, Mr. 

Speaker, unless those power lines are inconvenient and 

sometimes these issues do arise for, particularly for larger 

landowners, farmers, Mr. Speaker. But you know, urban 

dwellers I think take it for granted it’s a benefit that someone 

crosses their land to provide them with power and telephone 

and cable television and whatever those easements are 

necessary for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here the Crown is proposed to have or place on Crown 

land easements that will run with the land. And it’s very similar 

in concept to the parking spot behind my condominium in 

Regina. I don’t own that little piece of asphalt but I own the 

right to park there to the exclusion of others. Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, I come down to Regina, particularly at the beginning 

of sitting, and I find that others don’t understand that. But once 

we have that corrected, Mr. Speaker, and then it is of some 

convenience to me. And that easement, when I someday sell it 

— condominium — that easement I will sell with it. I will not 

sell a piece of asphalt but I will sell that right to use that asphalt 

to park one’s vehicle on in an easement. 

 

And what the Crown is proposing, what the government is 

proposing is the Crown would place easements on Crown land, 

Mr. Speaker, a land that the Crown may own for some period of 

time and may cease to own at some time in the future, Mr. 

Speaker, but that the easement would remain so that a future 

private landowner would buy the land knowing that this part of 

the land is subject to an easement that protects the environment 

and the natural habitat on that property. And that is the proposal 

that is before us in the Bill. It’s not the only proposal. There are 

some other matters but that’s — and most of them I think to 

further that proposal — but that is the centre of the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the member from Moose Jaw North I think is wondering 

what this is all about, which surprises me, Mr. Speaker, because 

it is after all not my private member’s Bill, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

government Bill. And I would think the member of Moose Jaw 

North would . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He may be bored 

because he’s read this Bill so carefully and studied it so well 

and understands it so comprehensively that he doesn’t really 

need to have any member of the opposition explain it to him, 

Mr. Speaker. That may very well be the case. Other people may 

have some other theories, but that may very well be the case, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think the public needs to have a better explanation, a 

better understanding of what this Bill is about and what the 

consequences will be and what the consequences will be to 

citizens of Saskatchewan who may be purchasers of this land or 

customers to businesses who buy this land that is subject to 

Crown easements, Mr. Speaker. And they may be entitled to . . . 

I would say they are entitled to more of an explanation than 



5072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

they would have received in the minister’s second reading 

speech. 

 

On occasion, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the second reading 

remarks from the minister, which is the only time we ever hear, 

the only time we ever hear from the government, Mr. Speaker, 

on these Bills . . . We won’t hear from the member from Moose 

Jaw North, I expect — I could be surprised — but we won’t 

hear about his understanding with the effect and the intent of 

this Bill. We will not. I expect it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the only explanation that one will hear from the government 

on government legislation is in the second reading speech. And 

as I said, or meant to say anyways, Mr. Speaker, the explanation 

of what a Bill’s purpose and intent is by the minister in a second 

reading speech sometimes leaves a little to be desired. And 

basically the minister’s second reading remarks in this case, in 

the case of Bill No. 131, The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, are a few vague statements of value about 

protecting environmental land. Not irrelevant to the speech, Mr. 

Speaker, not irrelevant to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, not at all. 

 

I mean I believe that the values that the minister spoke to in her 

very short remarks on this Bill are the values behind the Bill. 

But it is not a very detailed explanation of what the government 

intends to accomplish in particular and how the Bill 

accomplishes that, Mr. Speaker, not what one would hope for in 

that case. 

 

So it does fall to the opposition to do a couple of things. One is 

to consult with people that we believe would be most directly 

affected, and the wider public, but people who would most be 

directly affected. And so the question arises as to whether the 

major non-profit environmental groups that I spoke of earlier, 

who are involved in the purchase of easements from private 

landowners, have been consulted on this Bill and the effect it 

might have, beneficial or otherwise, on their ability to further 

protect sensitive environmental land. Has that taken place, Mr. 

Speaker? It may have, Mr. Speaker. I frankly don’t know, but 

we are, I think, duty bound to ensure that it has. 

 

And that’s just an example of the consultations the opposition 

might undertake because we can’t be confident that the 

government necessarily has. The government may have, but in 

some cases they have not. And I can think of examples of 

legislation that have been before this House that they have 

consulted with the stakeholders. The stakeholders maybe even 

initiated the legislation. But there’s been legislation before this 

House where they have not consulted as widely as the 

government may have wanted the opposition to believe, and so 

we have that duty. 

 

Secondly we have the duty to — and not just the lawyers in the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, but other members of the opposition 

— to struggle with the legislation, to do our best to understand 

what it’s intended to do and whether it’ll in fact do that, and 

what are the unintended consequences or perhaps unintended 

consequences of the legislation. 

 

And it’s striking to me how often I, as a member of a social 

democratic progressive opposition party, have to remind 

conservatives of the law of unintended consequences. Because 

conservatives who are represented on the other side of this 

Chamber supposedly are supposed to keep in mind the law of 

unintended consequences — that if it ain’t broke, you don’t fix 

it because you might break it. And we fallible human beings 

can’t always predict the consequences of our actions and 

therefore should proceed cautiously. At least that’s a 

conservative principle as I understand it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the members opposite are not conservatives in that sense 

when it comes to labour legislation. We had a labour climate in 

this province and a labour regime from The Trade Union Act 

and a construction industry that facilitated or certainly did not 

deter the economic boom in this province which started in 

2006-2007, Mr. Speaker. All that happened — all that growth, 

all that expansion that carried almost through a recession under 

this government but not quite — all that was done under a 

regime that the members opposite decided, well we’re going to 

fix it even though it ain’t broke. 

 

So that’s also, I think, an obligation of the opposition is to raise 

concerns about what might be the unintended consequences of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I know that members on this side 

are going to want to give an opportunity, first of all for 

consultation with the public and stakeholders, but also to give 

an opportunity to discuss legislation and ferret out through 

debate and discussion where there might be unintended 

consequences — consequences the government doesn’t even 

want to their legislation, consequences they don’t intend. I 

guess that’s by definition unintended consequences, Mr. 

Speaker. So that’s our duty as well. 

 

[08:45] 

 

So members may, members of the government may grow 

impatient with the opposition for the time it spends on 

discussing this legislation, but that is the duty and those are the 

purposes of the legislation. And I’ve certainly, in the very short 

time I have been here, seen the circumstances where we have 

had to — both previous government from 2003-2007, of which 

I was a part, and this government — had to bring in legislation 

because everybody, the government in its drafting and the 

opposition in its scrutiny missed provisions or omissions or 

typographical mistakes that resulted in the legislation not 

having the effect that was intended. 

 

And as a matter of fact, I think the government may be 

considering legislation in respect to tax-free savings accounts. 

To facilitate the designation of beneficiaries on tax-free savings 

accounts, the opposition agreed to quickly, quickly pass 

legislation if the government brought it forward to enable that 

to take place, as was the case with RRSPs [Registered 

Retirement Savings Plan]. 

 

My understanding is that there are financial institutions who 

don’t accept the wording in Saskatchewan legislation. They 

may be just being obstreperous, Mr. Speaker, but they’re not 

small, they are not small financial institutions. They are 

significant financial institutions, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I 

expect that the legislature once again will have to bring in . . . 

Stubborn and persnickety. Perhaps you want to look up 

persnickety too, Mr. Speaker. The government may very well 

want to bring in legislation, not a year, not a year since the 

earlier legislation, to change the wording so that this 

legislature’s intent can be accomplished, Mr. Speaker. 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5073 

And so this is not a hypothetical problem that legislation may 

not, may not have all the consequences and all that are intended. 

It may have consequences that are not intended. And this may 

or may not be an example of that kind of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. This may be an example of legislation that we will 

have to look at again if we pass it in a rush this time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s why, one of the reasons that the opposition is 

reluctant to, except in exceptional circumstances where urgency 

weighs against caution, but except in those exceptional 

circumstances . . . And they do arise, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 

had cases in this legislature in very recent time where we have 

passed legislation very quickly. And I mentioned one example 

in respect to the tax-free savings account. 

 

I mentioned another example would be legislation that the 

government resisted for quite a while, The Profits of Criminal 

Notoriety Act, resisted actively in question period, Mr. Speaker, 

then reversed itself. The government said, well we can’t pass 

this legislation very quickly. It takes a long time to get 

legislation through the House. That was not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. The opposition and the government worked together 

on this legislation. It was passed fairly quickly. 

 

And the government was wrong both about how quickly it 

could pass, and the government was wrong about whether it 

would be effective or not, Mr. Speaker, because that legislation 

was upheld by the Court of Queen’s Bench. And nobody was 

more surprised, I think, than the Minister of Justice who 

brought in the legislation, that his legislation was upheld as 

constitutional by the courts, Mr. Speaker. But that shows what 

we can do when there’s an urgency. 

 

But when there’s not an urgency, Mr. Speaker, when there’s not 

an urgency, caution should govern us. Caution should govern 

us. And in this case, caution should govern us. 

 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I can’t take my seat without 

expressing — and again I know it won’t be for the first time; it 

probably won’t be for the last time — the skepticism that the 

opposition has about the motivations of the government in 

respect to environmental legislation of which this is a small 

piece. And that skepticism arises because there is so much 

evidence, that for the government, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue 

of issue management, Mr. Speaker. It’s not an issue of 

environmental management. It’s an issue of issue management, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

People care about the environment, and the government has to 

pretend that it does too. And that is why the government said 

they would stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. That’s 

why the government said that it would implement the NDP 

targets for greenhouse gas emissions. But that’s not what the 

government did, Mr. Speaker. But the reason they said those 

things during the election is because they knew that those issues 

mattered to people and that people agreed with the NDP 

government of the day about those issues and how those issues 

should be managed, Mr. Speaker. And then when they become 

the government, when they become the government, they walk 

away from those targets and they break those promises. 

 

And part of issue management, Mr. Speaker, is not only to say 

that we agree with you in the public and with the NDP about 

greenhouse gas. We agree about the issue. We agree about the 

targets, and we will act in the same way. Whether they intended 

to or not, Mr. Speaker, they certainly did not when it came 

down to the crunch. That’s part of it. 

 

And part of it is, as the Premier put it, to “rag the puck” on 

addressing climate change, that’s part of it. So part of it is 

holding yourself out as having a certain position, whether in 

fact you’re going to follow through on that position or not. And 

there’s other examples outside the environment, but I won’t — 

in the case of labour law, Mr. Speaker — but I won’t go to 

those because they would be too far from the Bill. But that’s 

part of it. Part of it is just delay. Let’s just talk about this some 

more and talk about this more, and I assume that’s what the 

Premier meant when he said, rag the puck. 

 

And part of it is, well we’re not going to keep our promises in 

significant areas about the environment, so we’ll do other 

things. And there seems to be some commitment, I don’t know 

how much of a commitment, maybe we’ll see if they follow 

through. We’ve seen abandonment of the Dutch elm disease 

prevention program. We’ve seen abandonment of the West Nile 

prevention program. 

 

Now we have a government that says it’s committed to some 

municipal recycling, but we’ll see, Mr. Speaker, because we’re 

skeptical about that. But if they’re not, it’s just another broken 

promise. And if they are, it’s a way of dealing with the issue 

and saying or doing things on the environment which may be 

worthwhile, but trying to draw attention away from glaring, 

glaring omissions and glaring broken promises. 

 

And this Bill I think is a worthy Bill. And over time, there will 

probably be some amount of natural habitat that will be 

protected by these Crown easements that may not have 

otherwise been protected when it was transferred to private 

owners. But it seems like the legislation of a government that is 

trying to turn a dinghy into a flagship because they sunk their 

flagship. They broke their promise on one of the major 

environmental issues of the day, and they’ve got to raise this 

green banner over something, Mr. Speaker. And the Crown 

conservation easement Bill, as worthy as it may be, is not a 

flagship of environmental policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I said, we have, as an opposition, some obligations in 

respect to this legislation. It appears that the government is 

treating this as an important Bill, and we will be debating it 

throughout the morning, Mr. Speaker. And to allow other 

members to join that debate, having listened very patiently to 

my comments on legal property owning systems, Mr. Speaker 

— and I thank them for their patience in that regard — having 

listened to my explanation about the use of easements and 

protecting native habitat, I think it’s time for me to take my 

seat. And I will move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill 131, The Conservation 

Easements Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 



5074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the Bill 

No. 131 . . . The question before the Assembly was the 

adjournment motion. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make some comments 

on the Act to amend The Conservation Easements Amendment 

Act to make consequential amendments to enforcement. Mr. 

Speaker, a important piece of legislation. The member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin making a few comments on this Act, I rise 

to add my comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the primary purpose of this Bill appears to be the 

enactment of process to create Crown conservation easements. 

And the Act provides for the registration of these easements in 

the land titles registry and lays out a process by which a 

landowner can amend to terminate . . . amend or terminate 

conservation easement, provides for enforcement terms of 

easement, and lays out penalties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions, the minister has risen to 

speak on the . . . Minister of Environment rose to speak on 

various things regarding for example the wildlife habitat Act. In 

there the minister goes on to talk about wildlife habitat. And 

some of the concerns, I think, that we see here are perhaps best 

exemplified in what she had to say in terms of The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in there she raised a number of points in The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, but I think they relate to . . . They can 

be put in as, as discussion pieces on Bill 133. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister went on to talk about changes in that Act 

in terms of . . . where she talked about detailed inventories that 

did not exist at present, were not in existence at present, and in 

fact that is one of the reasons the minister stated that they had to 

do, had to look at this. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, we find those sort of statements when 

the Act, when the lands have been in existence for that amount 

of time, we find those, to say the least, Mr. Speaker, odd 

because all of that work had been done. Much similar to the 

work that has been done on easements and owners’ rights in the 

Crown conservation easements and, Mr. Speaker, the land 

owners involved and the registry and how land owners are to do 

this. 

 

Now to have to go back and to redo some of the good work 

that’s been done, some of the consultation process that were 

carried on, makes absolute no sense in terms of what is 

occurring here. Mr. Speaker, we have, we have already a 

detailed description of which lands are protected as under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 being brought in. The lands are listed now, listed and 

we are clear on where we stand. 

 

The opening of the doors to this opens up many, many 

questions that we need to, that we need to have answered. And I 

guess the issue around here is the track record. We can go on 

here for hours, Mr. Speaker, on the track record of consultation 

that this government has regarding this. The minister also went 

on to speak about the amount of time and in terms of who was 

consulted regarding this. Questions of who should provide 

conservation easements that can be granted for protection of 

species that are not plants or animals, like fungi or lichens. 

 

[09:00] 

 

Now on the surface, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this does seem to be 

positive. Now, however as I was speaking on regarding what 

the minister had been talking about, on who they had consulted, 

we are not . . . The credibility in terms of environmental matters 

and what has occurred on that file does not make us feel all that 

comfortable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For example the 

Environment minister spoke, in The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act, that in fact they had consulted a number of groups 

regarding that Act. There is nothing here which outlines in 

terms of what actually occurred in The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act and why it was necessary to do that. 

 

Again the minister in speaking to this said: 

 

The proposed amendments to this Act strengthen the 

Crown’s ability to maintain and protect these lands. Along 

with granting of easements to specific individuals, 

easements can now be applied to the Crown land. 

 

And she went on to say: 

 

This new type of easement will have enhanced 

enforcement capabilities and will assure that our most 

sensitive land will be protected. This will also ensure that 

the easements remain intact and active, even if the lease 

changes hands or the land is sold. 

 

Now what we get to here, we are opening up the entire 

discussion around lands. Who’s reselling them? What are our 

sensitive lands? Who can they be sold to? And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, then that brings me right to the point that which I was 

earlier talking about and that is in consultation. Now on the one 

Act, the minister went on to say that she has contacted and 

consultations with Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, nature 

conservatory of Canada, Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks 

Unlimited Canada, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 

Now I know we had the ponies Bill, and again from that side of 

the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was statements that in 

fact everybody had been consulted with. And lo and behold, we 

found out that in fact that was not the case, that everyone had 

not been consulted with. And people had, groups came forward 

with amendments. Groups came forward with amendments, and 

that allowed that Bill to pass, but it passed with amendment, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And this is the track record of this government. In terms of 

when it comes to consultations, it is sorely lacking. And we can, 

just to talk briefly, but there is a host, a list, a growing list of 

groups who were not consulted. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the most alarming 

things that occurred was, of course, the passage of some labour 

legislation — Bill 5, Bill 6. Bill 5, the essential services Act; 

Bill 6, The Trade Union Act amendments. And those along with 

Bill 43, the trespassing Act, Mr. Speaker, all those were put 

forward to the United Nations, the ILO, the International 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5075 

Labour Organization body. And now the United Nations has 

clearly come out and sent some very pointed instructions to this 

government saying that they did not consult. 

 

Now for us here in the legislature, we have been talking. We 

have been saying to the members across the way that there is no 

consultation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is no consultation, 

that they lack consultation. And not only is it the groups that are 

coming forward and contacting us and saying that there’s a lack 

of consultation but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now we have groups 

outside of Saskatchewan, in fact outside our country, groups 

that were established to deal with international issues, issues 

that are important to people worldwide that people have come 

to recognize that we want people to be clear of a process that 

has to take place. 

 

And it seems that this government has been unable to do that 

sort of thing. They have, for the very basic fundamentals of a 

democratic approach, to follow processes which would be 

accepted by national bodies, which people feel that perhaps 

comment is not necessary on, a process that when you bring in 

legislation, that a consultation should have been held. 

 

Now it seems simple, but yet we are here spending time having 

to question and perhaps look at Bills. Look at Bills which if we 

could have a clear understanding, have faith that the 

government had done its due diligence of work and consulted 

various groups, we would not be having to do this. 

 

But we have to as opposition, as opposition in a democratic 

forum, it is our duty to consult with these people as well and to 

simply tell them, when we talk to them, we tell them and 

discuss with them the entire issue of has the government . . . 

First question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has the government, have 

you talked to the government about this? And it is amazing on 

any number of issues that we find that the government has not. 

 

So it is disconcerting that you would not have a process that 

would be similar across the piece. And so whatever you are 

bringing in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whatever sort of Bills you are 

bringing in — be they labour Bills, be they environmental Bills, 

be they finance Bills, whatever they would be, municipalities or 

for our resources — and in fact those stakeholders would all 

have been contacted, that this would have been discussed and 

the people of Saskatchewan would feel comforted in the fact 

that their voices are being heard. 

 

It is when you go off, if I may, on a process where it is 

hit-and-miss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a hit-and-miss approach that 

the questions come and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes right to the 

heart of the trust that a government requires to provide the 

necessary governance for our province’s laws. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have not even begun to talk about the 

entire environment file, that we have no targets. We have, I 

guess you could say, perhaps a moving target would be more, a 

better definition of what is occurring. But I think at some point 

a moving target becomes no direction, absolutely nothing being 

done on this environment file. 

 

In fact we have what is a lot of people have been talking about: 

a Premier ragging the puck on addressing, for example, climate 

change. And this goes right down the piece, and unfortunately it 

goes right down to the very important issues in our province 

and that is land, designated protected land, easements — when 

these can be sold, who they can be sold to, how they will be 

used. 

 

And in this case, there is discussions about fines. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the issue that we have to be careful about is 

once you have protected lands or lands that we’ve deemed to be 

protected, if something happens to those lands where the 

difficulties arise, the fine is hardly going to replace protected 

lands and what was protected. If in fact there has been a 

problem created, whatever that might be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

whatever that problem might be, it’s simply too late to then say 

that somehow people should feel comforted because there’s a 

fine. 

 

So we have a minister going on record saying that she has 

contacted and spoke to a lot of people. There is some questions 

here that when these people are contacted, they have no 

knowledge of being contacted. Again I guess phone calls, the 

messages may be misplaced, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re 

allowing some latitude here in terms of that. But on issues as 

important as this, you would think that if there was not a reply, 

people would be contacted again to make sure that their input 

would be there. I’m not certain, you know, as to what to make 

of those sort of comments. We can simply say that the minister 

has stood in her place, said certain things, and we now have to 

put into question what those might be. 

 

Again there is discussions here, words like streamline 

management, to deal with these issues. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of streamlining and what we have seen with this 

government, there are concerns. Concerns that what does 

streamlining actually mean? To streamline, is that taking away 

from protection? Is that taking away from the due diligence that 

is necessary on this file? What in fact is happening here when 

we have no discussions, and we have questions about people 

who were contacted who perhaps raised concerns about their 

input, or whether or not in fact there was actual discussions on 

the topics that are raised? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again as the minister, in one of her replies, 

as I mentioned earlier, to the wildlife habitat protection Bill and 

applicable here in The Conservation Easements Amendment 

Act, the minister at that time said, “Our government believes 

that . . . land users are great stewards of the land and have a 

vested interest . . .” And then again here, talks about fines as she 

does in The Conservation Easements Amendment Act. And 

when it comes down to that in terms of fines that will be, then 

the damage might already be done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Might 

already be done. 

 

So what do we have here? We have an alarming picture 

developing, an alarming picture on this issue. The alarming 

picture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a picture of a government that 

has mismanaged finances, has mismanaged finances in this 

province. Was left with $2.3 billion, and now that is gone. It’s 

gone, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of people are saying, 

where did all the money go? 

 

So as we go around the province and discuss with the groups 

that should have been contacted in terms of dealing with the 

initial Bill 131, people are saying to us, where did all the money 



5076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

go and what has occurred here? And why are we now into this? 

We had everything from, in potash, ministers saying that there 

would be $3 billion predictions. And I think people, as an 

overall, this gives them the sense that they have lost confidence, 

lost confidence in this government to make the decisions. So 

when we talk about, when the minister talks about people being, 

she believes that the people of this province will be good 

stewards of this land, we agree with that. Unfortunately putting 

the plan together is where the problem is. 

 

Putting the plan together that . . . The trust and confidence in 

this government is sliding away, much like the money, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that went down the drain. If you can picture 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a funnel of money, perhaps much 

like water, going down a drain and emptying from a clear 

cylinder. If you could just visualize that, I think that’s what 

people are seeing these days, is all this money just going down 

the drain. And of course it’s quite obvious or quite logical that 

they would ask, well where did it go? What have I gotten for 

my money that we went through? You know we’ve heard this 

story — this is absolute fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker — of how the 

previous Conservative government through the ’80s spent that. 

 

And then we know that out of that, because the Conservative 

Party was so embarrassed, that in fact we’ve got now the 

Saskatchewan Party — different name but obviously the tricks 

are the same, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The tricks are the same, and 

so now we have basically . . . We are, the people of the province 

are seeing a whirlpool of money going down the drain. And it’s 

gone. 

 

[09:15] 

 

And so while the party was on, the Sask Party government had 

friends. But now that the money is gone, the friends are not 

there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re not there. 

 

And so they’re asking us, they’re asking us, where do you . . . 

What happens here? What happens in terms of our plan 

regarding Bill 131? What happens in terms of that? But all they 

see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is money going down the drain. No 

plan. 

 

Exaggeration. I guess exaggeration is the best word that would 

cover when you talk about potash revenues of $3 billion. It is 

amazing that you would do something like that and people 

would go out and say, well my goodness, I mean, you know, 

we’re not the expert in potash. I spoke to my neighbours in 

Saskatoon, and they believed that we were getting $3 billion 

from potash. And I, you know, I said to them, I don’t think that 

the five-year records or the five-year averages in potash are 

that. I don’t believe that this is what . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind the member that 

we’re discussing Bill No. 131, The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, 2009. I would ask that he discuss that Bill. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m so mesmerized by 

that funnel of water going down in the debt, you know all the 

money that was spent, and I just wanted to make sure that those 

points . . . 

 

But the importance of the relationship to that is putting together 

a budget and putting together a Bill requires certain things to be 

done, certain things that . . . They’ve been corrected now all the 

way from the United Nations telling them, here is how you do 

it. 

 

It’s much, it’s much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, much like when we 

have . . . I have two children, and in raising those kids, if I may, 

they do things. And you talk to them and you try and explain to 

them how things should be done. At some point in time you 

have to say, this is the way it should be done. 

 

Now I guess the embarrassing part about this whole thing is that 

it took the United Nations to tell these folks, the government, 

that they were doing things wrong and that they should, whether 

it be the budget, whether it be Bill 131, The Conservation 

Easements Amendment Act that they are doing, here is how you 

should do it. 

 

Now when we think about this . . . I know they laugh and the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

laughs about it because perhaps they don’t respect the United 

Nations. There is a history behind the United Nations in terms 

of setting this up because people the world over believe that we 

should have some international standards for people everywhere 

so that we can not go to the lowest common denominator but 

we can raise ourselves up, raise ourselves up so that 

internationally we can all raise ourselves up to a level. 

 

And here we have Canada being pointed out, a finger being 

pointed at Canada with our past and our stellar record, 

especially in this legislature where we have passed Bills, not 

only Bill 131, the conservation easements, and I’m . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the points I make here is that it goes directly to 

the heart of drafting Bills, but we have to understand when we 

draft the Bills that they are done right and correctly. And so the 

issue becomes when you shake that foundation, when you need 

an outside — a respected, if I may say — outside body to make 

comment on, at the end of the day when the work in this 

Legislative Assembly is done, to make comment to say that you 

should redo this. 

 

This is not only this government, what we have seen in the past, 

not doing their Bills right and having to redo them. This goes 

beyond this. This goes beyond in singling out the Saskatchewan 

legislature in saying, you do not understand the basics of 

drafting legislation. You should redo your legislation. And what 

is the reply, I guess, from the members opposite, other than the, 

I guess, the smiling or laughter, which lends us to think that 

they’re not serious about this issue. What has occurred as a 

result of that ruling is it’s a deafening silence, a deafening 

silence from over there in terms of doing that. 

 

So when you get to the easements Act and you have the 

Environment minister then join this fray and start talking about 

people who she has consulted in terms of that, listing out then 

talking about what great stewards people in this province are. 

But saying that we need fines, fines that, if I could, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, read into the record, of $100,000 plus 100,000 per day 

and corporations can be fined 500,000 or $500,000 per day. 

 

Again as I mentioned before, damage that would occur over the 

opening up of this file to go over the entire land and easements, 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5077 

what is, you know . . . Our question is, what is really happening 

here? If you combine what is happening in The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act where again we are talking about selling land, 

creating new schedules, it’s raised concerns throughout the 

province on this issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, raised concerns 

about why we need a new schedule, why are we going on about 

this new schedule, who has been consulted. 

 

And again here, many people, many people have not been 

consulted. Many people are contacting us and saying, how do 

we make comment on this? They’re asking how do they make 

comment and unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all we can 

tell them is that, you know, the United Nations has looked at 

some of their work and has found it lacking. And one of the 

things they’ve said is they didn’t consult. And we don’t know. 

 

They seem to not listen when we tell them that they should 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan. They turn a deaf ear to 

that sort of thing and feel that governing is all about telling 

people what to do. Now that is what a dictatorship is, when you 

direct or you simply say, this is what will occur. We are beyond 

that, but unfortunately I see that in fact this government quite 

easily slips into that sort of mode when it suits them. And 

maybe that’s a lack, perhaps that’s maybe a lack of, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, maybe a lack of understanding of how you govern a 

province, of how you govern a province. And perhaps it goes 

right to the issue of leadership, right to the issue of leadership, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and leadership which has no patience for 

discussion, for debate, for democracy because they simply think 

that they know what is right. 

 

And on an important file, an important file such as the 

environment where we have in fact no leadership on that file, 

no leadership on that file because we have changing targets, we 

have . . . In fact there is some question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

what that government thinks about climate change in terms of 

looking back at their history and some of the remarks made by 

the Saskatchewan Party on climate change. It does put into 

question in fact whether or not there is a belief that there is an 

issue of climate change in our province, not only in our 

province, our country, but in fact the world. 

 

But I guess they perhaps would smile and laugh again because 

if told by anybody outside . . . And it’s an interesting sort of, an 

interesting sort of personality trait when you do not allow any 

information to come in, any constructive criticism. When you 

shut down all incoming information, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

does lend itself to perhaps a dictatorial approach when it comes 

to governing. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just returning to some direct 

comments on Bill 131. As I started out, the primary purpose, as 

I read the Bill, as I go through the Bill, to . . . This Bill appears 

to be the enactment of a process to create Crown conservation 

easements. And the Act provides for a registration of these 

easements in land titles registry. Again lays out a process by 

which a landowner can amend or terminate a conservation 

easement and provides for enforcement of terms of easement 

and penalties, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As soon as, having said that, I suppose it is well and fine, but 

the minister, in commenting on this, it says that: 

 

Until now, government has been limited to what it can do 

to protect sensitive land. Conservation easements have 

been shown to be an effective tool to protect important 

ecological values on privately owned land. It’s a tool 

that’s been used extensively by conservation organizations 

. . . 

 

Now it doesn’t really talk about how they have been limited, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so immediately after that, the second 

paragraph to the minister saying: 

 

The proposed amendments to this Act strengthen the 

Crown’s ability to maintain and protect these lands. Along 

with granting easements to specific individuals, easements 

can now be applied to Crown land. This new type of 

easement will have enhanced enforcement capabilities and 

will ensure that our most sensitive land will be protected. 

This will also ensure that easements remain intact and 

active . . . 

 

Now again there’s talk here about: 

 

This approach will begin with the comprehensive 

ecological assessment of all surveyed . . . land. This 

assessment, developed in consultation with stakeholders, 

will determine which parcels of land require the protection 

afforded by a conservation easement. [And the minister 

ends by] We are confident that this will help to protect our 

. . . valuable Crown lands for future generations. 

 

Again when we look at that piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 

we . . . I’m a bit confused by those statements because again, as 

the minister said, the government was limited. But nowhere 

after that, in terms of talking to this important Bill and what she 

has had to say, she just talks about striking the ability to 

maintain these protected lands. But I’m not certain in terms of 

the process that in fact it’s happened. 

 

And I would think that the number, sometimes the number, the 

concerns that are raised in spite of the number of people from 

the province that would say that they have not been spoken to 

or that have concerns that say, how do we get in on this 

process? What process do you have within the legislature for 

doing this? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have our education system and the 

Assembly and we oftentimes have students in here who come to 

see how the Assembly works, but it is a lot to ask of people, it is 

a lot to ask of people to know the rules of this Assembly. 

 

Oftentimes the Speaker will talk to the Clerk. Oftentimes we 

will talk to the Clerks to find out what the rules of this 

Assembly are. So to then think that people in this province 

should automatically understand the rules here so that they 

would say to us, how do we get in on this debate . . . there is a 

responsibility on the government to do proper work when it 

comes to Bills so that there are not the discussions, there are not 

the questions for . . . that we would have to get and to spend the 

time to explain of how people should have their questions 

answered. We are simply . . . the opposition is here to do its 

part, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The opposition is here to do its part 

so that we can move legislation forward, to debate it, to ask the 

questions. 



5078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

[09:30] 

 

But there is this entire issue of the public, the general public, 

and asking us as to how possibly they can get their message out, 

how possibly they can, what they have to do, what they have to 

do to get a say. And this is where there is a great failing of this 

government, a great failing of this government to involve, to 

involve the general public of Saskatchewan in the debate, in the 

debate to involve them so that they, that they feel . . . those 

people that are concerned about our sensitive lands. They’re 

concerned about those sorts of things, to involve them. 

 

And perhaps this government would’ve been well served had 

they involved the people of Saskatchewan in doing their last 

two budgets, had they done the consultation around the budget 

— their budget that is in shambles now, in shambles by their 

own, by their own admissions. All the things that they did 

around this, around this issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

billboards, the billboards that they put up, that this government 

put up, the billboards, the ads that they ran . . . how were they 

related? How were they related, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 

budget? Mr. Speaker, it just showed the lack of consultation on 

the budget, the debt that has arisen and then trying to in a 

manner that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will ask the member to return to the 

Bill that’s being debated, Bill No. 131, The Conservation 

Easements Amendment Act, 2009. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the relevance that I’m 

talking about is the consultation, the consultation process. Had 

this government used this consultation process, we would not 

again be in the mess that we’re in financially in this province. 

We would not . . . And it’s directly related to the confidence 

that people need to have and why we’re spending the time here 

on this Bill talking about the budget and the freewheeling 

spending that is going on, the freewheeling spending that is 

going on, and the money being wasted. 

 

And where we should be doing proper consultation work with 

money, we are seeing money going down the drain, down the 

drain. Mr. Deputy Speaker, down the drain in a budget where 

there was no consultation, in a budget that they were . . . wild 

predictions, wild predictions that people here said as soon as 

that budget was out, that this isn’t going to work. It just has no 

chance of working. And we do not hear now . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There’s a few conversations going on 

across the floor. I’m having a hard time hearing the speaker. I 

recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on an important issue 

like this, we again . . . And I sympathize with you in terms of 

trying to have the government members pay attention to an 

important issue like this. Perhaps they don’t like when we talk 

about the budget. Perhaps they don’t like to talk about their 

free-spending ways, freewheeling ways. And perhaps that’s a 

little too close to home for them when we talk about their wild 

predictions in the budget of $3 billion for potash because this 

leads to the kind of things that . . . a crisis of confidence, a crisis 

of confidence occurring with this budget, with this government, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of this woeful budget. 

 

And then the dictatorial approach used to try and ram it down 

the throats of people and thinking they won’t see this. So we 

wake each day now to announcements of cuts — Dutch elm 

disease, West Nile — affecting people directly who . . . My 

neighbours now ask me, well what does this mean about the 

mosquito population in Saskatchewan? What will be . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to return to 

the Bill that is being debated. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the issue as you mentioned, 

the issue of going back to the Bill, this is simply the building 

blocks in putting a Bill together like Bill 131, The Conservation 

Easements Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again what we see here 

and what has become rather the ongoing saga, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are issues. So for example, some of the changes that 

we see directly in the Bill, 4(a) talking about the: 

 

(a) “conservation easement” means a conservation 

easement within the meaning of section 3, 

 

That is the existing provision. Again, the minister here felt that 

that could stay and there was no change. Again creating a new 

4(b), there was, as I said, a new (b), the language now “ . . . is 

created to reflect a new category of easement that may be 

applied to Crown land where Crown land is both initial grantor 

and holder,” where the Crown is both initial grantor and holder. 

Again, on that one, questions, again people have asked in terms 

of that, what is occurring there? 

 

There are some other minor changes. Department change, 4(c), 

“means the department over which the minister presides.” The 

explanation here given by this minister is to reflect the new 

terminology, and I guess on that part, it is on issues like this 

where work is being done and that is appropriate that we would 

do this sort of thing and make the amendments necessary so that 

people would understand. 

 

There’s 4(d). Again, the same thing. 5 is a conservation 

easement. “The heading before section 3 is struck out and 

replace for the organization of the act.” 6, there is no . . . again, 

“Addition for organization . . .” 7 here we talk about what the 

existing provision is and, if I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

existing provision: 

 

4 A conservation easement may be granted for any of the 

following purposes: 

 

(a) the protection, enhancement or restoration of natural 

ecosystems, wildlife habitat or habitat of rare, 

threatened or endangered plant or animal species. 

 

Again, what is allowed in terms of explanation is “This will 

allow conservation easements to be granted for the protection of 

threatened or endangered species that are not plant or animal 

species, for example fungi and lichens.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

again an interesting point and one that people are asked and 

perhaps are saying, what about anything else that we haven’t 

looked at? If we’re going to redo this Bill or if we’re going to 

make changes, perhaps we should be looking at all the changes 

that are possible. And that again goes to the heart of 

consultation and why I have spent the time on talking about this 

government’s record about consultation. 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5079 

Now in 5(3) we have: 

 

The Crown, the Crown in right of Canada or a 

municipality may grant conservation easement to: 

(a) itself; or 

(b) anyone eligible to be a holder. 

 

Again here the explanation is “The Crown no longer requires 

the power to apply a conservation easement to its own land, as 

it will have the new power to create . . . conservation easements 

with enhanced compliance provisions, ” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of . . . I know you 

would probably like to hear all the changes read into the record, 

but I don’t think that that is necessary. There is committee work 

for that, and I will leave that for that time. 

 

The thing I think overall that we have to be concerned about 

here is, has the necessary consultation been done? Are the 

changes . . . Will we have buy-in from the people who we need 

to have buy-in, whether that not only be the people who use this 

but the people who enforce this, in fact all levels of 

government, all people that are concerned about this? 

 

One of the new . . . 11.55 is a new provision: 

 

The minister may take action to repair or prevent damage 

when it is considered necessary. Parallel provisions grant 

the minister similar powers under other provincial 

legislation . . . The Natural Resources Act . . . This section 

is consistent with the section 62 . . . that is being proposed 

[again] in the fall . . . 

 

That’s the explanation of a new provision that we have. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in looking at this Bill and the work that 

still needs to be done, I would just like to return to the concerns, 

some of the concerns to clarify when the Environment minister 

speaks about this entire area of land conservation. And perhaps 

what has set off alarm bells for me and for many people in the 

province is the approach that the entire issue of protected land 

to be looked at again. And you twin that with the lack of 

confidence in terms of and the track record in terms of this 

government of approaching changes and particularly this sort of 

sensitive area, and you look at their track record in the 

environment, what we see . . . which can be only deemed as 

ragging the puck by the Premier on this issue, the changing 

targets, the minister never being clear, changing daily almost 

every time she has the opportunity to stand, changing what is 

happening on the environment file. And now she moves into 

protection of wildlife habitat or easements, and again this is of 

great, great concern because we have had numerous, numerous 

people outside — not only locally here — comment on these 

issues but also international bodies. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and just on that, just on that, and I did 

speak to the issue of the ponies and how the lack of consultation 

that had occurred there. But I would just like to, in terms of 

what the minister had to say in another Act about how it relates 

to this one, where the minister says, until now . . . and speaking 

to The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) 

Amendment Act, 2009, the minister had this to say. She said: 

 

Until now, [the] government had no detailed values 

inventory of protected land in our province. We didn’t 

know why a piece of land was currently being protected 

and if that land still had the characteristics that originally 

qualified it for protection. Much of the current protected 

land is used for various activities such as grazing. We will 

now be able to identify which land has changed and is 

suitable for limited activity. We’ll also be able to tell 

which land is the most sensitive and needs stronger 

protection. 

 

This statement, I simply wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this 

statement, what . . . For example, the Sand Hills in the 

southwest part of our province, the Sand Hills, was the minister 

talking about the Sand Hills when she said here, there’s no 

detailed values of inventory of protected land? I’m not certain 

what the minister is saying here, and nor are any number of 

people sure what is being said here. And that is the argument 

used to open up sale of land. To open up sale of land, the 

argument is used to talk about The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act and talking about people, the use of land. 

 

[09:45] 

 

And here we have is . . . What is the intent of, or what is the 

minister saying here? That there are no detailed inventories. Are 

all the now lands that are covered or that are protected, is she 

saying that there is no detailed inventory of that? Is she saying 

that people in Saskatchewan do not have a record that the Sand 

Hills are protected, do not have record of the Sand Hills being 

protected? 

 

I’m quite puzzled by the argument that she’s using here. And 

goes on to say that we will now be able to identify which land 

has changed and is suitable for limited activity. If that is the 

approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that now, that they want to 

move into, into protected lands, what is . . . 

 

The government should be clear. Most times they have by 

stealth put things in. We have in this Chamber talked about it 

being dictatorial. But the stealth in terms of doing that is a 

disruption and is a disruption, and creates a lack of faith, a lack 

of faith in the legislators pushing forward this very important 

kind of legislation because people would look at and say, what 

is their position? Can we trust them on dealing with protected 

lands? 

 

And the minister, in saying that there is no inventory of lands, it 

is quite amazing that a statement like that can be made. It’s 

unclear what the intent is. It’s unclear whether, whether that she 

even knows that are protected lands, whether she even knows 

that there are protected lands. So is it any wonder, is it any 

wonder then when she says that she has a contact, if I could 

read into the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it any wonder that 

this has been developed in consultation with a wide variety of 

stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks 

Unlimited Canada, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities? 

 

Is it any wonder then, when these people look and are contacted 

— when they actually find out that there are these changes 

being planned — and they say, well we’re not sure. We’re not 



5080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They say, we’re not sure as to what 

is occurring here or what the minister meant, that there is no 

detailed inventory of protected lands in the province. What was 

she talking about? Was it something similar that tomorrow this 

will change, much like the targets on emissions? Will this 

change, as the change is done on climate change, whether we 

are uncertain whether the government believes or does not 

believe in climate change, whether the people are talking about 

the Premier just simply ragging the puck on this whole issue? 

 

The entire environment file is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a mess. A 

mess because there’s no direction. There’s no leadership on this 

file. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know you’ve been concerned. But 

you can now probably see the relationship between this and the 

budget — the mismanagement, the lack of direction on the 

budget. And if you look at all the . . . And it’s become a 

hallmark of this government, a hallmark of the lack of . . . And 

it starts with consultation. And when you lack consultation — 

the hallmark has become that lack of consultation — but it leads 

you into all the other problems. It leads you to a distrust. It 

leads you to problems of confidence because people have 

confidence. 

 

So when you have a government such as this that takes office 

and has $2.3 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $2.3 billion, and then 

the money goes down the drain in their freewheeling, free 

spending, and what do the people see this as? Because the 

people ask, where did the money go? Where did the money go, 

they say, and what did we get for this, their freewheeling, free 

spending days? 

 

And now there’s some people obviously in the province that are 

very happy, and those are the friends of these freewheeling 

spenders. They’re probably happy. But as a result of that, as a 

result of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also then start selling 

off, stripping the Crowns. They strip the Crowns for money. 

They look around for anywhere the money . . . Because they 

want the party to continue, the party that they were having with 

spending the money. 

 

hey want that party to continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

want the party to continue because they want to have all these 

friends. They want to have friends around them because they 

can say that, the people of Saskatchewan are with us on this 

thing. And so they have . . . There’s a lack of respect, a lack of 

respect for serious issues because they spend money. They get 

left with $2.3 billion and then now . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to return to 

the Bill that’s being discussed on the order paper, Bill No. 131. 

I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the party that I was 

talking about, the party, sometimes if we look at that, this party 

can continue. We had a party like that through the 1980s, and 

it’s the after-effects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the after-effects 

that everyone has to live with. There were after-effects. There 

were people not wanting to be called a Conservative in the 

province of Saskatchewan. That’s the after-effects of a party, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But they choose to not acknowledge that. They choose to not 

acknowledge their history. They think that, in fact, what we can 

do is do a name change and history will not follow us. But I 

think in terms of a history, you have to have a history, a proud 

tradition of where you have to know where you come from, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. You have to know where you come from. 

We’ve heard it said on a number of occasions: you have to 

know where you come from to know where you’re going and to 

plan directions. 

 

This is about leadership. This is about vision. And you have to 

have that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to govern. And that is 

totally lacking. And so you would find out when you come and 

you deal with the budget and you have people make 

pronouncements that there will be $3 billion in potash, we’re on 

a roll. And they have to understand that what in fact has 

occurred with this is that the lack of leadership, the lack of 

vision is what gets you into trouble. And where you get into 

trouble with that is that you say, we have no past. 

 

We say out to the people of Saskatchewan, we have no past, 

therefore you cannot blame us for anything. But at the same 

time, Mr. Speaker, you go and you say, well the NDP were in 

power for 16 years and on any number of issues — on the 

health care file or other files, environment — you say, here is 

what the NDP did. The problem with that thing is much like 

someone who perhaps is somewhat immature making grandiose 

statements about, you know, well this is the way it should be, 

and again not having any respect for the people who have 

struggled and who have built, and perhaps better understand the 

functioning of government, the way things would work. 

 

And again there is the history in this province, just a concrete 

example of this history in the province of the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] under Tommy 

Douglas bringing in The Trade Union Act, a piece of legislation 

that set, that set many high standards that are honoured 

throughout this country, that are honoured not only in this 

province, this country, but the world. 

 

And never through that history in our proud traditions of trying 

to give people to bring . . . Because, Mr. Speaker, the issue here 

is consultation, the issue of bringing people together. The issue 

of respecting, respecting not only the citizens when it comes to 

dealing with Bills such as Bill 131, but respecting the traditions, 

respecting that people will have input, that they have something 

to say, that people have something to say about any Act that we 

bring in here. 

 

So those proud traditions as when The Trade Union Act was 

brought in, of bringing people together, bringing the chamber of 

commerce together, bringing the trade unions together, bringing 

the workers’ organizations together of all stripes, and sitting 

down with them and building . . . and not being afraid, not 

being afraid of doing that. And that is directly . . . Because 

when you are afraid, you have no respect. Because you’re 

afraid, you do not know what you think and that goes strictly to 

the . . . because you right off, you say, I have no history; I have 

no history. So if you have no history, you have no knowledge. 

You have no knowledge because you have no history, because 

you have not studied this area, and so what do you bring? 

 

What do you bring? What do you bring to the table here? What 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5081 

do you bring to the table? What do you bring to the table? I see 

that we’ve probably hit a bit of a nerve over there, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But experience, we’re not afraid. You’re not afraid that you’re 

not afraid to acknowledge that people in this province can bring 

something to the table, bring something important to the table, 

and have a debate. And if you are afraid of debate, you’re afraid 

of democracy, Mr. Speaker. You’re afraid of democracy and 

that is what, that is what is happening here. That is what is 

happening here in this legislature. 

 

That is what is happening here and that is what is the trademark. 

That is the trademark of this, of this government, because 

they’re afraid and so people are seeing that, as they’re seeing 

there’s a lack of respect. And when you have a lack of respect, 

you have a communication breakdown and that communication 

breakdown leads to bad legislation. It leads to bad legislation. 

 

And over all the years and all the changes and all the 

governments that have been involved in this province, it is this 

government with that sort of approach that has now, that has 

now been pointed to by the United Nations and have said, you 

have done legislation wrong. How embarrassing. How 

embarrassing with that sort of history that we have in the 

province, that’s lacking over there, that we now have been 

pointed out to the world — to the world. And it had been 

acknowledged that we do not know how to bring in legislation, 

how to bring in legislation. 

 

And so here we are, Mr. Speaker, with this sort of 

embarrassment and acknowledgment from a body, an 

international body, on to this. And I would just go over that. If 

you can say that we are new and you somehow want to spin that 

to people, then you are saying you have no history; you have no 

knowledge in this area. And that is, that’s true. And it leads to 

lack of respect. 

 

And people now see that lack of respect. Because they come 

and say, we were not consulted. We were not consulted. And 

they saw that immediately. And that’s why they made 

application as a first step before they would go on to now 

embroil us in a Supreme Court challenge. Because that was now 

laid out in the previous cases in terms of that, that it said it was 

important to go. 

 

Our Supreme Court of Canada as well has made comment on 

this issue, and said that it is important what the United Nations 

has to say in these issues and you should listen to that. But I, 

again, I hear . . . And it’s not uncommon to hear laughter on 

these issues from the other side, Mr. Speaker, because that is 

their approach. 

 

But that’s fine. We continue to make our points, whether that be 

on how they deal with the budget, or other legislation, or on this 

particular piece of legislation and the entire issue of protected 

lands. Because they fail on all accounts to say, as we did in the 

pony Bill that we have, that we, as a private member’s Bill, that 

surely with that, you would have talked to people. 

 

Private member’s Bills are Bills that are brought forward 

because they are something that parties could agree on, 

especially from the government benches. Especially from the 

government benches to then have to make an amendment — a 

last-minute amendment because of not having consulted with a 

very important group, and that group is in here and also in the 

wildlife habitat protection and probably should have been 

consulted about easements — the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations or any of the groups that are in there, that 

consultation. 

 

[10:00] 

 

What have we done with the duty to consult? I mean the duty to 

consult is a . . . that’s why the courts have now recognized this. 

The international body, the United Nations recognize this as 

important. But what has this government done towards that? 

What have they done with this very important issue? On any 

number of files, that is the one thing that comes forward: there 

is no consultation. 

 

And then people ask, people ask, well how do we get our views 

heard? How do we get our views heard in this legislature? And 

at times before we’ve heard . . . It’s in the record. Well the thing 

that where we last heard the people was the election. It was 

2007, and the people spoke loudly. And that’s all we need. And 

that carried, I guess that carried, that carried that government 

for a while. It carried them. 

 

And then the money that the former NDP government had put 

together and put away for a rainy day, that carried that 

government. But it carried them until they spent it, until they 

spent that money. And now most people, when we say, they’ve 

had all this money, people say, where did all the money go? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member to actually 

confine his comments to Bill 131, The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, my point in that, perhaps 

going and building the case for the consultation is that, at the 

very heart, it’s distressing that people would contact us or 

distressing that when we would contact people, that what would 

be occurring here is that it would be saying, no we did not hear 

about this. No, we did not hear about these changes. 

 

But we would say to them, but this directly would impact on 

you. Do you know about the issues surrounding this? Do you 

know about what the purpose of this Bill was? Do you know 

that the purpose is to create Crown conservation easements and 

how they would be dealt with? Do you know about the fines? 

Do you know that the process by which you, as a landowner, 

can amend or terminate the conservation easement and what the 

penalties will be? Do you think that the issue of penalties, does 

that go to the heart of . . . Do you understand that? 

 

And people over time and again say that that’s not . . . They 

don’t understand that. They don’t understand that. 

 

So it is not, it is up . . . There’s a responsibility that goes beyond 

simply introducing Bills. There’s a responsibility to delve in 

further and to say we want, we want these people at the table. 

Much as I was making my comments before — when you are 

afraid to ask people to come to the table, when you are afraid to 

ask people to participate, you are going to find that you run into 



5082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

any number of problems. Any number of problems that you 

might run into, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The kinds of problems that you can run into are that people will 

perceive that as a lack of respect. People will perceive that as a 

lack of involvement. People will perceive that they had 

something to offer and that perhaps they were not heard. People 

will see that if they had listened to me, if they had listened to 

me, they might have made the appropriate changes. People will 

see that in fact if somebody has a proposal, maybe a lot of times 

all that they require is to be able to express those concerns and 

then have that clarified. Perhaps they’re only questions that they 

have of these Bills. 

 

And when you lack the leadership, when there is no vision, as 

we see, what starts happening is people start losing confidence. 

People start wondering what the government is doing. And 

what you might have is an unhealthy, an unhealthy, not only 

situation, but process that develops in and around an issue as 

important as protected lands. 

 

This is huge for our province when you start talking about 

protected lands. All of us, Mr. Speaker, whether we are, 

whether that is, whether we daily deal with this or whether we, 

whether we only deal with it when the issue is raised, this is an 

important issue for all of us. An important issue for all of us in a 

sense that when you talk about protected lands, I would dare 

say there probably isn’t a single person in this province that has, 

that would not have some comment on lands or some comment 

on things that they think is important in this area. 

 

And so the sensitivity that the government should bring to this 

issue, the sensitivity of allowing the people of this province to 

participate in this sort of debate should be paramount. This is a 

responsibility that the government should take very seriously, 

very seriously, to show people in this province that they are 

important. And particularly here, I think, there’s no need to go 

on to say how important the issue is, but we need to say that . . . 

We need the people to have a say in this. They need to have a 

say, Mr. Speaker, to have a say on this very important Bill 

because in each parts, we represent all parts, all of us here 

represent every part of this province. And as I said, I dare say 

that in every part of this province there will be people that will 

want to have something to say on this issue. 

 

So the government, it is the responsibility of the government. 

But this is, again as we have said over and over, a place where 

there’s a breakdown, a breakdown which is at the heart of the 

leadership issue, Mr. Speaker. An issue as we have in the 

running of the finances of this province, an issue when we have 

the Premier who bankrupts a couple of companies, that that 

becomes part of his resumé. A Premier that does not have . . . 

that there is no history because they want to decline that history. 

A Premier who ran for the Conservatives and then says that 

now that is not his past. Does not talk about that past, and 

somehow wants to obliterate the history of that or that past, 

when it is quite clear that not only did he work for that 

government, but he wanted to run and continue.  

 

And unfortunately as we saw in a videotape, the thinking of that 

individual who is now the Premier of this province, in terms of 

what some of his thoughts were on residents of this province in 

that video. That unfortunately is a history that they cannot deny, 

that the Premier cannot deny being a part of the government, as 

the Premier himself has said, who lost their way. And we hear 

that now, that in fact this could be the same thing used now, on 

whether it be this Bill or other Bills, that in fact this government 

. . . but it is the Premier who has lost his way. 

 

So we had an individual who was at that time wanting to run for 

the Conservatives and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m finding the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview’s comments are getting fairly 

broad-ranging. And I’d ask the member to address the issues 

surrounding Bill 131, The Conservation Easements Amendment 

Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — The issue goes directly to the Premier’s 

judgment. And the issue as well is that we need the leadership 

on all the files and particularly the Bills. And an issue as 

sensitive as designation of lands. and the issue of respect, Mr. 

Speaker, the issue of respect, the whole consultation of how we 

feel, how we respect and are not afraid of comments from 

residents of this province. 

 

And so it is disheartening to many people when we see the type 

of comments that were in the video regarding the residents of 

this province, people of Ukrainian heritage, when people see 

that and wonder what the thinking was. And that is the history 

that we have to look at and the Premier has to look at and say, 

this is my history of what I . . . And the shocking part about that 

is that throughout, I imagine there’s been many things have said 

by many people, but the audacity to put that on videotape is 

truly mind-boggling, Mr. Speaker. Truly mind-boggling. 

 

And so people who can say that we want to change our name 

and now we’re somehow different and then we don’t have any 

past there, you can see why they are getting into the difficulties 

that they are. But these are things that people do not forget. So 

when it comes to a Bill and they talk about where they 

consulted people, and people phone in and say, well we don’t 

recall that, we can give them the ability to say, we don’t recall 

that. Perhaps there was a misplaced call, perhaps people were 

not consulted. 

 

But this is seriously alarming. It goes to vision. It goes to the 

Premier’s judgment of the individuals. It goes to judgment in 

terms of when you deal with issues like the budget, and then it 

goes in terms of judgment when you bring that approach 

directly into the file of this importance as designated lands, 

designated lands that are important. 

 

And we talk about the . . . Obviously the list is fairly inclusive. I 

think in terms of the list, as I’ve read it — the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservatory of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited Canada, Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. Now these 

are the people that are being contacted. 

 

You know, the only questions that I would have, Mr. Speaker, 

on an issue like that is, you know, are there any other groups? 

But let’s not forget we can deal with groups of people, but 

there’s also individuals out there that want to make comment on 

this. There’s also all the individuals who, as we look at the Bill 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5083 

131, the owners, in terms of the present owners who are now 

owners and who want to find out how they can amend or 

terminate conservation easement. And they would also want to 

know about their fines. 

 

What has been the process by which the government has 

contacted those? We understand the minister has said that she 

has contacted these groups. And perhaps it’s unfortunate that 

some of these groups have questions and say that they have not 

been contacted. But the hallmark, the very hallmark of this . . . 

well what this, I guess basically what this government’s 

becoming known for is the lack of consultation.  

 

And the lack of consultation, but you wonder, but you have to 

wonder if perhaps there’s a lack of respect and then that’s why 

the people are not being consulted because there’s a lack of 

respect. And perhaps they don’t want to hear diverse views 

because those would in some way that go directly against, 

against what they believe and what they say. And they do not 

want to hear any opposing views on these issues or any views 

that would be contrary to what their beliefs are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we have further statements being made, 

and not only being made, but in fact in my city, Mr. Speaker, 

almost an onslaught, an absolute onslaught that people question, 

where do you get that sort of money in terms of the billboards 

that blared back in two different times about the budget, the 

deficit being reduced? That message, how quickly, it’s amazing 

after doing that, how quickly that has dissipated, and that the 

real facts are coming out that all sorts of people have 

commented, whether that be financial institutions or 

newspapers, about that there is a deficit here. No matter what 

you say about this, about the budget, there is a deficit. So the 

billboards that the government put out, the money that they . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is well aware of 

the rules of debate, and the rules require that members address 

the issue under debate currently and the issue of conservation 

easements amendment, Bill 131, has nothing to do . . . The 

budget debate is a debate for another day and another time, and 

there’ll be ample time for that debate. Recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again the purpose when we 

deal with the easements or whether we deal with this whole 

issue of designated lands . . . does deal with money, does deal 

with money. It does deal because if you’re talking about selling 

lands, if you’re talking about fines, so if you’re talking about 

that, you’re either talking about, perhaps we need some money. 

We need money and we’re going to deal with designated lands 

because we’ve mismanaged the finances. And we’re going to 

go around everywhere and we’re going to try and find some 

more money, be that the Crowns, or we’re going to change, 

change the very structure of this province. 

 

Because, not because . . . At times I guess some people might 

argue a government wants a different approach, but there’s a 

lack of leadership and there’s a lack of understanding. And 

people see that understanding and where are we going? And so 

they not only ask, and this is, this is at the heart of . . . Is it 

because that they have mismanaged the finances so badly? Is it 

because that they had to get out so quickly and say that there is, 

that there is no deficit, when there is. Is that why they are wont 

to sell off protected lands to balance the budget so that they can 

say that the billboards that they put up were right? 

 

But we know that soon after those billboards were up, that they 

were outdated. And in fact when you look at the forecast, that 

we will have perhaps a larger budget than when these folks 

were in last time. But I know they want to say that they’re 

different and that that’s not their past, but perhaps they’re 

worse. They’re worse than the 1980s. 

 

The issue is, is that it takes a number of years before these 

things play out and roll out and then the true cutting has to start. 

It takes a number of years. And so the raising of the red flags 

now, Mr. Speaker, this becomes the new history. So the new 

history in the future will be, when the budgets were brought out 

. . . and do you remember the billboards that said our deficit 

was going down and what in fact occurred. 

 

But I think the people of Saskatchewan and this province are 

smarter. They’re not fooled by the name change. They’re not 

fooled by the name change. They’re not fooled by the trickery 

around the budget. And they see that when you start talking 

about protected lands, that it’s an important issue. And they are 

concerned because, at the very heart, if you cannot manage the 

finances of the province, can you manage the protected lands of 

the province? 

 

And the issue for us when we look at the Bill and we go over 

and we talk about it, whether it be, Mr. Speaker, whether we’re 

debating it or whether we talk about it in committee, is the 

questions that need to be asked, because not only on this side 

. . . We take our role seriously as an opposition. We take that 

role seriously. We take that role seriously that our role is to ask 

the questions. Our role is to go to the people that we represent 

in this province — and that is everybody, even those ridings 

that we don’t . . . because there are people everywhere that are 

concerned about protected lands, and to talk to them as well and 

to ask the hard questions in committee or in debate. 

 

But also important in that, we have to talk about . . . Mr. 

Speaker, what we have to talk about is a trust factor. We have to 

talk about whether there’s confidence in the rollout of programs 

because that is at the heart as well, Mr. Speaker. When you 

have a Bill that is put out or that is rolled out, we have to look 

immediately, as you do in all cases . . . And I know they, in 

denial about this, that in fact when you look at a government 

that you don’t have to look at its past or what they have done. 

They think they can change that. 

 

But what you do, Mr. Speaker, is when . . . This government 

that has a history of no consultation — it’s become a hallmark 

now of theirs, of the lack of consultation — that impacts on 

how you discuss Bills. It impacts on how you discuss Bills 

because, over and over again, you’ve either had the redos on the 

Bills or pulling Bills back because they have not done it right. If 

you have had to have comments by international bodies on Bills 

that they’ve done, if you have had a lack of faith over time 

about their ability to manage the finances, if you have had all of 

that, you bring that in because that is history and that is how 

you make . . . that is where you gain knowledge. Where you 

gain knowledge is from your history, and then you apply that 



5084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

knowledge into Bills into the future. 

 

So when we talk about Bills, that has to be part of it. That has to 

be part of it. Every person that brings what they know, whether 

it be people throughout this province that bring their knowledge 

on protected lands, they come with all levels of knowledge. 

They come with either direct knowledge of that because they, in 

fact, are involved in this Bill where they have conservation 

easements and they want to know how to do that. And they can 

tell you about that. Or there are people who have studied in this 

issue and have done reading, not only Saskatchewan, across the 

country. And they can bring something to the table on this. And 

we all have to respect that because the more we do that, there is 

a trend in history that the more you do that, the more there is 

involvement, participatory democracy, then the better, the 

better, the better product you get. And that is why it is 

sometimes frustrating. It’s frustrating sometimes to work 

through this. 

 

And you have, as we have in the extended hours debate, you 

have a lack of maturity on that other side, a lack of 

understanding of this, of the democratic process. And the 

frustration level is achieved more quickly, and we pull the 

trigger and we go into the extended debate and we say that the 

other side is, the opposition is simply trying to not allow us to 

pass the Bills. But in fact, what is in fact occurring is, it is not 

that the other side is not allowing to pass the Bills. What is 

happening is democracy, Mr. Speaker. It’s democracy. 

 

And it’s a fine line. It’s a very fine line between when you pull 

the trigger and say that this is obstruction and this is democracy 

because patience, Mr. Speaker, patience is a virtue. And that is 

absolutely true that patience is a virtue because there are 

difficulties that . . . whether we encounter in our personal lives 

or difficulties that we encounter here, we all struggle as to how 

we’re going to get through them. Some we pass through 

quickly. Some we allow to just . . . we ignore them and they 

pass. But some we have to struggle with. But that makes us who 

we are, Mr. Speaker. That makes us who we are. And those 

kinds of lessons in life, we bring here. Or supposedly we should 

bring here. 

 

But when we think, Mr. Speaker, when we think this is a game 

and we do not take things seriously, that is when we go into the 

ditch. We go into the ditch because what takes over after that is 

a pointing of fingers and, I would say, perhaps a certain type of 

paranoia that would say that this is what really is the intent of 

that when it is true debate. 

 

And so a fine line, democracy is a fine line. And it’s a fragile 

thing. It is a fragile thing. And it’s always easier, it’s always 

easier to — if I may grab the bull by the horns as we would say 

— and just go out and do this. Now at times that works. At 

times that works. But when we have time, when we have ample 

time, when we have time when there is not a crisis that has 

developed, to say that we will not pass our Bills, that it’s 

absolutely clear that becomes something different. When we 

use words like obstruction, when we create, when we 

manufacture crisis, that is when we get into trouble because 

that’s when democracy, that fragile thing that we strive for, gets 

damaged. And we say that in fact it’s obstruction. The other 

side says that they’re doing their work. And here we have and 

we create a crisis. 

But the issue, the issue here is, we bring that — Mr. Speaker, 

what I wanted to say is — we bring our history and the 

knowledge we gain. We bring that, what we’ve learned in our 

life is another way of saying the same thing perhaps in more 

common language. We bring all of that to bear upon every issue 

that we face. And we’re called upon to do that and to do that in 

a serious manner. And when we do that, the product will be a 

solid product. We should always strive for that. 

 

And of course when we don’t do that, we see some of the 

failings. We see those failings, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

legislation. We see those failings when we are called upon, 

when this government is called upon — that they did not do the 

proper consultation, Mr. Speaker, that they did not do proper 

consultation on any number of Bills, that they should have to 

redo those Bills, that they should have to start all over again. 

Something as basic as what we’ve been talking about, Mr. 

Speaker, as basic as the lessons learned in life, lessons learned 

in life, and that we are not going to be bringing those at all to 

bear upon the problems that we face. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is important. It is important because people, 

when we do these Bills — and we have to — the amount of 

concern that when we are told that, whether it be the pony Bill, 

as I have said before, or any number of Bills where people have 

said that they consulted, to then at the last minute have a group 

say that we did not consult them and we would think that this 

should be in. And then the government saying, well okay, that’s 

right. We will change that and do an amendment and do that. 

 

So I mean it’s, I guess, at the end of the day, at the end of the 

day we have a product that was acceptable to the parties that 

needed to gain that acceptance. But the process — and process 

is what we are all about here. Democracy is process. Process is 

what we are about and democracy is process and that seems to 

be lacking. There seems to be a lack of understanding about that 

and it is like the amber and then we talk about the sort of type 

of alerts that we should be put into whether there are cases 

where different alerts for whether cases of missing persons we 

have. 

 

But this government should look at this as alerts that they are 

. . . perhaps have hit red alert when they pass a Bill and the 

United Nations says you did not consult. We have been saying 

that over and over again here that there’s a lack of consultation. 

We point to any number of Bills that people were not consulted. 

Again, not even to go into the more controversial Bills, but the 

pony Bill where there is a lack of consultation. And that’s an 

indication, should be an indication to this government about 

how deep this runs, and they in fact gloss over it and move 

forward. And then they wonder why, when it comes to the Bills, 

that we raise these issues. 

 

We raise these issues that are so basic, and they put that off as 

obstruction or that in some way, why are we still talking about 

that because it is not only us that has recognized this now. It is 

the United Nations that has recognized this now. Now I’m not 

sure where they go with this because some of these Acts, as 

people move through, a second sober thought moves through, 

that some of these Acts like the labour Bills have been in force. 

They have been in force and have been in place and people have 

been trying to operate under them. 

 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5085 

But all those things that people said under those Bills, 

particularly the essential services Act, people are unable to 

achieve a collective agreement. They’re unable to achieve a 

collective agreement because of, I guess, the best word is 

ill-conceived drafting, ill-conceived Bill, but the lack of debate, 

the lack of consultation. 

 

And what are the words that we hear from many women, many 

women across this province, many women who dedicate their 

lives to the health care system because they’re part a health care 

team? What do they see? The biggest word I hear out there is 

disrespect, a disrespect on a number of levels, disrespect on a 

level that of that are we part of the health care team? Are some 

members of that health care team being treated differently . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member if the 

member could at least tie his comments to the legislation that 

we’re currently debating, Bill No. 131. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, before I get into the more 

clause-by-clause of the Bill, I felt that it was necessary to make 

a . . . to talk about the foundation of . . . which again as I said, 

it’s difficult to simply talk about the Bill when some of the 

arguments are based on the lack of ability of this government to 

draft the Bills and to present the Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the Bill, some of the things that are in 

the Bill provide just direction, and I would think that there is no 

concern about that. 

 

I think in terms of if there is anything to be said in terms of 

offences, and again here we have to look at whether the 

offences under 11.6(1) . . . if I could just get the explanatory 

notes that we were presented with. Mr. Speaker, the offences, 

under the offences, division 5, offences and penalties, talk 

about: 

 

No person shall: 

 

(a) alter lands that are the subject of a Crown 

conservation easement unless the alteration is permitted 

pursuant to the regulations or is otherwise authorized in 

writing by the minister; 

 

(b) fail to comply with a Crown conservation easement; 

 

(c) make a false statement or provide false information 

to the minister, an officer, the ministry or any person 

acting on behalf of the minister; 

 

(d) omit to state a fact that is required to be stated or that 

is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light 

of the circumstances in which it was made to the 

minister, an officer, the ministry or any person acting on 

behalf of the minister; 

 

(e) fail to comply with an order of the minister or an 

officer issued pursuant to this Act; or 

 

(f) fail to comply with any provision of this Act or the 

regulations. 

No. 2 under the offences and penalties is: 

 

Subject to subsection (3), every person who contravenes a 

provision of this Act or the regulations is guilty of an 

offence and liable on summary conviction: 

 

(a) in the case of an individual: 

 

(i) to a fine of not more than $100,000; and 

 

(ii) to a further fine of not more than $100,000 for 

each day or part of a day during which the offence 

continues; and 

 

(b) in the case of a corporation: 

 

(i) to a fine of not more than $500,000; and 

 

(ii) to a further fine of not more than $500,000 for 

each day or part of a day during which the offence 

continues [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

(3) If a person is convicted of an offence pursuant to this 

Act or the regulations and the court is satisfied that as a 

result of the commission of the offence monetary benefits 

accrued to the offender, the court may order the offender 

to pay, in addition to a fine pursuant to subsection (2), a 

fine in an amount equal to the court’s estimation of the 

amount of those monetary benefits. 

 

(4) Every director, officer or agent of a corporation who 

directed, authorized, assented to, acquiesced in or 

participated in an act or omission of the corporation that 

would constitute an offence by the corporation is guilty of 

that offence and is liable on summary conviction to the 

penalties provided for that offence whether or not the 

corporation has been prosecuted or convicted. 

 

Now: 

 

“Additional order from convicting court 

11.61 In addition to or instead of any penalty imposed 

pursuant to this Act, the convicting court, having regard 

to the nature of the offence and the circumstances 

surrounding its commission, may make an order doing 

one or more of the following: 

 

Then it goes on to talk about, Mr. Speaker: 

 

(a) prohibiting the convicted person from doing any act or 

engaging in any activity that, in the opinion of the court, 

may result in the continuation of the offence; 

 

(b) directing the convicted person to repair any damage to 

any lands that resulted from the commission of the offence 

in a manner and within the period specified . . . [and] 

 

(c) requiring the convicted person to take steps [or] to 

prevent any damage to any lands that may result from the 

commission of the offence in a manner and within the 

period specified by the order; [and] 

 

(d) directing the convicted person to pay to the minister an 



5086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

amount of money as compensation, in whole or in part, for 

the cost of any corrective action taken by or at the 

direction of the minister as a result of the commission of 

the offence; [and] 

 

(e) requiring the convicted person to do any other thing 

that, in the opinion of the court, is necessary in the 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is quite clear what should occur. It’s quite clear 

that what should occur is that people who have easements 

should be contacted. And my question I guess would be, have 

these individuals been contacted? We have no comments from 

the minister in the remarks as to whether they have been 

contacted or where, what their intention, what their thoughts are 

on this very important issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue I think of why it is important to speak to 

people . . . And I spoke briefly on the issue of the health care 

providers and the number of women in our health care system 

providing service to the residents, and I don’t know if they were 

contacted . . . Well they obviously were not contacted in terms 

of when the Premier said before the election that he would not 

bring essential services and then broke that promise. Much like 

the inaccurate information on the budget billboards when I am 

certain that no one I have talked to yet has indicated to me that 

they were contacted about the individual fines that they would 

face in terms of the legislation, and what they thought about 

that and how that would impact on their personal lives. And that 

we would be prepared to go out throughout the province and 

fine our neighbours, put fines that would set people back years 

for people who are trying to simply put forward their rights, 

rights of collective bargaining, that we would see the need to 

impose fines of that nature on people who work in the health 

care system. 

 

Individual fines on individual workers, impose those fines, and 

that they would go home and say to their families, here’s what 

now I am facing. It was not there before, Mr. Speaker, and they 

would have to come home now and say, here’s what I am facing 

in my workplace, a fine of this sort. 

 

And on top of that all, Mr. Speaker, no one was contacted. No 

one was contacted. Not one phone call to any of the 25,000 

health care providers that are now without a contract saying to 

them, did you know that you would be fined the amount of 

money that’s in the Act of $4,000 or 2,000 daily for doing that? 

 

So I raise that because at the same time we have that experience 

and what those folks are saying and what those mothers and 

daughters and grandmothers when they came home and looked 

at their . . . Because these are not wages at the higher end of the 

scale, Mr. Speaker. These are not wages . . . But if this 

government felt that kind of steel fist had to be shown to these 

workers in order to have them comply, and what now appears to 

be an Act in total shambles, if that was the concentration where 

they . . . Was there any thought given to having them reply? Or 

were they contacted to say, what do you think? We’re going to 

fine you here if you determine that you will go on strike, that 

you’re essential . . . And that whole essential services piece now 

where you have . . . I mean, surely the embarrassment has had 

to start coming in where the number of people that are deemed 

essential is now larger, Mr. Speaker, when you go on strike. 

Can you imagine that it’s larger than, on a daily basis, than the 

number of workers that are on-site? And it’s not just on a day. 

The stretch is over months. This is tracked. 

 

Now what type of legislation and what type of things were 

being thought about and what type of things are being thought 

about here when we impose fines, when we impose these fines? 

Are they meeting, are they meeting those needs? And that 

question has to be asked because, as in the case of the health 

care, of the essential services legislation, the minister has no 

response to that of how, how is it that if you go on strike, that 

when you go on strike, there has to be more people working 

than normally there is when you’re not on strike? 

 

That, when you think about that, what an absolute 

embarrassment. What an absolute embarrassment. And it isn’t 

any wonder that the United Nations say, what are you doing? 

What are you doing? Did you talk to anybody here about how 

this works? And so that, that type of knowledge or that . . . in 

fact just on that small point, it’s not knowledge. It’s just 

common sense. It’s common sense that you should talk to 

people. 

 

So who has . . . have they talked to the people who have these 

easements? Have they talked to them before they say we need 

to come down with these, with these fines? I don’t know. I 

mean there’s nothing here where the minister has said it’s just 

simply a connection. And this is that, this is what people are 

seeing, a steel fist about, about here’s what you’re going to get. 

But where is the discussion . . . Have we reached this low in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, have we reached this low in the 

province that our answer, our answer when there’s no 

consultation is a steel fist? 

 

To show that much like, much like the hours debate . . . and you 

see a trend line here, or not a trend line, but you see a common 

thread run through these, run through the approach. Now we 

can say that and I’m certain that there will be not many people 

on the other side of the House who will acknowledge that, who 

won’t acknowledge that. 

 

But it has to be said, Mr. Speaker. It has to be said because 

today, every day is history. Every day is history, and I know 

those folks aren’t fond of history. They don’t believe in history. 

But every day is history and history is being made. And that’ll 

be what, in the case of the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour, that’ll be his story that he writes in 

here every day. His story will be told that he was the fellow that 

the United Nations talked about. He will be known as he was 

the person who said to . . . I would say there is over 80 per cent 

of the 25,000 health care workers now are women. He will be 

the person who’ll say he was the person who wanted to fine all 

of those daughters and aunts and granddaughters and sisters. He 

was the one that wanted to fine them. And he was the one that 

did not want to talk to them, but simply wanted to push through 

legislation. 

 

And I know that the Environment minister has had some 

international recognition with a fundraiser that she was going 

. . . And maybe she wants to also be writing a history. But there 

is also no comment about what the intent of her . . . what her 

intent is in terms of these fines. 

 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5087 

So you see, not only is this . . . there’s the lack of democracy. 

Not only is there a trigger-happy response regarding extended 

hours, but there is a thread that runs through all of this. And that 

thread, Mr. Speaker, that thread of what is common here is the 

lack of respect, the lack of respect. And I believe there is fear. 

 

Fear is always at the basis of lack of respect, because that’s how 

you get to lack of respect. Because everything comes from fear. 

When you have fear, you react in probably ways that are not 

logical. And one of the reactions is probably to disrespect, to 

feel that you know better and the other person doesn’t know 

better. And so you put forward fines. 

 

So I have not in my discussions around the essential services on 

the numbers of people that are required to work . . . It’s a joke. 

It’s a joke out there. 

 

Now the government might feel that it’s not important enough 

to take seriously, to mend their ways, and to do things 

differently. And I think it’s exemplified in the electoral officer. 

I believe it’s exemplified in the electoral officer and the 

approach taken by the Justice ministry, the Justice minister, 

where there is the group of people that decided who a candidate 

should be for a very important office in our legislature for our 

province and what that group did with that. What did they do? 

They made a decision, and then the Premier decided that that 

was not on for him. They changed that decision and now we 

have . . . I’m not sure where we’re at, Mr. Speaker, where we 

are now. Perhaps we’ll again require a body outside of here to 

make comment on that. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have made the points that I think are necessary 

to be made. We’ve talked about the lack of . . . the 

acknowledgement that you can govern without history. We’ve 

made the points about the Premier on the video, the remarks 

that he made, and not only making the remarks but putting them 

on videotape so that that could be their history, preserving 

history and that. 

 

I’ve talked about the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve talked 

about the budget in terms of what we see on the free-spending 

ways of this government. We talked about the billboards — the 

billboards that were in fact not true, probably true for a few 

seconds after they were put up — and that we will be 

experiencing a huge deficit over the next . . . a projected deficit 

that will be worse, worse than we experienced in the ’80s. 

 

We’ve talked about the lack of vision and leadership of the 

Premier, the lack of . . . free-speeding ways and the party that 

was going on here. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind the member to bring 

his comments back to Bill 131, The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the point that is most, 

I guess, disturbing across the entire piece is the judgment, the 

judgment. And the Premier throughout has a history of this 

judgment. And again as I mentioned earlier, we all have 

perhaps said things or done things. But his remarks about the 

Ukrainian farmers in this province and then the ability or the 

lack of judgment to put that on videotape, the lack of judgment, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to put that all on videotape for all to see, 

for the country to see and to have the visual of that, is 

disturbing. 

 

But I think that lack of judgment continues to this day, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s unfortunate. But I know that there will be a 

number of other people that wanted to comment and with that I 

will take my chair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. . . . Has he 

adjourned before . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Pursuant to a 

rule under 283, that the member has lost one adjournment so he 

cannot move to adjourn debate again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Pursuant to motions to adjourn the 

House, pursuant to rule 283, subparagraph (3): 

 

A motion to adjourn the House may not have conditions 

attached, otherwise it becomes a substantive motion which 

may be moved only after notice. 

 

There . . . [may] be some question before the House for a 

Member to move a motion to adjourn the House. 

 

If a member has lost it, the motion before . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Okay. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to rise today to give my comments on Bill 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to point out, after discussing the notion of how long I wish 

to speak on this particular Bill, I will point out that the Bill, 

you’re allowed to speak on a Bill for as long as you wish. And 

there’s no specified time frame that you can speak on this Bill, 

and I think the only thing that’s stopping me from going on 

right until the end of session of course is the fact that the second 

last day of the session a vote can be called in relation to Bill 

131. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the purpose of the Bill, and for 

those that are listening to the presentation here this morning, the 

Bill really is . . . The primary purpose of the Bill is to enact a 

process to create Crown conservation easements. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about the, not necessarily 

the intent of the Bill, but those that are proposing the Bill. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to point out that the Saskatchewan 

people and many people throughout the different areas of our 

province, they certainly support any effort to conserve land and 

to try and protect wildlife and offer habitat to wildlife. And 

basically the list goes on and on as to the value of conserving 

land. And the Bill attached to this in terms of the easements, 

which are primarily land set aside for this purpose, in theory 

certainly every effort should be made to promote that and 

support that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 131, we looked at the Bill itself. And 

again notwithstanding the fact that there hasn’t been enough 

consultation and debate on many, many Bills, we look at this 



5088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

Bill as at the face value an effort to try and look at conservation 

and easements throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that people out there can 

understand that the Act provides for the registration of these 

easements in the land titles registry. It also lays out a process by 

which a landowner can amend or terminate a conservation 

easement. It also provides for enforcement of the terms of an 

easement and also lays out penalties for violations of those 

easements. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go bit by bit on the four or five 

phrases or the points that the minister tried to present to this 

Bill. And before I do that, I want to talk a bit about her record 

as the Minister of the Environment. We’re looking at the 

number of things that this minister has failed miserably on and 

this party has failed miserably on. 

 

But prior to the last election in 2007, in an effort to try and 

attract some Green Party support and obviously trying to 

persuade Saskatchewan people that they had this new-found 

environmental values, what they did was they made some bold 

predictions on what they want to do to reduce greenhouse gases 

and how do you make sure that Saskatchewan did their part. 

And this Bill 131 is a key part of what they attempted to try and 

do but obviously failed miserably at, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I listened with great interest yesterday when the Minister 

of Health was talking about West Nile and the Minister of 

Environment was talking about the northern forest fire situation. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 131, contrary to what many people 

think, there’s a lot of interconnection between forest fire 

fighting values, the West Nile virus, this Bill 131. And we need 

to go down the path to connect all the dots for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The first thing I want to point out is that when it came to the 

whole notion of reducing greenhouse gases, which this has a 

direct connection to, this government failed, as I mentioned at 

the outset, to try and do anything when it comes to leadership 

on the environmental front, Mr. Speaker. They have failed 

miserably in the sense that they made the prediction, they made 

the commitment, and all during the election you couldn’t find a 

stronger champion of their cause anywhere, Mr. Speaker, when 

the radio ads were out and newspapers — yes, we’re 

environmentally friendly. And what happens after election day 

2007? They totally forgot about everything that they committed 

to, Mr. Speaker. They downgraded their commitment, and then 

they went further down to their commitment, and now they’re 

down to zero, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s much similar to their potash revenue figuring-out scheme. 

That’s how they did the environmental process where they said 

at one time in potash they wanted to get $3 billion. At the end 

of the day they owed the potash companies $204 million. That’s 

how the environmental file is going as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll point out to the people and to yourself, Mr. Speaker, the 

important message that any environmental Bill presented by 

this minister and by this government really is not any type of a 

Bill that we want to see passed easily. It’s not any kind of Bill 

that we want to see go through the process without having some 

very thorough discussions. And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly can 

and plan on doing that. 

 

Now at the outset I spoke about the time allotted for this 

particular Bill. And I’ve been advised that this Bill, the 

discussion can go on for quite some time. And about the only 

pressure attached to the debate on this Bill is that the second 

last day of the session a vote could be called, and I imagine a 

vote will be called on this Bill to try and get it through session. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s two Bills that of course have 

precedence or priority over this particular Bill, and that would 

be of course the budget Bills and the specified Bills. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the current government’s going to have 

a tough time here, unless things change, in trying to proceed 

forward with their legislative agenda because they simply have 

not been able to do so on the finance front. They’ve not been 

able to do so on the economic front, and again as we mentioned, 

they can’t seem to do anything in relation to the legislative 

agenda. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular minister and this party talked 

about the environmental challenges but have done zero, 

including this Bill 131, to try and ease the challenge that we 

face as a province. People throughout the province have been 

telling us . . . And it’s not just private people. It’s not just the 

environmental groups. It’s not just the average household. It’s 

been many people in the business community. It’s been many 

agricultural leaders. People are saying to this government and to 

many other governments across the country — and we’re not 

immune to that — that we ought to provide leadership when it 

comes to the environmental stewardship of our province, that 

we ought to provide some solutions. We ought to be very, very 

dynamic. We need to be very intelligent in how we proceed 

with our environmental plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the challenge and the problem 

with Bill 131, is that it’s a sporadic, confusing little issue, plan 

that this particular minister is trying to provide and trying to get 

approved through the Assembly. And like Bill 131, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a clear example of how there’s been no thought, 

no leadership, and no connect to the rest of the issues in relation 

to the environmental challenges that we face in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the people of Saskatchewan again are saying, Mr. Speaker, 

that Bill 131, it’s a small, little piece in some corner that this 

particular minister and his government are throwing out as their 

flagship Act in relation to meeting the environmental challenges 

of our province. And Mr. Speaker, nothing is more insulting. 

And nothing is more disingenuous in terms of trying to deal 

with the whole notion and the challenge that people are laying 

before this government of dealing with climate change. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this minister also talked about fines of up to 

100,000 per day or for corporations, 500,000 plus 500,000 per 

day. Like, give me a break. These fines that they’re putting up, 

it could be $500 million a day or $5 billion a day. There’s really 

no plan that they have whatsoever to enforce any kind of 

easement Act. 

 

So those figures that they’re throwing out here are just that, just 

figures. We don’t see any evidence nor do we suggest in any 

way, shape, or form that these fines that the minister is trying to 

allocate are going to be applied, Mr. Speaker. People in 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5089 

Saskatchewan know very well you can have all those figures 

that you want in terms of how the fines are going to be doled 

out or rolled out. And quite frankly, there isn’t going to be 

anything in terms of serious action in relation to fines to address 

climate change and to meet the challenges attached to climate 

development strategies when it comes to this particular 

government. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, Bill 131, The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act is primarily that. It is just the small, small little 

piece of something that the current minister and the Sask Party 

government have no intention of doing. And as I mentioned at 

the outset, many of the pieces of papers and the Bills that we 

get from that particular minister, about the only value I see in 

some of these Bills, including this one, is that if I take it home, 

and after I’m done reading it, I could start a fire in my fireplace 

and this would make certainly good fire starter for that purpose. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the conservation easements throughout the 

province, they have a real true value, much like the RAN 

program, which was the representative area network. People 

began that process . . . Whether it’s wildlife habitat protection 

lands, these are all interconnected. And the minister ought to 

know that, but quite frankly she doesn’t know that because 

we’re seeing different actions on different fronts. This Bill 131, 

the conservation easement Act, it has its own specified or 

specific actions. And they can attach as many of the fines and 

amounts as they want but they’ll never be applied. 

 

The second thing is that, how does it relate to the wildlife 

habitat lands? Is there a connection there? You would assume 

there would be, Mr. Speaker, because it has the same purpose as 

Bill 131. Isn’t it about conservation and isn’t about protecting 

lands, much like the wildlife habitat lands — isn’t it the same 

purpose? Well why is it that actions on Bill 131 does not match 

the actions behind the wildlife habitat protection lands or does 

not match the actions of the representative area network 

system? 

 

And why aren’t there discussions and consultation with land set 

aside even on agricultural land? Wasn’t there any discussion 

with the Department of Agriculture in relation to some of the 

lands that they de-listed as lands that are important for habitat? 

There was no consultation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the important message we have for 

people throughout Saskatchewan is that when you have small 

Bills, like Bill 131 and the current government says well they 

don’t want to pass even these small Bills, we are saying to 

people, you shouldn’t put these small little band-aids on a huge 

problem that Saskatchewan faces, — and that’s addressing the 

climate change matter — and try and pretend that that’s the 

solution, the silver bullet, to meeting all the needs. Because 

clearly, there is no connect and there’s no actions attached to 

any of the other conservation efforts that this government 

purports to have in relation to this Bill. 

 

So what that simply means is they have not thought out the 

strategy nor have they put the proper resources, the time, and 

the intelligence behind how they’re going to deal with setting 

aside land for many, many purposes including easements that 

we’re speaking about on Bill 131. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues quoted a very 

important point yesterday and I wanted to echo that quote. 

Robert G. Ingersoll quoted: “In nature there are neither rewards 

nor punishments; there are consequences.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have been trying to tell this government, 

and many people throughout Saskatchewan have been trying to 

tell this government that you’ve got to have a comprehensive, 

interactive strategy to deal with not just global warming but to 

also look at how we’re protecting our land base, how we’re 

protecting our animals, how we’re protecting the value of our 

plant life, and the list goes on and on and on. 

 

And obviously with Bill 131, these are just red herrings in the 

sense of saying, well we’ll do this on this one; we’ll put all 

these big fancy fine amount and maybe that’ll convince a few 

people that we’re serious about this. Well I’m sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, but The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, Bill 

131, as I mentioned, is a very, very small effort in relation to 

what needs to be done province-wide, and what needs to be 

done across the government board to make sure we’re serious 

about addressing climate change and we’re serious about the 

environmental agenda that people of Saskatchewan are asking 

us to adopt as legislators. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the credibility of this minister 

and this government as it relates to Bill 131. And that’s the 

important point here, is that the people of Saskatchewan and the 

environmental movement are saying, well we need leadership. 

They’ve said that to us on many, many occasions when we were 

in government. They continue saying that today. And I think the 

time has come, the time has come where Bills like 131 have 

absolutely very little effect on what needs to be done, that we 

need not to raise them up and hold them up and saying, look 

what we’re doing. Because that is not fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. That is not intelligent in any way, shape, or 

form. 

 

We need to begin to get serious about climate change, about 

protecting our environment, and put a made-in-Saskatchewan 

solution. And that leadership has to come from us, Mr. Speaker. 

It has to come from us. 

 

And we’ve done it in the past. We’ve done it in the past. 

Whether it’s medicare under Tommy Douglas or the creation of 

the Crown corporations under the NDP, we have certainly 

shown that Saskatchewan can lead the nation and be a shining 

light of how we’re able to turn the corner on meeting some of 

the environmental challenges that we as a country and as a 

world face. And what is wrong with providing leadership, Mr. 

Speaker? There is absolutely nothing wrong with that particular 

point. 

 

So Bill 131, The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 

people ought to know that this Bill in its small, little way is 

talking about easements but in the meantime this minister and 

this government are ignoring a wide range of other issues that 

are just as, if not more important, as this particular Bill. And 

this minister and this government are not connecting some of 

those initiatives in other sectors and other areas to how they can 

make this conservation easement actually fit into the grand 



5090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

scheme of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out the Bill itself is a pathetic effort to try and 

have some kind of environmental agenda that the Sask Party 

was touting before the election. And people can see right 

through it because it has no base of support, it has no 

intelligence behind it, and it has no connection to the other 

pieces of the different Acts that can really make an effective 

plan for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I pointed at the outset, this particular 

minister has agreed to delist certain wildlife habitat lands at her 

will and is basically saying, we’re going to do this; we’re going 

to sell that land, and nothing’s going to change. And, Mr. 

Speaker, then they turn around and present Bill 131, saying they 

got all these fines for people that don’t want to follow this Bill. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what you have clearly here is a sense of 

confusion and what the heck is going on. That’s the vast 

majority of people’s position and point as it relates to this 

government’s environmental agenda. 

 

So I would point out to the people out there, the fact that they’re 

not connecting with some of the other initiatives within the 

Department of Environment, the fact that they’re not putting the 

proper resources into some of these areas, the fact that they’re 

just throwing out some of these red herrings such as Bill 131, 

the fact that they’re never serious about the environmental 

agenda to begin with, it all points to the fact that many of the 

environmental groups throughout Saskatchewan have been had 

by this government. They thought they would give them the 

opportunity — and this minister — to try and provide 

leadership on this front, and they got a big fat F in terms of 

progress so far. I’m talking about the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And now the Green Party and members of the Green Party, 

people that are quite serious about the environment and people 

that have done, people that have done a lot of work in relation 

to raising the awareness, they are now seeing a total lack of 

leadership by this minister and by this government. And The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, Bill 131, all it is is 

just a feeble attempt to try and have some kind of 

environmental agenda in front of people that they can speak 

about. 

 

So in relation to this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out 

to the people of Saskatchewan, they need to look at the 

credibility of not just the minister but the government that is 

proposing this Bill. And you can see right off the bat, that is 

never part of a serious effort and that some of these Bills and 

some of the fines attached to the Bill in 131 really doesn’t mean 

anything to anybody. 

 

And that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling 

people now that some of these Bills that are being presented by 

the minister, the paper . . . It isn’t worth the paper it’s written 

on. And when I get back home and after I’ve read through some 

of the points of the Bill, I’m going to roll it up, and I’m going to 

start a fire in my fireplace back home so that my house can stay 

warm and some of my grandkids can stay warm. And that’s 

about the value of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to look at the . . . Going back to the credibility of the 

minister that’s proposing Bill 131, the other day I mentioned to 

people: the minister was talking about, well we hope there’s 

good moisture in the North because there’s a lot of forest fires; 

then a few minutes later the Minister of Health saying, well 

there’s no more West Nile cases so we reduced the West Nile 

budget, so we hope that there isn’t a lot of mosquitoes in 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

So here we have a Minister of the Environment that’s saying 

it’s going to rain in the North. And then you have the Minister 

of Health saying, well it’s not going to rain in southern 

Saskatchewan. So that’s pretty much their strategy when it 

comes to trying to assess and prepare for the environmental 

challenges. They have decreed that in northern Saskatchewan 

there will be rain. They have decreed in southern Saskatchewan 

there won’t be rain. So that the net result is there’ll be less fires 

in the North and less mosquitoes in the South. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of Sask Party math that we’ve 

seen evidenced in the last couple of years. And that’s why I tell 

the people on the environmental challenges and some of the 

environmental plan that they have attached to, Bill 131 isn’t 

worth the paper it’s written on because they’re never serious 

about it. They have ignored people time and time again. And, 

Mr. Speaker, people have had enough of this government. 

 

They’ve had enough of this government and its lack of 

leadership. They’ve had enough of that minister who purports 

to try and protect the environment and never has any plan 

attached to anything that she ever does, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

calling a spade a spade today, that if you can’t provide 

leadership on the environmental front and you don’t know what 

you’re doing, then you should step aside for a party and 

certainly for a leader that can provide that leadership, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I’ll point out that this minister, everything that she has 

touched, whether it’s the greenhouse gas emissions target, 

whether it’s anything on a national stage, whatever Ottawa says, 

she certainly jumps and does exactly what she’s told, Mr. 

Speaker. You’ve never seen her challenge the federal 

government on any environmental front. And my point to 

people out there, as I speak to some of the lack of leadership on 

the environmental front, is you shouldn’t bite the hand that pats 

you on the head. And that’s exactly the relationship this 

minister has with Ottawa. She refuses to stand up for the people 

of Saskatchewan. Whatever the federal Harper Conservatives 

tell her to do, she will do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s not her in charge, Mr. Speaker, it’s not her in charge. 

It’s the business, it’s the business people in downtown Calgary 

that’ll dictate what happens to our environmental problems here 

in Saskatchewan. It is not this minister and it is not that party, 

Mr. Speaker. It is the business community in downtown 

Calgary, the oil executives that are dictating what we will do or 

won’t do on the environmental challenge and the environmental 

front that Saskatchewan faces and that the people of 

Saskatchewan so desperately want to see leadership on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again, as we pointed out at the outset, I don’t believe the 

legislation . . . And I said I’d go through the points, point by 

point. This Act is about laying out a process which a landowner 

can amend or terminate a conservation easement. It provides for 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5091 

enforcement of the terms of an easement and lays out penalties. 

 

Now on the first front in which a landowner can amend or 

terminate a conservation easement, well, Mr. Speaker, if a 

landowner can do that, why do they have penalties attached to 

it? Like what is the purpose of the Bill? Again it’s very 

confusing, because isn’t this meant to protect land? And yet as 

part of the Bill 131 they’re saying that they can amend or 

terminate a conservation easement and that’s entirely up to the 

landowner. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s got to be leadership and co-operation 

in the sense of working with the many landowners throughout 

Saskatchewan and how we can protect simple things like 

wildlife habitat, of how we can protect the river streams and the 

flow of water. These are some of the issues that we have to 

have discussions on. 

 

And what I see here is that again The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, it is not meant in any way, shape, or form to 

try and protect the environment and interconnect and interact 

with all the other legislation and to really, truly have a very 

good, solid plan for the environment, Mr. Speaker. This is more 

about protecting certain interests when it comes to land and it 

has nothing to do with the overall benefit of the majority of 

people. 

 

And that’s exactly the reason why I pointed out earlier that the 

penalties and the enforcement that they have attached to it is 

just simply a smokescreen. They have no plans to fine anybody. 

They have no plans to enforce any kind of provincial statute 

when it comes to sharing water rights or protecting habitat 

lands. No plan whatsoever. So as a result of that, all this is is 

simply a smokescreen that people can see right through. And 

this minister is certainly trying to push that agenda. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that if you’re going to be 

serious about the environmental protection, and we’ve said that 

time and time again — and this Bill 131 is certainly connected 

to that — you’ve got to make sure that you’re able to commit 

the time and the resources and the energy and the staffing to put 

that strategy together. This minister and this government have 

no intention whatsoever. 

 

And I’m just trying to find out exactly how many times that 

she’s actually spent many, many hours sitting and talking to her 

officials by saying, what can we do to make it better? And they 

have an air management system is one of the things that she 

often speaks about in some of her Bills. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again, what the heck is an air management 

system? She insults the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence 

in the sense of providing little Bills like this in the hopes that 

she can at least present to people that she’s trying to do 

something, all the while she’s not going to bite the hand that 

pats her on the forehead, and those hands that pat her on her 

forehead are in Ottawa and downtown Calgary. And it certainly 

isn’t in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan to try and 

put a solid environmental agenda forward so we can finally do 

something to try and address climate change and the greenhouse 

gas challenge that we as a province are contributing to. 

Mr. Speaker, there are solutions. There are bold steps. There is 

a plan. There’s a need for it. All the issues point to the fact that 

there is a demand for leadership from this minister. And Bill 

131 is nothing but a small, little part of a small, little piece of 

action that this minister is trying to do and tout herself as the 

environmental champion of Saskatchewan, which is the furthest 

thing from the truth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was quite amazed to also see the fact that 

this minister . . . from what I can gather, she’s given up the 

forestry allocation process that was typically under 

Saskatchewan Environment. She’s handed that file over to the 

minister of Energy and Mines. And the minister now has the 

right, the minister of Energy and Mines has the right now to 

allocate the forestry to whomever he wants. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the problem with that is, again, the minister is sitting around 

wondering what’s going on in her own department. In the 

meantime, different ministers are taking away different 

responsibilities from her, and she’s sitting there on her hands 

hoping . . . well what effect does this have? 

 

Well what happens typically in a government, the Minister of 

the Environment should actually be somebody that is totally 

separate from the process when it comes to trying to protect the 

integrity of her department. So when somebody comes along, a 

politician or another minister, and says, why don’t you give that 

allocation to X-Y-Z company and they’re allowed to harvest 

300 000 cubic metres, well the minister needs to be a bit more 

independent by saying no. Based on our environmental 

modelling and based on the structure of our government, I can’t 

be pressured from the economic perspective to compromise on 

the environmental standards that we as a government should 

have. 

 

Now what happened was, the minister basically gave up those 

standards and gave up her integrity as a Minister of the 

Environment by simply turning over all allocation rights of the 

forestry issue over to the minister of Energy and Mines, and 

now he can do with it as he wishes. And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 131 

goes back to that, my point earlier, that this minister lacks 

credibility on many, many fronts. And Bill 131 is another 

example of how she’s trying to confuse and fool people of 

Saskatchewan that she is really in charge over there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one of the first things that this minister ought to do is take 

charge of her department, take charge of her department and tell 

the minister of Energy and Mines that I will not be told which 

allocations to make, and you will not do it for us. We have to 

protect the integrity of their environmental standards, and that 

means I can’t be persuaded nor convinced, from the economic 

perspective, that I have to do this. I’ve got to make sure I 

balance the economy with the environment. It’s got to be fair. 

It’s got to be thorough. There’s got to be a certain amount of 

standards attached to that process, and the list goes on as to why 

she should not have done that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we see is the minister saying, well 

okay, you want this piece of the environment? Go ahead and 

take it. You want that piece of the environment? You go ahead 

and take that too. But I’ll put up, like, Bills 131. I’ll say oh 

look, look what we’re doing on the environmental front. And 

people of Saskatchewan and the opposition are shaking their 



5092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

heads, saying my goodness, where’s the leadership from this 

minister? Where is the leadership from this minister? And I 

would say to the people of Saskatchewan that it was never 

there. It was never there. Many of you had been fooled and that 

shouldn’t ever, ever occur again. 

 

And I’ve bumped into quite a few folks that at one time were 

thinking of giving this particular minister and this party an 

opportunity, and many of them who are very strong 

conservatives and who have voted for them. They have looked 

and they have assessed. And many people in the environmental 

movement as well said let’s see what they can do. And after two 

short years, $2 billion, two extended hours sitting, they have 

come to the conclusion that we made that mistake and we’ll 

never make it again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the environmental movement is getting strong. 

I encourage them not to quit. I encourage them to rally, to 

organize. I encourage them to provide leadership to that file 

because obviously this government and this minister’s not 

going to do that. I encourage them to connect and help the NDP 

develop policy. I encourage all the people out there that have 

been disenfranchised, as a result of this particular party’s action 

and this minister’s lack of action when it comes to the 

environmental front, and join forces with us so that 

Saskatchewan can once again provide leadership on the 

environmental front. It’s the single most important issue, the 

single most important issue facing Saskatchewan, and that’s 

how we begin to protect our environment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, The Conservation Easements Amendment Act 

is primarily, again, just a little game that the minister throws 

out, some of these Bills. And there’s no connect to some of the 

other areas. There’s no connect whatsoever. How is it that you 

can put this Bill forward, 131, and talk about trying to conserve 

land? Then all of a sudden you turn around and you raid the 

wildlife habitat lands and de-list many lands that are important, 

for sale. And how do you all of a sudden start laying off staff 

and all of a sudden the RAN program’s in jeopardy? There’s no 

valuation. There’s no effort to try and figure how that program 

may have been valued. And then you turn around and you say, 

well we hope there’s a lot of rain in northern Saskatchewan so 

we don’t have as many forest fires as we’ve had in the past 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly my point. It goes to the credibility, 

not just of this minister but of the Sask Party government in 

terms of trying to address the climate change and really do 

something meaningful for the environmental file. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out to several of my colleagues 

that if you want to look at a plan, it’s got to be a 

comprehensive, across the board, interdepartmental strategy that 

this government can implement to begin the process of 

forwarding an environmental plan that the people of 

Saskatchewan can help architect. And they haven’t done 

nothing of that sort. 

 

Unless and until we see that concentrated effort, the effort to try 

and bring as many resources as possible to make sure that 

people know we’re serious and to engage the people, then you 

will see the energy and the flow of information and the 

participation from the people, from the communities, from the 

universities, from the youngsters, from the schools, from the 

villages, and from the business community. All these groups out 

there are just dying to have the opportunity to participate in the 

process to establish their role and thus the leadership role of 

Saskatchewan when it comes to qualifying and quantifying in 

developing sound, intelligent environmental strategy that 

certainly has short-term, medium-term, and longer term 

outlooks and goals. And that’s exactly what I think the people 

of Saskatchewan want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I want to point out that there are many more things 

that I want to say on this, but again, Bill 131 is certainly that; it 

is simply primarily a smokescreen for this minister to try and 

pretend to be an environmental minister. And that’s why I think 

it’s important that people be told exactly what she is and what 

this government lacks, and that’s a poor leader and certainly 

lacks vision when it comes to the environment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from . . . Just one 

second. Is the member standing to speak to this current Bill? 

Oh, okay. The member from Athabasca I’m assuming has 

moved to adjourn debate. Okay, the member’s done. So the 

question before the Assembly is that Bill No. 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to 

the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to get up 

today to speak to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and the 

amendments being proposed for it. 

 

Some of the things that come to mind when we first talk about 

wildlife protection and the lands that we’re talking about are 

many of the hours and days that were spent around the Great 

Sand Hills and talking to people around there and people in the 

province who were interested in making sure that we do 

preserve our natural habitat and our natural beauty in this 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5093 

province. There is some concern with this Act that there will be 

less rigour around those protections and that we could, in 

essence . . . And I think, listening or reading the minister’s 

comments this morning in The StarPhoenix, that there will be 

opportunity, there would be opportunity in regulation to 

actually see some eroding of that protection. And I don’t think 

that is anything that the people of Saskatchewan want to see. 

 

We have spent a lot of years making sure that we do have 

respect for the land and respect for the land that we turn over to 

our children and our grandchildren. And I think it would be 

very harmful and very short-sighted to put into effect anything 

that would hamper that protection. And I do have some serious 

doubts that the proposals that are in place in this Bill, I don’t 

think they actually would strengthen anything that we have in 

place now, so I’m really a little leery and skeptical about what 

the intent is. 

 

I know there is people who have had access to the land for years 

and would like to have an opportunity to buy it, but I don’t 

think that there’s any urgency for that. And I do think that this 

is a Bill that has some serious consequences into our future and 

our children’s future. And once you do something, it’s very 

difficult to undo it. And I think if you sell lands and something 

happens to the wildlife on that land, then it’s not possible to 

reinstate it or to undo the harm that has been done. 

 

I certainly wasn’t reassured, and I don’t think anybody else will 

be reassured by the minister’s explanations in the paper today 

that define a different definition of ecological. And somehow 

what will meet their definition of that and what will meet their 

broad plan was, I don’t think, terribly reassuring and I don’t 

think actually very clear about what the intent will be. 

 

And I know a lot of the proposals talk about putting things into 

regulation, and there is a fair amount of unease about moving 

things that were previously in legislation into regulation 

because regulation does not have the scrutiny. Passing 

regulations does not have the scrutiny that passing legislation 

does. There’s lots of things that happen in regulation that just 

actually slip by, and unless you’re paying attention to an OC, an 

order in council, you will not notice it. 

 

And one of the things that comes to mind is the recent one in 

health where, by regulation, your private information will be 

shared with a foundation. And that comes into place May 1st by 

regulation. I don’t think The Health Information Protection Act 

ever, ever envisioned that. Since I was the minister who was 

responsible for bringing that original Act in, I know that was 

true. And I don’t think there’s anything in that Act that would 

have presupposed that we would be sharing our health 

information just by changing a regulation. 

 

So I’m really not very happy to see that we’re going to talk 

about having things repealed and regulations will be adopted, 

especially that designate which lands are protected. And this 

says this will allow all designations and withdrawals of 

protected lands to be done by regulation. Well that goes to my 

point exactly. This can certainly be done without any scrutiny, 

without any transparency, and certainly without any debate. So 

there is, I think, a real danger in actually going down this route. 

 

And that is what I think I am seeing from the actual wording of 

the Bill. And not knowing the intent from the minister, I don’t 

know if that’s the intent, is to hide some things that could 

happen and things that could be done without public scrutiny 

and certainly without scrutiny of the opposition. 

 

I know there’s various organizations who want to have some 

conversation about this and talk about the impact of what this 

will do from their point of view and from their interest, and I 

don’t think we’ve heard from them yet. And I think that they 

are still waiting to come, so I think that it would be premature 

to actually think that this legislation would be one that we 

would see moving along very quickly. 

 

This one, I think as I mentioned at the beginning of my 

remarks, has such a huge impact on the future of the province 

and the future of the land that we turn over to our children and 

our grandchildren and on to perpetuity that we simply cannot 

get this wrong. And I think it would be short-sighted, certainly 

of the minister, to expect that things that were in legislation that 

would protect the land and the future of the land would now be 

willingly or eagerly removed to regulation where we have 

certainly far less scrutiny and far less accountability. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I think it looks like it’s innocuous when you talk about 

defining what is wildlife habitat and what are ecological lands 

and to reflect some broader intent. I don’t think that’s very clear 

of why we would need that, especially when the minister’s 

remarks said, we would be able to define and fit them into our 

plan. And given our experience — at least from the opposition’s 

point of view — of the plans of government, none of them have 

actually worked out very well and in fact are fairly thin on 

detail and thin on rigour and also thin on outcomes and 

evaluation. So again I have significant problems with having 

this sort of thing put into regulation or leaving it in the hands of 

regulation. 

 

I think that people in the province definitely do have an 

appreciation of our wildlife habitat, and they do have a real 

interest and a keen connection to the environment and the 

ecology of our province. And I think that changing this— in 

particular changing it in so many ways and areas that would 

open it up to interpretation of whoever is in the ministry at the 

time — is a danger, and it is doing a disservice to our province 

and our future and the future of the land. So I don’t think that 

there’s going to be a huge amount of support for moving this 

into regulation, and I think that’s basically the thrust of the 

amendments that are proposed. 

 

And there could — exactly what I was talking about — there 

could be ways of selling off what is now currently 

wildlife-protected land. And I think there’s going to be some 

questions about what exactly we do to make sure that what we 

sell, if we sell it, we have certainly good reason for it and that 

we have looked at all the impact on the previously designated 

protected land and why it would it would be of value or of 

necessity to sell it at this point. 

 

So I think that many of my colleagues have raised some of the 

same concerns, and I don’t think that is something that we can 

see anybody has suggested anything that would ease those 

concerns or in any way answer the questions that we all have 



5094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

about why move to regulations and why the necessity at this 

point to put something in place that would make it easier to sell 

land that has been previously designated as wildlife protected. 

And even if you designated it as ecological land, it doesn’t 

protect it any more since you’ve only allowed it now to be 

accessed through regulation which, as I said, doesn’t have a 

great deal of rigour attached to it. Regulations come and go and, 

basically at the whim of a minister, have only cabinet to answer 

to and basically are only shared with the media and the 

opposition after the fact. 

 

So there is no ability or opportunity to talk about regulations 

and the impact of what they would be until it’s done. And once 

something is done, as I’ve said, it’s very hard to undo it. Once 

you’ve allowed something to be sold, it would be extremely 

difficult to un-sell it. And I think of some of the provisions of 

NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement], where once 

you’ve moved into a certain area and you open it up, you have 

opened it up forever and there’s no turning back. 

 

So I think we should be even more cautious on our land. We 

only have so much land in Saskatchewan. It is our duty as 

legislators at this time to protect that land, and I think it is an 

abrogation of our duty if we look at making it easier to sell it 

without anybody having the ability to ask why and have any 

public scrutiny of decisions that are made about who gets to buy 

the land. 

 

It does seem suspect that it would be necessary to do this. I 

think if there’s some reason that land has changed in its 

designation and that it has now become . . . there’s no wildlife 

on it or it doesn’t have any ecological value, then there is the 

legislation to deal with. And there’s processes within that, I’m 

sure, that you can look at to see if this could be somehow 

expedited to sell it. But to leave it to regulation does not sit . . . I 

do not think that that is a very good avenue to pursue, and I 

know the legislation itself is basically constructed around that 

premise. 

 

And as I said, the minister’s remarks in the paper today were 

not reassuring. And I think that her comments have led people 

to think, what about the Great Sand Hills? Is there an 

opportunity for something like the Great Sand Hills, for us to 

lose that as a protected area? There’s certainly been 

conversation about what’s under the land and who owns it and 

who would want it. So it’s interesting to have this debate at a 

time when you wonder who would benefit the most from this. 

What is somebody wanting from this land, or what is somebody 

wanting from a certain piece of the land? Has it got anything to 

do with some of the natural resources that could be there? 

 

So I know when the Great Sand Hills debate was going on, this 

was definitely an issue the public was really connected to and 

concerned with and engaged in. And there was an awful lot of 

conversation about the value of protected land and even the 

value of protected land versus what could be considered to be a 

natural resource that would have some economic value, not 

only to the area but to the province. And in the balance, the 

value of the protected land won out. 

 

So I think it’s extremely short-sighted to be looking at some 

way to actually undo this and make this easier to have 

somebody who has an interest in perhaps taking out natural 

resources or — for whatever other reason — wants the land, to 

make it easier for them to get it or make it easy for them to get 

it without any public input or public scrutiny, and certainly 

without any ability of the opposition to review the regulations 

before, as I said, they become fact. 

 

So I don’t think that there’s any way we can actually see this 

going forward unless we have some serious conversation with 

the stakeholders and the wildlife federations who are interested 

in this and have not had the opportunity to appear here in the 

legislature to share their concerns. And I know that they are 

sharing those concerns out and about in many venues, but they 

need to be able to come here to talk about their concerns and to 

answer the questions that we might have or to bring forward 

some of the issues that we may not have thought of. 

 

Given that this has serious impact on the future of the province, 

I think we do need to have that conversation. And I think it is 

important that everybody that needs to be involved in the 

conversation is contacted and has the opportunity to have that 

conversation. At the moment I don’t think any of that has been 

done. 

 

And I know, given the history of consultation with Bills that 

I’ve been involved in and that I’ve seen in this legislature — 

and particularly in the last two years — that consultation is 

really a foreign language to the Sask Party. So I don’t think that 

there has been meaningful, meaningful consultation that would 

in any way ease people’s concerns, and I don’t think people 

would be very happy to see this Bill move forward without that 

conversation taking place. 

 

And I know when we talked to First Nations about the wild 

ponies Act, they certainly had no idea what was coming 

forward and they certainly did not feel that they’d been 

consulted. We’ve seen many areas of First Nations not being 

consulted. Many of the lands in the province do of course fall 

under First Nations or on reserve land or on treaty land. And 

there would be certainly an interest, I’m sure, from the FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] to have a 

conversation on what this would mean if there’s lands that are 

in this protected Act that would be in danger of having any 

changes happen to them without consultation since that’s the 

norm, without consultation with the FSIN or with the bands that 

were affected. So I don’t think that, Mr. Speaker, much has 

been done for consultation. 

 

And I know I was just recently involved in looking at The 

Opticians Act, and the contradictory submissions we have had 

about who supports it and who doesn’t. It’s unusual for a Bill to 

come this far without having done that homework and done that 

work ahead of time so that people do support the Bill. As 

government, that’s how I would think it would work, that you 

bring a Bill forward that has the support of the community that 

it affects, but apparently not with The Opticians Act. 

 

So I’m not convinced that this Act has had any better 

preparation from the stakeholders’ point of view. And I don’t 

feel comfortable that we’ve heard from whoever needs to be 

heard from and certainly have given them the opportunity to 

raise their concerns. This is not something that any of us should 

take lightly. It is certainly something that will have a long 

reaching effect on our future as a province and the land that we 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5095 

see and that we have access to as citizens, not only just for our 

own personal use, but for our own enjoyment and the 

enjoyment of tourists and other people in the province who just 

enjoy looking at wildlife or enjoying the scenery out and about 

on a holiday. 

 

I don’t think we have any idea of who is interested in buying 

what, which is the danger of having legislation like this that 

opens the door. And once a door is open, as I said, it’s very 

difficult to shut the door. And I think we do this at our own 

peril. And I don’t think this is an Act that has been well 

advised. And I don’t see any real imperative to do this. There 

doesn’t seem to be anybody calling for this in a very concerted 

way. I’m not sure who or what this legislation would benefit, so 

I think that’s another question that needs to be answered. Why? 

Why do we have this proposal? And who needs this? And what 

will it do for them? And why do they want it? 

 

And then on the other side, what will it do to our wildlife and 

our land? And what does the Wildlife Federation and what do 

all the members of the Wildlife Federation have to say about it 

because they have a very, very large membership that reaches 

from border to border of our province. And I think that they 

definitely have had a role as stewards of our protected lands 

over the years, and certainly to hear from them would be of 

great value. So I certainly await that opportunity that I believe 

is coming soon. 

 

I think that, as I said, the minister’s conversation with The 

StarPhoenix was disconcerting to say the least. I don’t think 

there was anything reassuring in those comments that would 

make me as a citizen, let alone as a legislator, think that this 

was good legislation. And I think when we look at legislation, 

we have to ask ourselves, what does this do for people? Does it 

make Saskatchewan better? Is it of a benefit to the people of 

Saskatchewan? And I don’t actually see what could be pointed 

to or touted as beneficial to the people of Saskatchewan as a 

whole. 

 

This may have some benefit to certain people, I’m not sure 

who. But I don’t know who would be asking for this, and of 

course we don’t know who was consulted since we don’t ever 

have that information shared with us. It’s difficult to actually 

scrutinize legislation if you don’t know the intent and you also 

don’t know who may have wanted it, who may have asked for 

it, who may have been consulted. We don’t know that and we 

seldom do. So it’s difficult to say that something is a good idea 

when you definitely don’t have any idea of why the idea is here. 

 

And I think we’re at that point now with this, this particular 

Bill. There doesn’t seem to be any explanation of why we 

would need to change, have this legislative change, and why we 

would put it into regulation that would be significantly less 

onerous and less rigorous in its scrutiny. I don’t see any good 

reason for that. I haven’t seen any remarks by the minister or 

anyone else who says this is a good idea. 

 

The minister’s remarks weren’t even that supportive. It doesn’t 

seem to me that that’s something that even the minister supports 

in a very significant way. It doesn’t seem like it’s an important 

Bill for her but I don’t know why then it was brought forward 

because it does seem to fly in the face of many other people 

who, if it was changed, would be, it would be very important to 

them. And they do have serious concerns, and they don’t really 

believe that this is in any way, shape, or form, a necessary piece 

of legislation. 

 

So I think with those remarks . . . I think it’s incumbent upon us 

as an opposition to actually do the consultations that don’t ever 

appear to be done on Bills before we get them. There doesn’t 

seem to anything done ahead of time. And like I said, my latest 

conversation around The Opticians Act has shown me that both 

sides have a different opinion. And as legislators, when we 

were in government, we were reluctant to bring forward 

legislation that didn’t have the support of the people that it 

impacted. We were less likely to bring forward controversial 

legislation than not. 

 

So I wonder what on earth it is about this legislation that would 

make the minister think this was a good piece of legislation. I 

haven’t heard that explanation. I also haven’t heard who has 

asked for it. I haven’t heard who it will benefit. I have heard 

from . . . anecdotally, and I’m sure we’re going to hear in more 

detail, why we shouldn’t do it. And I can only, as legislator in 

this opposition, hold to that that there are people who don’t 

want to see this and they have a significant, they have 

significant reasons for that. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So we do have some information on . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Oh and a nice picture of a moose too . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes. And those of us who travel on the 

highway now are seeing more and more moose. I think it’s 

moose. Plural — isn’t it moose? 

 

I’m just hoping that they all stay away because I do think . . . 

Apparently much of the best remaining habitat, wildlife habitat 

land, is on Crown land and so these are, these have always been 

historically very important for maintaining existing wildlife 

populations. And as much as we don’t want to see them on the 

highway where they’re involved with our cars or trucks, we do 

appreciate that they contribute to our general good, the good 

way of living that we have in this province by what they bring 

to our natural habitat. And many of the wildlife populations are 

definitely on land — that is about two-thirds — some of it is 

south of the forest fringe and it is privately owned. 

 

But we do have a history around this when we passed Bills like 

the critical wildlife habitat protection Act which is now, what 

this one is known as The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, and 

that was passed in 1984. And it does protect 3, over 3 million 

acres of uplands and wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat 

in our agriculture region in its natural state. 

 

So when we talk about changing legislation and moving the 

ability to sell any of this into regulations, we’re actually putting 

at risk over 3 million, 3 million acres of uplands and wetlands. 

And it seems like a fairly dramatic step to take, to jeopardize 

that much land in this province. And the current Act has a 

protection for these lands and we have apparently the most 

cost-effective wildlife conservation program around these lands. 

And the Act prevents the government from selling the 

designated Crown lands which I gather is what, is all I can 

gather, is what the intent of, is changing this legislation to allow 

in regulation the sell-off of Crown lands previously designated 



5096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

as protected. 

 

And the philosophy of the Act was to conserve the wildlife 

habitat while enabling compatible traditional uses to coexist. So 

people who had rented these lands and used them for farming or 

agricultural use have done so over the years while still 

protecting the wildlife habitat that live on those lands. And the 

wildlife, the protection Act does recognize and support some 

agriculture use and petroleum activities, and the lands are leased 

mainly to cattle producers who use them for grazing and 

haying. Now I understand there are some cattle producers who 

would like to, after years and years and years of leasing, like to 

buy the land, and I understand that. 

 

But I think the bigger picture is, what happens when you open 

this door of selling the lands that have . . . And then 3 million 

acres is a significant amount of land and it has been protected 

for a long time, and the reasons for the protection I don’t think 

have diminished over the years. I think those reasons are still 

solid now. 

 

And the designation of a protected . . . wildlife protection has 

no effect on the lessees’ right to continue leasing their land. So 

there is no threat to removing the ability of the person to lease 

the land and use it for what the terms and conditions of their 

leases are. They can be, the leases can be routinely renewed and 

transferred as in the past and the Act has very little effect on 

their daily operations at all. 

 

So again I have to ask, why on earth bring this legislation 

forward then, if there’s not some impelling or compelling 

reason to selling the land? Because that would be the only thing 

that I could see the legislation would do, would open it up to 

sell it. And most people do not like the idea of selling land that 

has been protected over the years and that has a designation of a 

protection. 

 

And there is certainly, there’s certainly ability for oil and gas 

companies, that they can explore and drill but they must ensure 

they do very little damage to the surface. So there are all kinds 

of, there’s all kinds of concessions made for people who lease 

the land to do certain things for the economy, their economy or 

ours or on agriculture. But it does always maintain the ability 

within the government to protect the land. Once the land is sold, 

of course the government has very little control over what it’s 

used for and so the loss of whatever value for the wildlife 

habitat is certainly a possibility once we no longer have control 

over that use. 

 

And Saskatchewan has . . . Preserving more lands to save 

endangered species is also important and we do have designated 

15 plants and animals under the species at risk provision of the 

Act. And there’s certainly things that we need to watch out for 

that we don’t lose animals, plants that we may lose if we don’t 

have, if we don’t keep our 3.4 million or 3.4, I guess, million 

acres. And that’s only about 5 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

agriculture region and about 80 per cent of the region’s total 

natural protected areas. And this includes such things as parks 

or protected wildlife and ecological areas. And protecting these 

lands, we have found, has been the best preventative medicine 

to ensure habitats for the survival of endangered species and 

spaces for species. Can’t say that too fast. 

 

So we have always found that the ranchers and farmers who 

lease the lands are good stewards and the wildlife is benefiting. 

Preserving the important wildlife habitat has enabled us in 

Saskatchewan to come to the forefront of national and 

international habitat and natural ecosystem conservation which 

is helping Canada contribute its share towards global 

environmental conservation. 

 

And so we have basically wise multiple use of public lands that 

can curb habitat loss while accommodating the interests of 

agriculture, wildlife, and the public. So there doesn’t appear to 

be in the current legislation any real reason — there’s no gaps 

— there doesn’t appear to be any reason that someone could not 

lease the land and do almost ordinary daily activities of 

agriculture or even gas and oil production as long as certain 

environmental standards are met. 

 

So I don’t see the reason that we have this Bill before us today, 

Mr. Speaker. And with all the questions being raised around it, 

it seems to fall under: why move it to regulation? And you have 

to ask then, what would be accomplished by that? And what 

protection for those 3 million acres would be left in the Act if 

by regulation you could change pretty much anything? That’s 

dangerous. It’s a dangerous thing to do, especially in an Act that 

has this impact on the environment and on the lands of the 

province and on the future of the wildlife and the various 

species that are protected. 

 

And that since we’re all in a bit of a connection as species of 

this earth, it does make a difference in whether we protect our 

wildlife and their habitat, how it affects us. Once we start 

interfering with the wildlife and their habitat, we see . . . Like 

killing foxes who kill gophers who kill rats, we end up 

impacting somewhere else along the line. And it doesn’t 

actually do us any good to insert ourselves with our human 

solutions. It doesn’t actually work. And we’ve seen that quite 

clearly with the fox thing . . . or coyote, sorry. I think what 

we’re seeing is it didn’t do what it was supposed to do and it 

actually did have harmful effects. 

 

So I worry that when we have legislation like this before us that 

we haven’t looked at, what will be the harmful effects of this? 

And that is our jobs as legislators and especially as opposition 

to look at what would be the downside. What would be the 

harmful effects of this kind of legislation? And that one just 

jumps right out at you. And I have had no explanation or no 

reassurance that that would not cause exactly what I am worried 

about, that the 3 million acres that are currently protected could, 

in effect, be sold. 

 

And I don’t see anything that says, from the minister’s remarks 

or anybody else’s comments, that that wouldn’t be the case or 

that there would only be a certain amount sold and here would 

be the criteria for the sale. I don’t see any of that. And I don’t 

see anybody jumping up and saying, we need to have this, we 

should do this. I don’t see that either. I do see people saying, 

what on earth are we doing? And this is a dangerous precedent 

to set and it’s dangerous for the province. 

 

So I don’t see the reason for this. I certainly don’t see why the 

minister has opened the door to letting these lands be sold 

without very much scrutiny. And you may have confidence in 

yourself when you’re sitting in the government seat and the 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5097 

Minister of Environment, but you’re also leaving this door open 

for any future person who comes in there, or future government. 

And I think we owe it to ourselves and to the people of this 

province to make sure that we leave the province in good shape 

when we leave our jobs as legislators. 

 

And I think that we have to take our jobs seriously because we 

do need to remember our connection to the environment, to the 

animals in the environment and the plants in the environment, 

and that we do have to have a connection, that we recognize 

that our health is dependent on their health as well and the 

health of the land. We can’t just take everything for immediate 

use and not expect some damage to be done that will be 

permanent and that will have lasting effect on the future of the 

province, the land of the province and the land that we turn over 

to our children and grandchildren. 

 

I think that we have . . . It’s interesting that there are over 600 

species of birds and mammals in Saskatchewan and their 

territorial ranges in southern Saskatchewan continue to shrink. 

Human activities and development over the last century 

including roads, towns, cities, agriculture, and industry have 

carved away 75 per cent of the natural areas in our province’s 

agriculture region. That’s aside from the places that the 3 

million acres that we protect. This is what’s happening as we 

just naturally let it go. 

 

This region contains one of the most altered landscapes in 

North America. That’s a significant comment, Mr. Speaker. 

When left to its own resources, the land unprotected has fallen 

victim to this erosion. Seventy-five per cent of the land, the 

natural areas, are in the agricultural region. So today, southern 

Saskatchewan’s wildlife populations are relying on 

approximately one-quarter of their original habitat. So that 

habitat is shrinking as we leave it to the natural forces. And so 

if we contemplate selling some of the 3 million protected areas, 

we are actually adding more into this erosion, and we will see 

more of the erosion of our natural . . . of our species of birds 

and mammals and their territorial ranges. 

 

So we do not have . . . I don’t think we have the authority to do 

this, Mr. Speaker. I think we have to look at what we are 

stewards of. And as legislators, we do have the ability to change 

dramatically what will happen to our ecosystem. And we have 

to remember that we are part of that ecosystem. Not only are we 

stewards of it; we are part of it. So when we contemplate 

changes of this magnitude or that have the ability to be of this 

magnitude, we are really putting in jeopardy so many things 

that I don’t think we’ve actually taken into account. And I think 

that we would do a disservice to ourselves and this legislature 

and this province and the children and the future if we would 

not ask the questions and we would not actually, I don’t think, 

put into regulation what this Bill contemplates. 

 

This is not something that I think should ever be contemplated 

— to lose the control of those 3 million acres. I was just reading 

how much of the natural habitat by natural erosion is going 

away. If we turn over the 3 million to the natural erosion, we’ll 

have nothing. We’ll have saved no animals and no species, and 

then we are then again. That is at our own peril. 

 

And I think that a sober second thought should be taken on 

putting forward Bills like this, that tamper with our natural 

resources — and I don’t mean our oil and gas and minerals — 

that tamper with the natural habitat, the natural lands, and 

natural order of things. I think we do that at our peril, and I 

think this is going to be opening the box to tamper, and I don’t 

see any benefit to that tampering. I think that we are actually 

looking at some significant, significant damage that could be 

done. 

 

And I think that we would have to seriously ask ourselves what 

would be the benefit to us if we did this. I don’t see anybody 

that is saying this would be a benefit to us. I really worry that 

whatever, whoever, or whatever reason we’re doing this for 

isn’t clear, and it certainly doesn’t offset the bad side or the 

downside of this decision. Nothing that I have seen so far or 

that I have read or that I have commented on today would at all 

make me believe that there is a balance of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. According to order, this House stands 

recessed until 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 13:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5067 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5070 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5074 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5087 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5092 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5092 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


