




















































Hansard: May 13, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 61A  THURSDAY, MAY 13, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5531 

 May 13, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would request leave of the Assembly for an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour and a privilege to be able to introduce a very special 

group in your gallery here to the Assembly. 

 

Just before I do that, I want to acknowledge the presence of 

Chief Guy Lonechild and many other First Nations leaders in 

the province of Saskatchewan as well as SaskPower officials 

who are here for a very important announcement today. And I 

think the Minister of SaskPower will be introducing them more 

fully, but we want to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost 100 years ago to the day of the very first 

organized curling match in Swift Current, the world gathered 

for the Ford World Women’s Curling Championship, March 

20th to 28th in Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, as you will know, it 

was broadcast across the country on TSN [The Sports 

Network], providing great exposure not just for my hometown, 

the great city of Swift Current, but also for the province and 

also for curling in Saskatchewan. We are, I think, the only 

jurisdiction on the continent that — or anywhere, frankly — 

that has as its official sport, curling. And it was on full display 

in Swift Current, March 20 to 28. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have members of the host committee who did 

an amazing job of putting those championships on in our 

province who have joined us today. They’re going to present us 

— myself and the Minister of Tourism — with one of the three 

flags that were on prominent display during the championships. 

And with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 

the Assembly and to put into the record the members of the host 

committee that have joined us here today. We want to thank 

them for the amazing job they did. 

 

We want to honour Barbara Walter who is a Co-Chair for the 

committee — maybe we’ll ask everyone to just stand or give a 

wave, whatever they’re comfortable with — and Bryan Tallon, 

her partner in this effort. Mr. Tallon was the Co-Chair. It’s hard 

for me to call him anything but Mr. Tallon. He was my 

automotives teacher long before he was organizing curling 

events in the province. Bryan’s wife Carole has joined him as 

well. 

 

Karen Biese is here. She was the Vice-Chair of hosting. Jeff 

Chambers was the Vice-Chair of the Keith’s Patch. And we’re 

told by curling officials, by the way, that our Keith’s Patch for 

this event in Swift Current actually out-performed a number of 

Briar Patches. None of the Canadian Briar Patches or none of 

the Saskatchewan Briar Patches, I should say, but some of the 

ones from other provinces. So they did a great job there. 

 

Connie Rittinger was the Vice-Chair of promotions; Jayson 

Sletten, Vice-Chair of facilities. And Jayson and his team did an 

amazing job of transforming the civic centre from the home of 

the Broncos to the home for this event. Lorna Spencer was the 

Vice-Chair of special events, and Andrea Stevenson was on the 

host committee as well. 

 

Four hundred and fifty-plus volunteers made this happen. 

Fifty-two thousand fans in total, I think that’s a Ford World 

Women’s Curling Championship record. An average of 2,200 

fans per draw, Mr. Speaker. Twelve teams competed for nine 

days and people will know that Germany was able to defeat 

Scotland 8-6 in extra ends in the final, Canada’s Jennifer Jones 

placing third. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know in Saskatchewan we’re famous for 

hosting best-ever events, but they only happen because of 

women and men the likes of which we welcome and honour 

today. We were happy to provide a bit of financial support for 

it, but the reason why there was a lot of laudatory comments 

about the Swift Current event was because of these folks that 

have joined us in the gallery. 

 

Here’s what the Canadian Curling Association Chair of the 

board of governors said in The Southwest Booster March 29, 

2010. Graham said, “The host committee has been one of the 

best that we have ever had the opportunity to work with . . . the 

way the community has got behind this event and supported it is 

really amazing.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we honour those who made that possible, 

who welcomed the world to Swift Current and Saskatchewan 

and did us so proudly with that event. I’d ask all members to 

welcome this group to their Legislative Assembly this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw, 

Deputy Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Through 

you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I too would like to 

pass along our congratulations and thank you to the organizing 

committee represented here from Swift Current. 

 

Curling’s often a pretty easy sell in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we take for granted that world events and 

world-class events that are held in our province will be sellouts 

and supported by the population. But we don’t often consider 

the work and the time and the effort that goes into those events 

and making them successful by the members of the community. 

 



5532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, it was a pleasure to see how smoothly the event in 

Swift Current was carried off, and of course to a very successful 

end. But I do want to join with the Premier and offer our 

congratulations and sincere thank you also for the wonderful 

work you did, not only for Swift Current, but for the province 

of Saskatchewan and also Canada in again showing that 

Saskatchewan can do the job when called upon. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — With leave for an extended introduction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for an opportunity to 

ask for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

hearings on SaskPower future generation plans in late 2009 and 

early 2010, we heard that our electrical utility would be 

pursuing emissions-free hydroelectric generation as part of its 

medium- and long-term plans. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to welcome some very 

special guests to the legislature here this morning that are seated 

in your gallery. They are here today for an announcement that 

we are very pleased to be hosting in the Legislative Building at 

11:30 this morning regarding a significant agreement on 

hydroelectric power between three First Nations in this 

province and additional folks as well. 

 

Joining us today are Grand Chief Guy Lonechild; Ron Burns, 

executive assistant to Grand Chief Guy Lonechild; Elder James 

Burns from the James Smith Cree Nation; Elder Delbert Britain 

from the Peter Chapman Band; Elder Jacob Sanderson from the 

Chakastaypasin Band of Cree; Chief Wally Burns from the 

James Smith Cree Nation; Chief Robert Head from the Peter 

Chapman Band; Chief Calvin Sanderson from the 

Chakastaypasin Band of Cree as well; Justin Burns from the 

James Smith Cree Nation; Jerry Head from the Peter Chapman 

Band; Derek Sanderson from the Chakastaypasin Band of Cree; 

Dwayne Seib from Fort-à-la-Corne Development Corporation; 

Scott McLean from the James Smith Cree Nation; Oliver 

Constant from the James Smith Cree Nation; Winston McLean 

from the James Smith Cree Nation; Jerry McLeod from Project 

Training; David Easton from Kiewit; Ian Kerr from Brookfield 

Renewable Power; John Kim Bell from Brookfield Renewable 

Power; Jacques Lacombe from Peter Kiewit; Guy Bruce from 

SaskPower; Kevin Doherty from SaskPower; Wayne Rude from 

SaskPower; and Ray Desjarlais from SaskPower. 

 

I invite all members to join us in the Qu’Appelle Gallery for 

this very special announcement at 11:30. And I would ask all 

members of the legislature to welcome our special guests here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming our guests here to witness 

the proceedings and to join for a very important announcement 

for the future power needs of the province of Saskatchewan. I’d 

like to particularly welcome Chief Guy Lonechild, good to see 

you here in the Assembly, Chief, as well as the three chiefs 

from the partner bands in this very important initiative, Chief 

Calvin Sanderson from Chakastaypasin — I’m sorry about that, 

bit of a . . . [inaudible] . . . tongue on that, but that’s the way it 

goes — as well as Chief Robert Head from Peter Chapman, and 

Chief Wally Burns from the James Smith. 

 

As well it’s really good to see the number of elders who are 

here today to support this very important endeavour. And I 

know that this is a project that has been going on for very long, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s been a lot of work done into this, a lot of 

thought, and I dare say a lot of prayer put in on the part of the 

elders. 

 

So the partners that are here from Brookfield, from 

Fort-à-la-Corne, and the different communities as well as 

SaskPower, we think this is a good announcement, Mr. Speaker. 

We await the details of course, but we think this is something 

that the province of Saskatchewan should see more of. There’s 

a tremendous opportunity here in terms of the future power 

needs of the province of Saskatchewan, and we should be 

partnering more fully with local communities and First Nations. 

So we’re glad to see this day going forward, and we’re glad to 

see these very important guests here in their Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly this morning, 

it’s an honour and privilege to introduce my first school group 

from Prince Albert since being elected. In the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, we have 14 students from grade 6, 7, and 8 from John 

Diefenbaker School, the senior band members from Prince 

Albert. Accompanying them this morning is the teacher, Deb 

McPherson and the chaperone is Kathy Olthuis. 

 

I had the honour this morning speaking with these students 

already, and I found out that some of these students were taught 

by my wife when they were in grade 1, so there’s a bit of a 

connection there. So it’s great to have them here this morning. 

And Kathy’s husband, Ken, and I go back a bit. He’s an RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] staff sergeant, an ident 

specialist as I was, so we’ve had some time to work together on 

some issues around Prince Albert, I should say. But I’d like to 

take the time now to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly 

and ask all members to do the same, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

Premier and the member from Elphinstone in welcoming the 

members of the First Nations who are here today, especially 

Chief Lonechild. 

 



May 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5533 

And I would be remiss if I didn’t mention an individual who 

I’ve worked with on a number of occasions, John Kim Bell, not 

for the work he’s doing here today, but for the establishment of 

the National Aboriginal Achievement Awards and the beautiful 

creations that he did in his career there. I just want to recognize 

all of you for the great work you’re doing. Keep it up and it’s 

well recognized within the province as being very, very 

productive. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the west gallery is a school group from Moose Jaw, the A.E. 

Peacock grade 12 class, and it’s certainly a pleasure to welcome 

them here. Their teacher, Carrie Kiefer is with them. Carrie is 

no stranger here. She brings her class here every year as they 

study the legislative proceedings in their classes. Along with 

them is Edith Newstead is the chaperone, and the bus driver, 

Elma Kaus. 

 

Peacock is a very special school. It’s one of the biggest high 

schools, it is the biggest high school in Moose Jaw, but they’re 

more famous lately for the Junior Achievement Awards. They 

won the Company of the Year last year and they won it again 

this year. So I’d like all members to welcome this bright bunch 

of students from my hometown of Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the members 

in welcoming one guest here from the city of Prince Albert, 

Ron Burns, who is the executive assistant to Grand Chief 

Lonechild. He has done, over his career in Prince Albert, a great 

deal of work for First Nations people and for people in general 

in the city of Prince Albert. So I’d like to make special mention 

and welcome him here today. 

 

Additionally I’d like to welcome, it’s the first school group for 

either of us coming from Prince Albert, so I’d like to take some 

time and welcome folks from John Diefenbaker. My mom is the 

community school coordinator at the school right across the 

playground. And I’d like to thank the folks from Diefenbaker 

for allowing me to spend time on their playground because our 

touch football league, we play football on the field there right 

next to their school, and I’m sure my footprints are deeper and 

bigger than the ones left by the students there. So thanks so 

much for allowing me and thanks for being here today, and I’d 

like all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, on the 

floor of the Assembly today, we have Robin East who is here 

for the first time. Robin was born in the Southwest of this 

province in Climax. He went to high school in Frontier and 

attended both the University of Regina and University of 

Saskatchewan. He also attended the SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] Kelsey Campus. 

 

Robin has a bachelor’s degree in social work, certificate in 

rehabilitation work, and has completed the assistive technology 

application certificate program through the Center on 

Disabilities at California State University. He has worked as a 

teacher associate, a behavioural therapist, and finally an officer 

with the federal public service. Presently Robin works for 

Canada Revenue Agency, adaptive technology program, as 

senior IT [information technology] infrastructure support 

analyst. Robin has lived and worked in Saskatchewan and will 

remain in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I first met Robin when he was presented the 

Saskatoon and District Labour Council’s, Labour Community 

Service Award. The Saskatoon and District Labour Council and 

the United Way of Saskatoon and area hold an annual event to 

recognize the achievements of a dedicated trade unionist who is 

active in both the community and the union. I was privileged to 

see Robin receive these prestigious awards and to learn about 

his vast achievements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list is endless but I’ll attempt to list a few. 

Currently Robin is the lead facilitator of the coalition of blind, 

deaf blind, and partially sighted Rights Holders of Canada; on 

the board of directors with the Council of Canadians with 

Disabilities; the national president of the Alliance for Equality 

of Blind Canadians; member of the Canada Transportation 

Agency advisory committee; member of the city of Saskatoon 

accessible playground committee; member of the North 

Saskatchewan living centre; member of the Saskatoon blind 

skiers; member of the Guide Dog Users of Canada; and a 

roaming advocate for persons with disabilities. 

 

Robin has been a member of the CLC [Canadian Labour 

Congress] National Disabilities Rights working group, national 

representative for access members for the Public Service 

Alliance of Canada, and sat on the national equal opportunities 

committee, member of the prairie regional council for Public 

Service Alliance of Canada. He’s a member of the SFL 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] human rights committee. 

He’s held various positions with the Dundonald Community 

Association in Saskatoon including president. He’s an active 

member of the Saskatoon ad hoc committee for persons with 

disabilities. He’s Chair of the Saskatchewan Office of 

Disabilities Issues advisory committee, and he is the first Chair 

of the Saskatoon accessibility committee for the city of 

Saskatoon and Chair of the Saskatoon human rights committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a citizen of this province, Robin has been granted 

rights under provincial laws. He has been granted rights under 

federal laws and more importantly under our constitution, 

specifically under section 15 of the Charter of Rights and 



5534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

Freedoms. And, Mr. Speaker, more recently the provinces and 

the federal government have joined together and have signed on 

to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, imagine all this great legislation and law, and 

it is all for nothing. Robin says that he, as a person who is blind, 

cannot perform the most important act a citizen can do, and that 

is to cast his vote in a provincial election. He cannot cast it 

independently and in secret. In all elections in this province 

since he has been able to vote, Robin has never known who gets 

his X. He literally marks his ballot with invisible ink. He picks 

a candidate by feeling holes in a template. He can pick hole no. 

1, hole no. 2, etc., but he never knows for sure whose name is 

beside that hole. He makes his mark; he cannot tell if that mark 

actually shows up. As such, he’s using invisible ink for all 

practical purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine all of our citizens trying to guess which 

number their candidate is and counting down the holes in the 

template and then placing their mark with invisible ink. Citizens 

of this province would not stand for it, and frankly we would 

not have a true democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Robin is here today asking for a simple thing. 

He’s asking to be able to vote for the candidate of his choice, 

knowing who he or she is, and he’s asking that he makes his 

mark, that he can verify that the mark to ensure he has chosen 

the best person to represent him in the Legislative Assembly. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, in 2010 people that are blind cannot 

independently cast their vote in secret. It is not enough to have 

someone assist them. It is not enough to have someone see their 

mark and verify to them that it’s correct. They should be able to 

have a secret vote like all of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

The ability to make this happen exists today. It has occurred in 

the municipality of Saskatoon in the last election. It can happen 

in this province if the will is there. Mr. Speaker, Robin is not 

begging this Legislative Assembly to do the right thing. He is 

simply asking that you consider him when you make your 

decision that you consider what it means to have human rights, 

what it means to have a constitution, what it means to sign on to 

the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities. The rights granted to him as a citizen of Canada 

and a citizen of Saskatchewan are there. However, the 

activation of those rights needs to occur here in the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Each of us need to give Robin the ability to vote with dignity, 

independently, and in secret. Each of us need to cast a vote for 

all the citizens in this province that are blind. Today the citizens 

of Saskatchewan who are blind cannot do this. They are asking 

us, with grace and dignity, to grant them the ability to be a true 

citizen and to do what is appropriate and to do the most 

important thing a citizen can do in a democracy, and that is to 

exercise one’s franchise to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Robin is here for all persons that are blind and that 

wish to do the most important act that they can do, and that is to 

vote for you and the members of the Legislative Assembly, a 

representative that will stand up and ensure our rights, the rights 

of citizens, are accessible to all. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 

to welcome Robin East to our Assembly. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming Robin East to the 

legislature today. I first met Mr. East a number of years ago 

when we were both doing volunteer work for the Retinitis 

Pigmentosa Foundation. It was a motorcycle rally that raised 

money for people that were fighting vision disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker. I can advise the Assembly that he was a tireless 

worker and came out and did a lot of volunteer work, spoke to 

our groups and was able to tell and convey the story with a 

great deal of passion and was able to get people to empathize 

and to understand with the issues that people with limited vision 

were facing. He’s been a tireless advocate in other issues 

relating to vision issues, and he should be commended by all 

members for the hard work and the commitment that he has 

made to those issues, and I’d want to encourage all members to 

listen to the issues that are being put forward. 

 

The issues that he raises today on the importance of democracy 

and the importance to cast a vote is certainly something that 

will warrant careful consideration. And I would certainly want 

to encourage all members to listen to what is being put forward. 

And on a personal basis, I would want to welcome Mr. East to 

the Assembly and ask all members to join me in welcoming 

him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted 

to join with the member from Moose Jaw North in welcoming 

Carrie Kiefer and the class from A.E. Peacock. Mr. Speaker, 

while technically Peacock may be in Moose Jaw North, it sits 

on the boundary of the constituencies, and Peacock has a 

reputation for drawing students from across the city — a 

number of recognizable faces, Mr. Speaker, in the crowd. 

 

But it’s important that students have an experience and an 

understanding of the democratic process. So it is a true pleasure 

to see them here today and have them be able to watch 

proceedings. And I want to say a thank you to Ms. Kiefer for 

being involved in this and dedicated to the process of expanding 

the opportunities for students and bringing them for a visit to 

the legislature. It’s greatly appreciated and will pay off with 

better informed citizens in the future. So join with the member 

to welcome A.E. Peacock here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of this Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce 

Heather Malek in the west gallery. Heather is one of thousands 

of members of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] 

Matters, a group concerned with this government’s handling of 

the privatization of the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, including the fact the government has missed its 

deadline to respond to several CRTC [Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission] 

complaints regarding the makeup of the SCN board and the 

government’s stewardship of the SCN licence. The CRTC, by 



May 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5535 

the way, has alerted the government and requested immediate 

response. With that, I ask us all to join in welcoming Heather to 

her Legislative Assembly today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

about the safety and the conditions of our highway system. This 

petition pertains to the Highway No. 10 between Fort 

Qu’Appelle and the junction of No. 1. And the petition goes on 

to say that this highway is the main traffic route to a year-round 

tourist destination, as well as this portion of the highway serves 

three major inland grain terminals. And the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker, reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of No. 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the good folks from Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Weyburn and Regina, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. This petition is signed by citizens who are concerned that 

the government’s proposal currently tabled in this House of 

repealing the schedule listing the designated lands will 

endanger protection and designation of these lands. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and wetlands or one-third 

of all wildlife habitat lands in Saskatchewan in their natural 

state. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection of 

wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw proposed 

amendments that will negatively affect the protection of 

wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of concerned citizens in my 

community of Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 

the 180 seniors centres around the province, most of them in 

rural Saskatchewan, who are in danger of closing due to rising 

costs of utilities, insurance, etc. Many of these places provide 

recreation and social activities and health clinics and workshops 

that contribute to the enhanced quality of life for the seniors 

who use them. And the closure of these centres will lead to a 

deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors which will 

add to our strain on our long-term care facilities and hospitals: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much needed funding to assist seniors recreation centres to 

remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And the petition is signed by citizens from Laird. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing in Saskatoon. And we know that the costs of rents are 

going up, and yet the number of actual vacancies compared to a 

few years ago is actually much smaller. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more people 

in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, and that the government 

also implement a process of rent review or rent control to 

better protect tenants in a non-competitive housing 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 915. This petition addresses concerns of 

Saskatchewan people about the quality of Stanley Mission road. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the people and leadership of the people of the 

community of Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 



5536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of students who have been 

negatively affected by recent cuts at SIAST. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

To cause the Sask Party government to recognize the 

importance of the programs offered by SIAST campuses 

in ensuring that we develop a highly skilled and educated 

workforce in Saskatchewan, and in so doing to cause the 

Sask Party government to stop shortchanging SIAST 

which forces the institution to cut important programs, and 

instead to immediately increase funding to SIAST to allow 

for the reinstatement of programs affected by recent 

budget cuts. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from here in Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. The petition is circulated and 

signed by Saskatchewan residents. Due to the exorbitant 

amount that Duck Lake citizens are forced to pay for clean, safe 

water, it’s causing the individuals hardship. And it’s forcing — 

believe it or not, Mr. Speaker — some folks to actually move 

from the town of Duck Lake to other jurisdictions. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

obligation to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from 

Wakaw, Rosetown, Macdowall, and Rosthern. I so present. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present yet another 

petition with respect to water issues that are affecting rural 

Saskatchewan. A government ministry has directed that these 

customers may no longer treat non-potable water using methods 

approved by Sask Health and that these residents of Furdale, in 

dealing in good faith with SaskWater for over 30 years, have 

paid large amounts for their domestic systems and in-home 

treatment equipment. The alternative water supply being 

referred to by a government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise once again here today to present petitions on 

behalf of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it 

relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by 

the Sask Party. They allude to the two consecutive billion-dollar 

deficit budgets put forward by the Sask Party and the billions of 

dollars of debt growth projected under the Sask Party. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Sturgis, 

Canora, and Rhein. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present a petition from citizens concerned or in support of 

midwifery here in Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by 

residents concerned that, despite the fact The Midwifery Act was 

proclaimed more than two years ago, there are only seven 

licensed midwives serving all of Saskatchewan currently. The 

petition, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 



May 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5537 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan’s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mining Week 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. National Mining 

Week is a great opportunity to take stock of the wonderful 

resources we have right here in Saskatchewan. National Mining 

Week is about celebrating all of the hard-working people in the 

mining industry and provides an occasion to acknowledge their 

tremendous contribution to our province. 

 

While Saskatchewan may not provide 20 per cent of the world’s 

natural resources as the Provincial Secretary might believe, 

Saskatchewan certainly does mine and export a very large 

amount of various resources such as limestone, shale, graphite, 

bentonite, magnesium sulphate, clay, coal, copper, zinc, gold, 

kaolin, potash, sodium sulphate, and uranium to name a few. 

Mining is a major contributor to Saskatchewan’s economy, 

directly contributing to almost $2 billion in revenue to the 

provincial government in 2008. These revenues support 

government programs and services such as health care, 

education, and infrastructure development. 

 

With a large number of operating mines, Saskatchewan is a 

significant player in the global mining scene and is currently the 

world’s largest producer and exporter of potash and second 

largest producer of uranium. The mining industry also 

contributes substantially to the province’s economic growth by 

creating high paying jobs and providing business opportunities 

and investments in our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in celebrating 

Mining Week and reflecting upon the hard work and dedication 

of the people who work daily in our province’s mining industry 

and celebrating the rich and diverse mining industry that we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

Celebrating Sikh Culture in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

weekend I had the honour of taking part in this year’s Vaisakhi 

fundraising event presented by the Sikh community of Regina. 

The day was highlighted by an array of cultural dances that 

were absolutely incredible. Mr. Speaker, I would personally like 

to thank Nick and Kelly Dhaliwal along with their families for 

the warmth and friendship they shared with me at the supper 

and throughout the year. They all went out of their way to 

ensure that I was welcomed to the community. 

 

The Sikh culture has a long and proud history of contributing to 

Saskatchewan society and cultural mosaic. During the 1980s 

Sikhs travelled across the country in an effort to raise funds to 

purchase temples in both Regina and Saskatoon. With the 

opening of the Sikh temple in Regina in 1988, their goal was 

realized. Now they have their own place of worship in both 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a rapid rise in the number of Sikh families 

settling in Saskatchewan. This makes me proud to live in such 

an open and welcoming multicultural province. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s crucial that we continue to encourage the atmosphere in 

which groups such as the Sikhs can proudly celebrate their 

culture and their faith. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Supporting Gender and Sexual Diversity 

in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Avenue Community Centre for Gender and Sexual Diversity in 

Saskatoon held its 17th annual gala on April 30th. And the best 

part of the evening, many believe, are the awards. The Avenue 

Community Centre recognizes those who’ve made significant 

contributions to a strong and vibrant, healthy LGBTT [lesbian, 

gay, bi-sexual, two-spirit and transgender] community — a step 

forward, we can agree, for Saskatoon and in fact all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Today as the government takes a dangerous step back in time 

by moving to the courts the question of allowing marriage 

commissioners to refuse to perform same sex marriages, the 

Avenue Community Centre presented the Community Service 

Award to Scott T. Bell who wrote the legal arguments for the 

Coalition for Human Equality that helped convince the 

Saskatchewan government in the early ’90s to make sexual 

orientation a prohibited ground of discrimination in The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code — something that we all 

take for granted today, especially today. Thank you Scott for 

your work, truly ahead of your time. 

 

Other winners included Roxy Diva, also known as Mitch 

Morgans, Rylan Ledene, and Thom Knutson, and Kent 

Macauley who were also recognized for their outstanding 

community work. Mr. Speaker, the Bridge City Chorus, a 

mixed non-profit choral ensemble made up of people from the 

GLBT [gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgendered] community 

and their friends and allies were also recognized. And they’re 

celebrating their 19th anniversary. 



5538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these special people who go above and beyond in supporting 

diversity in Saskatoon and our province. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Asthma Awareness Month 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is 

national Asthma Awareness Month. Asthma is a chronic 

inflammatory disease of the airways that causes those afflicted 

to suffer from shortness of breath, tightness in the chest, 

coughing and wheezing. The strongest risk factors for 

developing asthma are a family history of asthma, exposure in 

infancy to high levels of house dust mites, and/or tobacco. 

Children are at the highest risk from air pollution due to the 

small size of their lungs. 

 

According to the World Health Organization, asthma is now a 

serious public health problem with over 100 million sufferers 

worldwide. The prevalence of asthma in Canada has been 

increasing over the last 20 years, and it is estimated that 

currently over 3 million Canadians suffer from asthma. 

Unfortunately researchers are yet to pinpoint the cause of the 

increase in asthma. 

 

Though there is no cure for asthma, there is something we can 

do. Regular exercise is a great way to control asthma. Exercise 

helps you strengthen your breathing muscles, boost your 

immune system, and keep a healthy body weight. All of those 

benefits can improve asthma in the long run. Though many 

Canadians are afflicted with asthma, the disease will be kept 

under control as long as we continue to take the proper 

measures. I am sure that there are people in this Assembly with 

or who know someone who suffers from it. I hope everyone in 

this Assembly will go the extra mile to help those in our 

province who battle asthma. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Regina City Boys’ Basketball Championship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to recognize 

a constituency high school, Luther High School, for their 

victory in the Regina senior boys’ city championships. The 

Campbell Tartans squared off with the Luther Lions in the city 

finals. I was pleased to be in attendance, along with my 

colleagues from Regina Dewdney and P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Northcote, for what was an excellent game well played by both 

teams with a wild and crazy finish. 

 

Three-year senior and co-captain Andrew Henry sank a 

last-second buzzer-beater in overtime to secure the win. It was 

Luther that came out on top. This is the first senior boys’ city 

championship for Luther since 1992. And of course, Luther is 

well known for its rich basketball history as hosts of the storied 

LIT [Luther Invitational Tournament]. 

 

The players of this fine squad include Ethan Kummerfield, 

Brendan Lee, Justin Lee, Andrew Henry, Mitchell Jones, 

Xavier Kosolofski, Paddy Foley, Eric Anderson, Kelsey 

Guenzel, Brock Mackenzie, Matt Harolson, Carter Carson. I’m 

pleased to recognize the coaches, Mr. Drew Hunter, Mr. Bill 

Johnson, Mr. Adam Hunter, and Mr. Joel Hunter, and as well 

the managers, Mr. Landon Bigalky, Mr. John Schulte, and Mr. 

Tanner Goetz. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me to recognize and congratulate players, coaches, and 

managers of the Luther Lions on winning the 2010 city 

championships and wish them well with their respective future 

endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

bring encouraging news on the issue of surgical wait times in 

Saskatchewan. The StarPhoenix reported today that the number 

of patients waiting longer than 18 months for surgeries in 

Saskatoon has been cut in half compared to two years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 2007-2008 to 2009-10, the overall number of 

patients waiting more than 18 months decreased by 54 per cent. 

Those who waited more than 12 months decreased by some 37 

per cent. These improvements can be credited to the hard work 

and dedication of the surgical services team in the Saskatoon 

Health Region. Mr. Speaker, Jenny Bartsch, the director of 

surgery services in the Saskatoon Health Region said, “Targeted 

funding from the provincial government also helped the region 

reduce wait times . . . allowing for more staff to be hired and 

more procedures to be performed.” Examples of this targeted 

funding include our government’s commitment to increasing 

training seats for doctors and nurses and construction of the 

multi-million dollar Academic Health Science Centre on the 

campus of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wait times reported today stand in stark 

contrast to what the members opposite have been saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan. The NDP [New Democratic Party] 

members continue to go around the province and tell everyone 

that wait times are up. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is an incorrect 

statement and yet another example of the fear-mongering and 

bullying tactics that the NDP have resorted to. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Definitions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the members 

opposite have problems with the actual definition of a few key 

words like accountability, Mr. Speaker, or consultation, but 

they can’t seem to really figure out one of the simplest words, 

Mr. Speaker, a four-letter word, w-a-l-l. 

 

A wall is usually a solid structure, Mr. Speaker, dependable, but 

other walls you can’t count on. They look reliable at first, but 

when you look beneath the surface, there is just failure, 

disappointment, and broken promises underneath. 

 

[10:45] 



May 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5539 

A wall usually supports infrastructure, but other walls they strip 

100 per cent of the equity from our Crown corporations 

meaning our Crowns will scramble to build and maintain our 

province’s infrastructure. A wall usually protects vulnerable 

people from the elements or perhaps even vulnerable land. But 

other walls cut programs and hurt vulnerable people and even 

dismantle legislation that protects vulnerable land. 

 

Some walls are known as curtain walls, because they are not 

load-bearing but function as a decoration. They may even be 

reminiscent of another time, perhaps another Devine era of 

history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Sometimes a wall may refer to a barrier you cannot get through. 

But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, walls are built by 

people, and people can tear them right down. So in 2011 the 

people of Saskatchewan will be ready and waiting to tear this 

wall down. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. On 

Tuesday the Minister of Health told this House and I want to 

quote it, “The agreement hasn’t been finalized. It’s up to the 

Saskatoon Health Region to have a look at the agreement too to 

see whether it makes sense to them . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did he say an agreement hadn’t been finalized 

when construction began on April 1st of this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The member opposite seems to have a 

hard time differentiating between a Catholic Health Ministry 

that may go ahead and purchase some land and start building, 

Mr. Speaker, and the health region, Mr. Speaker. There is a 

complete delineation, Mr. Speaker. The health board held a 

meeting yesterday that looked at a proposal put forward by the 

Catholic Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker, decided that it was a 

great proposal because, Mr. Speaker, it is precedent setting in 

the province. 

 

It allows seniors to age in place. It allows seniors to age with 

dignity. It allows seniors to age with their spouse, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many positive things about this new 

proposal, Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand why the NDP are 

always so negative. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was the Ministry of 

Health that signed the MOU [memorandum of understanding] 

with Amicus in March, and not the health . . . [inaudible] . . . 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister yesterday which 

company had been given the contract to build this new facility 

which will be paid for by the public. And it’s passing strange 

this minister wasn’t able to answer the question. Funny, since 

construction began on April 1st, and there’s a big hole in 

Stonebridge. 

 

Well we now know that Miners Construction is building this 

facility. The president of Miners Construction, Michael 

Stensrud, was appointed to the Saskatoon Health Region board 

by the Sask Party government. And we know that Mr. Stensrud 

and his company have donated $18,000 to the Sask Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question: was the contract tendered, given that 

the public is paying for this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I find that 

very interesting. Is that member accusing the Stensruds of 

having a conflict of interest here, Mr. Speaker? Is she . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Is she accusing and implying that 

there was manipulation of a contract by the Stensruds, who 

have been in business for decades, Mr. Speaker, and a very, 

very reputable family in this province, Mr. Speaker? I’m quite 

shocked that she would go on that angle because Mr. Stensrud 

recused himself of every board meeting that discussed anything 

about this proposal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Stensruds are a nice family, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m asking questions on behalf of the public 

because we know, we know this deal originated in this building. 

We know that the Saskatoon Health Region was told about this 

in January. We know it was the government that signed the 

MOU with Amicus in March. We know that Mr. Stensrud, a 

significant contributor to the Sask Party, was appointed to the 

health board, and we know that this government has claimed for 

the past three days that no final decision has been made yet. But 

there was a hole dug out in Stonebridge on April 1st. 

 

Is it the minister’s view, is he sticking to his story that no 

agreement was signed, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard that 

opposition, to use a line off of Lewis Draper, carp on, on and on 

about the lack of long-term care beds . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just ask the members 

to, I would ask the members, the opposition members to allow 

the response to the question. If there’s a witty comment, that’s 

one thing, but just ongoing dialogue is certainly . . . impedes the 

work of the Assembly. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the 



5540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

opposition complain about the lack of long-term care beds, Mr. 

Speaker, especially in Saskatoon. The Ministry of Health 

entered . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We’ve heard the members opposite 

carp on about the lack of long-term care beds in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. We have entered in . . . a memorandum of 

understanding is a long way from any sort of deal or agreement 

signed between the health region and Amicus, Mr. Speaker, a 

subsidiary of the Catholic health foundation. Mr. Speaker, this 

is innovative. This is new, Mr. Speaker. It is great for seniors. I 

don’t know what they’ve got about senior health care in this 

province because it’s a positive, forward-moving project, Mr. 

Speaker. They should be in favour of it instead of carping on. 

 

The Speaker: — Members have been reminded time and time 

again not to infer anything negative against other members. I 

ask the member from Regina Walsh Acres to refrain from that 

comment. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s an odour wafting 

over this Assembly and it’s not the flax burning outside the . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s review the situation. The situation is this: the 

Saskatoon Health Region knew nothing about this until it was 

brought to them by the government. That’s point number one. 

Point number two, it was the government, the Sask Party 

government, that entered into an MOU in March with Amicus. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the construction started on April 1st of 2010, 

and they wouldn’t be constructing unless they knew what the 

deal was. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why did the minister insist all week there was 

no deal when that facility is being built while he was saying 

that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health 

signed an MOU, a memorandum of understanding. What was 

needed in this province is more long-term care. We entered into 

a memorandum of understanding with the Catholic Health 

Ministry to look at this. We brought the parties together. That’s 

what we do as the Ministry of Health, unlike 16 years of NDP 

government that turned their back on seniors in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the odour that that member is smelling is the decay and 

the lack of money that went into long-term care facilities across 

this province. That’s the odour that that member’s smelling, Mr. 

Speaker, 16 years of NDP government. This government has 

acted quickly in two and a half years, Mr. Speaker, and this is a 

very positive project for Saskatoon. 

 

I think the members opposite would rather have seniors live in 

acute care centres in City Hospital than in an innovative, new 

approach like this long-term care facility. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — [Inaudible] . . . Ministry of Health, his 

deputy minister is meeting with affiliates today. And I ask this 

question: are those affiliates who are doing bake sales, who are 

out there doing walkathons, and golf tournaments, and 

everything under the sun, are they going to get the same terms 

as Amicus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve met with many 

groups around the province and some in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, some that are religious based. And they all have 

different ideas of how the proposal could be funded. 

 

This was new. This was innovative. This was the Catholic 

Health Ministry coming up with 100 per cent of the capital — 

never proposed by anybody else, Mr. Speaker. It is a pilot 

project. And believe me, when we know this is going to be as 

successful as it’s going to be, we’ll certainly look at spreading it 

around the province with other organizations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Agreement Between Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Health minister isn’t the 

only Sask Party minister that has problems with telling stories 

that don’t add up. For the last two nights in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Advanced Education has been telling 

some stories that simply do not hold water, stories about the 

merger of Carlton Trail Regional College and St. Peter’s 

College. Throughout the process, Mr. Speaker, he’s been 

insisting that things are just getting started. 

 

Well the facts tell a very different story. We know there’s a 

joint CEO [chief executive officer]. We know that a new board 

is being established. We know that they are merging finances 

and programming. We know that they are merging IT services 

and centralizing staff and offices. We know, Mr. Speaker, that 

the intent is a complete and comprehensive merger, according 

to documents from the minutes. 

 

My question to the minister: will he just come clean with 

Saskatchewan people and admit that this deal is not just getting 

started, but it is already signed and done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

report to the people of this province the investments that we’re 

making in post-secondary education and especially relating to 

the significance and importance of our regional colleges, Mr. 

Speaker, I can speak directly to the two colleges in question. 

What we’ve seen over the course of the last year or so, we’ve 

seen that $16 million has been invested from this government, 

from the federal government, from the private sector, and other 

fundraising initiatives, Mr. Speaker, to ensure we’re enhancing 

the student experience in the central eastern region of the 



May 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5541 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member makes a great statement about some 

new partnership. This partnership has evolved over the course 

of the last 10 years. And as I mentioned during committee, he 

may have missed this, this is so secret that we put out a press 

release, making sure that people knew there was an event last 

July 10th. And Professor Kobussen at that point said, there’s a 

new partnership being formed, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 

member opposite finally caught up with what’s going on in 

Humboldt. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my ears just stopped bleeding 

from last night’s committee meeting. The answer the minister is 

giving, Mr. Speaker, suggesting throughout committee over the 

last two days that due diligence is just beginning, has just 

started, raises some serious questions for this Assembly and for 

the people of Saskatchewan. Given the documentation, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been received and the points that eventually 

were revealed through committee, it’s clear that this process, 

Mr. Speaker, the plan for a complete merger is a done deal and 

it is fully going ahead. 

 

My question to the minister: why does he claim that due 

diligence is only beginning right now when the ministry has had 

officials at the table for almost a year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again, thank you very much for the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to continue providing an update on 

this. Over the course of the last 10 years, this partnership has 

continued to evolve. In fact what we’ve seen previously is 

Carlton Trail was utilizing and drawing on St. Peter’s to do 

some of the university-level courses. Obviously St. Peter’s is 

affiliated directly with the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact there are two level of consultations, Mr. Speaker. First 

and foremost, the level of consultation that has occurred 

through and by the respective institutions, we have been 

involved in that, certainly. We are attentive to grassroots ideas 

about including and improving student and enhancing student 

experience in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As far as the process that the member opposite is now referring 

to as far as getting started, that’s a process that will be 

undertaken by the ministry. And we’re certainly pleased to say 

that they are going to be a range of consultative efforts that will 

include First Nations and Métis peoples. It will include labour 

organizations. It will include the Enterprise committee. Mr. 

Speaker, happy to state that we’re working to ensure the student 

experience improves in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of the 

Environment slipped the Minister of Advanced Ed her speaking 

notes when it comes to consultation with First Nations people. 

The minister suggests that the due process is just beginning. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some questions about the due process: 

where was the due process, Mr. Speaker, when a transition 

board was established almost a year ago? Where was the due 

process, Mr. Speaker, when a joint CEO of both colleges was 

appointed? Where was the due process, Mr. Speaker, when the 

minister appointed a new board of Carlton Trail with strong 

connected ties to St. Pete’s College? 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker: where was the due process when 

finances, programming, and classrooms were being put 

together, Mr. Speaker? For crying out loud, why is the 

minister’s due process and due diligence occurring just now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as far as due process and 

due diligence, maybe the members opposite might want to look 

at the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 

Employees’ Union] press release and highlighting the word 

privatization. A day later, and we see the NDP press release 

also highlights the notion of privatization. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just flat out inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. What 

we’ve seen is $16 million invested in these two institutions, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen community groups come in and, through 

St. Peter’s, raise $3 million through extensive efforts. We were 

able to match those dollars and the federal government, through 

the knowledge infrastructure initiative, come in and top up over 

six. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in working with the Ministry of Education we 

were able to go out to Humboldt with the Deputy Premier and 

make an announcement on the new education centre in 

Humboldt combining the synergies between the ministries, Mr. 

Speaker, all in the name of enhancing the student experience. 

Mr. Speaker, as far as due diligence, I’m glad the member 

opposite is finally catching up with the news release from last 

July. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here is about public 

assets — assets that are owned by all Saskatchewan people. The 

public ought to have a say, Mr. Speaker, about the future of 

public assets instead of the approach we’ve seen from the 

Minister of Health, instead of the approach we’ve seen from the 

Minister of Environment, instead of the approach we’ve seen 

from every minister on that front bench, Mr. Speaker, where 

they make a decision and do the consultation after. That’s not 

how a transparent democracy works. Will the Minister admit a 

decision has been made and now this whole sham of 

consultation with the public is nothing more than a sham? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that 



5542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

what is not a sham is $1.6 billion that’s been invested in 

post-secondary education by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve seen record investments in infrastructure. We’ve seen 

new dollars in this budget, Mr. Speaker, one of the highest 

investments in post-secondary education across the country in a 

year that’s seen very, very tight fiscal constraints, not just 

within this province, but across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see, this continued investment is ensuring 

that we have excellence and innovation, that we have greater 

inclusion on our campuses, that we’re serving more First 

Nations and Métis students., that we’re making sure 

affordability and accessibility and equity issues are being 

addressed, Mr. Speaker. What we’re not going to take, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that the member opposite just ran into a 

press release that was issued last summer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Out-of-Province Camping Fees 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, can the Minister confirm 

that the budget he delivered in March needs to be amended 

because it violates the New West Partnership the Premier 

signed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m unaware . . . Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m unaware that there is anything in the 

New West Partnership that would require an amendment of the 

budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day, examples of 

this government’s incompetence keep rolling in. It’s no wonder 

that Saskatchewan people are losing trust in this Premier. 

Insiders tell us that the extra out-of-province camping fee 

introduced in this budget violates the New West Partnership 

Agreement and that the government will be . . . embarrassingly 

will need to remove this fee very soon.  

 

To the minister: did he not know that this fee would violate the 

New West Partnership deal when he brought it in? Where was 

the due diligence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, thanks for the question. 

Certainly during the budget process, this was an initiative put in 

place to recoup more dollars that are going to be staying within 

the provincial park system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Obviously the people of Saskatchewan, by virtue of the subsidy 

that the provincial parks receive, pay over and above camping 

fees. And so we felt that it was appropriate to look at having 

outside of Saskatchewan residents that come to Saskatchewan 

to camp pay extra, Mr. Speaker. And so certainly we are 

looking at, not just the camping fees, but certainly other 

initiatives within the context of the New West Partnership. But 

we’re very comfortable with this new approach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — One ministry, one minister not knowing 

what the other ministries and other ministers are doing, Mr. 

Speaker. Insiders tell us that this fee was rushed through to 

avoid having Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport provided much 

. . . to prevent them from providing much-needed revenue for 

their ministry. But the government didn’t think through the 

implications of the New West Partnership as they threw 

together their budget. Now they’re having to embarrassingly 

amend their budget. 

 

To the minister: how will the government make up for the 

revenue shortfall that is a direct result of complete 

incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, this was hardly done for 

additional revenue into the provincial parks when you take into 

account the fact that we believe that $150,000 in additional 

revenue will be raised, in comparison to the $9 million subsidy 

that the provincial parks receive. So it’s clearly a small 

percentage of what the provincial park budget will be across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at other recreational activities 

across the western provinces, there are differential fees for 

out-of-province residents in other recreational activities, Mr. 

Speaker. I can think of one example in the Kananaskis Park, 

Mr. Speaker, in Alberta. So this is clearly something that we are 

looking at within the context of the New West Partnership. And 

clearly, Mr. Speaker, the budgeting process doesn’t . . . We 

have to do our work during the budget process regardless of 

what work is being done elsewhere within government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister seems to have 

no awareness of the implications of the New West Partnership 

deal. Further he dismisses the amount, hundreds of thousands of 

dollars, at the same time as that government’s cutting mosquito 

programs and Dutch elm programs. Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t 

make sense. 

 

Day after day examples of this government’s incompetence just 

keep piling up. It’s no wonder that Saskatchewan people are 

losing trust in that Premier. The government was working on 

this budget since last fall. The government was also working on 

the New West Partnership since last fall. But they didn’t realize 

until last week that the two were on a collision course. That’s 

utter incompetence, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: when will the 

Sask Party learn how to govern? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 



May 13, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5543 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will not take any counsel 

from the members opposite when it comes to the provincial 

parks system in the province, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 

the lack of investment in the provincial parks across 

Saskatchewan when those members were in government, Mr. 

Speaker, comparing to the record levels of capital investment 

into the provincial parks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly looked at ways where . . . When you 

look at the fact that in many parts of the provincial parks 

system, especially on the west side of the province where nearly 

50 per cent of campers come from outside of the province and 

those campers don’t pay the subsidy that all the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan pay, Mr. Speaker. So this was one of the reasons 

why we did look at this, Mr. Speaker, but we’re not going to 

take any counsel when it comes to provincial parks. 

 

When it comes to adding a tax for the people of Saskatchewan, 

when it comes to firewood, Mr. Speaker, within the provincial 

parks for the wiener roast tax, Mr. Speaker, or looking at 

options as the members opposite did in terms of closing down 

provincial parks, we’re not looking at that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Access Issues for Voters 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Robin East is in the legislature 

today. Robin is legally blind and because of this, Robin can’t 

perform one of the most important acts a Saskatchewan citizen 

can do — cast his vote in a provincial election in complete 

confidence and privacy. In all elections he has voted in, Robin 

has had to vote by feeling holes in a template, hoping that he 

picks the right hole, never knowing for certain who gets his 

vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister assure Robin and other legally 

blind Saskatchewan citizens that in the next provincial election 

they’ll be able to vote for the candidate of their choice, knowing 

with confidence that when they make their mark, they have 

placed it by the candidate of their choice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’d like to thank Mr. 

East for coming here today and raising this concern. It’s an 

important concern, and in the issue of democracy, the ability of 

a person, a citizen to be able to cast a vote is one of the most 

fundamental rights that we have as citizens. So it’s certainly 

something we want to look at very carefully. 

 

I can advise the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in late April of this 

year, the Chief Electoral Officer wrote a letter to stakeholders 

raising concerns about the issue of accessibility for a number of 

different issues that arise around accessibility. I want to advise 

the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that it is the intention of our 

government to look at those issues, not necessarily waiting for 

the reappointment of another Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

But those are issues that we think are fundamental before going 

into the next election and would very much want to see those 

issues addressed because we think they are fundamental to 

democracy. So the issues that Mr. East raises are ones that are 

things that we would very carefully want to look at. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about 

democracy, but I’m a little more concerned about waiting for 

the Chief Electoral Officer. Mr. Speaker, under provincial law, 

under federal law, under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 

and more recently, Mr. Speaker, the provinces and the federal 

government have joined together and have signed on to the 

United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities. Robin and other legally blind people have the right 

to vote independently and privately. 

 

In Saskatoon, in the 2009 civic election, approximately 75 

people used Automark voter assist terminal, an optical scan 

ballot marking system that provides the visually impaired with 

the ability to vote in the usual way. The majority of people who 

used the system found it to be very helpful. Mr. Speaker, is the 

minister going to be implementing the use of Automark voter 

assist terminals in the next provincial election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it would be premature to 

commit to any particular kind of system. I can advise the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite had 16 

years to do something with this. It is our intention to try and 

have something in place prior to the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will look to them for some co-operation and some 

assistance as we put through whatever appropriate changes are 

made because, Mr. Speaker, and to all members and to all 

citizens, it is important we have a fair, democratic, open 

election. And we want to ensure that all voters have the right to 

cast their ballot in an effective manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 613 — The Blind Voters Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill 613, The Blind 

Voters Act, be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved first reading of Bill 613, The Blind Voters Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Next sitting of the House. 

 



5544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2010 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 136, The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections and Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

this Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 136, The 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved that Bill No. 136, The 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act to be now 

moved the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 

adjourn to go to committees. 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — If I could just ask the House Leader just to 

hold on for one second. Before orders of the day, I just wish to 

inform the Assembly that late . . . Order. I wish to inform the 

Assembly that late yesterday afternoon, I received a letter from 

the Children’s Advocate who has indicated that he has no 

intention of continuing on as the child advocate in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn to go to committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to move to committees the Assembly do now 

adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:15.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5531 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5531, 5534 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5532 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5532 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5532 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5532 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5533 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5533 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5533 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5534 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5534 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5535 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5535 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5535 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5535 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5535 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5536 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mining Week 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5537 

 Celebrating Sikh Culture in Saskatchewan 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5537 

 Supporting Gender and Sexual Diversity in Saskatchewan 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5537 

 Asthma Awareness Month 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5538 

 Regina City Boys’ Basketball Championship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5538 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5538 

 Definitions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5538 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5539 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5539 

 Agreement Between Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5540 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5540 

 Out-of-Province Camping Fees 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5542 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5542 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5542 

 Access Issues for Voters 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5543 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5543 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 613 — The Blind Voters Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5543 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5544 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5544 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5544 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


