




















































Hansard: November 02, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5763 

 November 2, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly I would 

like to introduce, and there are many introductions obviously 

that will be made today, but I’d like to introduce Pastor Femi 

Ogunrinde of the Lighthouse to All Nations Church and a 

distinguished group of University of Regina students, 

international students from Nigeria that join us today, Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery. These are among the about 4,000 

international students that we have studying in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we certainly wish all of them very well, and 

we’re absolutely delighted to have these students join us in your 

gallery and in the Saskatchewan Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Speaker. I would ask and invite all members to join me in 

welcoming these international students from Nigeria studying at 

the University of Regina to the Saskatchewan Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the international students from 

Nigeria to the legislature today. As they observe the 

parliamentary process and learn about, a bit more about 

Saskatchewan, the province that they’re studying while they’re 

here in Saskatchewan. So I wish them all the best in their 

studies and thank them for visiting us today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, today Tourism Regina held its very first Tourism 

Advocacy Day here at the legislature. Now tourism translates 

into dollars and employment for Saskatchewan — $1.6 billion 

annually to our economy and over 62,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker — 

all of which strengthen our economy and keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, I’d like to 

introduce some of the good people from Tourism Saskatchewan 

who are here, others accompanying them. They are seated in 

your gallery. 

 

Ms. Lynda Haverstock, president and CEO [chief executive 

officer] is here; Ms. Candace Phelps, vice president. And as 

well, Tourism Saskatchewan is governed by 15-member board 

of directors, a number of whom are able to join us today. And 

they include Carey Baker is the Chair of the board from Unity; 

Mr. Leon Brin from Regina; Mark Caswell of Maple Creek; 

Susan Schigol from Meath Park; Randy Goulden from Yorkton; 

Jasmine DeBlois of Willow Bunch; Joe Chad of Regina; and 

Brenda Sherring from Regina, but formerly of Yorkton, I’m 

told, and proud of it. 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan is also supported by president’s task 

teams and advisory councils, and some of these good people 

were able to join us as well. Welcome to Ray Ahenakew, to Bill 

Shurniak, to Jim Hopson, Ruth Smillie, Marty Klyne, John 

Treleaven, Shann Gowan, Jim Hodges, Janet Olsen, Craig 

Blackmur, Morris McLachlan, Kerry Sapp, Marla Preston, 

Bryan Tudor, Claire Bélanger-Parker, Denise Stroeder, Roger 

Vogelsang, Hal Stupnikoff, and Kay Koot. 

 

We also have several Tourism Saskatchewan staff members 

here with us as well, including Jonathon Potts, Tracy Breher, 

Kim Dumelie, Ian McGilp, Carol Lumb, Bonnie Baird, Diane 

Cohoon, Lynne Kennedy, and Mark England. Mr. Speaker, 

these people help folks from outside of Saskatchewan realize 

what a great place our province is and why they ought to be 

here as visitors. I’d like to thank them and ask all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Tourism Saskatchewan to their 

Legislative Assembly today. The opposition also had the 

opportunity to meet as part of Tourism Saskatchewan’s first 

annual, I trust annual, lobby day, and we were very pleased to 

hear some of the successes and some of the challenges that 

Tourism Saskatchewan faces. 

 

I’d like to say hello to Dr. Lynda Haverstock, who is the 

president and CEO of Tourism Saskatchewan; Carey Baker, 

who is the Chair of the board; and all the staff, the directors, 

and task teams that are here today. Thank you so much for 

coming and sharing your knowledge with us, and I know that 

that will help build better public policy for the people of 

Saskatchewan. So thanks for everything. And with that I’d like 

us all to welcome Tourism Saskatchewan to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

While I’m still on my feet, I would like to also introduce one of 

my constituency assistants and a good friend, Chris Gallaway. 

That would be the west gallery. I’d like everyone to welcome 

Chris to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



5764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce a couple 

of guests here today, George and Esther Haas. They’re from 

Langenburg, Saskatchewan, just recently retired from farming. 

Very interested in the political world here in Saskatchewan, 

been very good supporters of mine. I’d ask everyone to 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m still on my feet, I’d like to also 

introduce Doug Steele who is the reeve of the RM [rural 

municipality] of Gull Lake and also a SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] director, and has been very 

good to work with on the agriculture front. And I’d ask all 

members to also welcome Doug to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel like I won the 

lottery, bouncing up and down because I’m so excited to have 

the opportunity to join the minister opposite as he was 

welcoming the people from Nigeria. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Eastview and I had the good 

fortune four years ago to spend some time in that beautiful 

nation, Nigeria. We were in Abuja for a conference. But we also 

got up to Zaria — I think I’m pronouncing that correctly, Zaria 

— where we witnessed a durbar, which was one of the most 

fascinating things I have ever witnessed in my entire life. Mr. 

Speaker, we also had the good fortune of sharing a meal with 

then President Obasanjo, and what a delight that was. He was a 

most interesting individual who gave a great speech. And we 

really felt welcomed to Nigeria. 

 

So it’s really nice that after our visit to Nigeria, so many 

Nigerians would come back and pay a return visit. I welcome 

you to Saskatchewan. I hope that everything you’re here for — 

your studies and everything else — turns out really, really well. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Let’s welcome the 

Nigerians. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour for me today to stand on my feet to welcome to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly on behalf of the 

member from Melfort, a very, very great school group from 

LeRoy, Saskatchewan. LeRoy used to be my hometown, so I 

know many of the students and have known them for many 

years. And without singling out one student, I’ve held her many 

times as a baby. 

 

So we have nine students, nine grade 11 and 12 students from 

LeRoy, Saskatchewan. They’re accompanied by their teachers, 

Audrey Severson and Danielle Bilodeau, as well as three 

chaperones, Ann Block, Bev Schloendorf, and someone that has 

been my very, very close friend and we don’t have enough time 

for one another that I wish that we had, and that is Shelly 

Bernauer. So it is so great to see all of you at your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Joining 

in our gallery today are two constituents from Saskatoon 

Nutana. I want to welcome to the Assembly, Jim Hodges, who 

is part of the tourism group. Jim owns Roadside Attractions in 

Saskatoon, and he is responsible for bringing many cultural 

events to the city of Saskatoon, particularly the Teachers Credit 

Union Place — the old Centennial Auditorium — as well as the 

Broadway Theatre. So welcome, Jim, to the Assembly. 

 

The other person I want to introduce is joining my colleague 

from Riversdale. I want to introduce Chris Gallaway. Chris 

originally hails from Estevan. His grandmother, Marguerite 

Gallaway, is well known to many members of the Assembly as 

she has spent a lot of time involved in the arts and culture in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Chris not only works for the member from Riversdale 

sometimes, but he also is Saskatoon Nutana’s constituency 

president. He serves on our provincial executive. And we think 

it’s hugely important to recruit young people into our party, and 

Chris is doing a fantastic job as president of our constituency 

association and representing young people on the provincial 

executive of the New Democratic Party. So welcome, Chris, to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the assembled guests today, I’d like to introduce 

constituent and friend, Doug Steele, the reeve of the RM of Gull 

Lake. I know he was introduced previously, but we rarely get 

the constituents from Cypress Hills here, so I want to make sure 

that I get my greetings on the record. 

 

Mr. Steele is very involved locally not just as the reeve, in a 

variety of other endeavours, and serves as the SARM 

representative on a number of provincial organizations. And we 

want to recognize the service of Mr. Steele to his constituents 

and to the province through his many endeavours. And so 

welcome to Mr. Steele. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while on my feet I also want to recognize 

Mark Caswell, who was introduced as part of the Tourism 

Saskatchewan group earlier today. Now Mark serves as the 

administrator for the town of Maple Creek. And his entire life 

was consumed by the flood event that happened in Maple 

Creek, and he gave tremendous service to the people of the 

community, to the Government of Saskatchewan in terms of 

communicating the needs of the people back to us. And I just 

want to acknowledge Mark’s effort on behalf of the constituents 

in the community of Maple Creek. And I’m sure that a day 

being in the legislature as part of the Tourism Saskatchewan 

endeavour is almost like a holiday for him. So Mark, enjoy your 

day. And welcome to your legislature, both gentlemen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — It’s with great honour, Mr. Speaker, through 

you, to you and through you to introduce a class of grade 7 

students from Stanley Mission, from the high school with their 

chaperone. And also their teacher, Isabelle Hardlotte, has 

brought down 12 students, grade 7 students. I just want to say 

tansi and welcome to your chaperones, your work with the 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5765 

teacher accompanying them. And it is an honour to have you 

here to see a process and to understand. You’ve travelled a long 

way. From way up north to come to Regina is not always easy, 

but I commend your efforts to educate our young people how 

important this legislature is, how important the job and the role 

that we, as your representatives, serve you. 

 

You are honoured. We are pleased to have you here, and I just 

want to say to you, enjoy. Learn. Ask questions while you’re 

here. Your dreams, they’re there for you. Inspire yourself. We 

all are honoured that you’re here. We’re pleased that you’re 

here. You are ambassadors to the North. Thank you for coming. 

I’d just like to say welcome to your legislative. Tēniki. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the risk of 

missing some, I would like to join with others who have 

introduced the group from Tourism Saskatchewan, Dr. 

Haverstock, the board, and members of this specific task force 

and thank them for their work on behalf of the government. 

 

I’d also like to welcome an old friend, Pastor Femi, and his 

group of students who have joined us from Nigeria. 

 

[13:45] 

 

But I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I can, to introduce to you 

and, through you, to all members of the Assembly someone 

who’s very active in my hometown, a constituent of mine, a 

former president of the chamber of commerce, and also 

someone who helps out when we need some help in the 

constituency office serving the needs of the people in Swift 

Current constituency, Shauna Fjaagesund. She comes to us 

from Thunder Creek, but we don’t hold that against her, and 

she’s doing a great job in Swift Current. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join those that have welcomed Pastor Femi to his Legislative 

Assembly. Lighthouse to All Nations of course is located in the 

great riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. And I know, as you 

know, Mr. Speaker, that Pastor Femi can really bring the word. 

He delivered a tremendous eulogy once upon a time for the 

departed Gerri Carroll, the founder of Souls Harbour. So it’s 

really good to see Pastor Femi here. 

 

And I’d also like to extend through him greetings to Sope, his 

daughter, who served very ably in this Legislative Assembly as 

a Page for a number of years. So if all members could join me 

in welcoming Pastor Femi again to his legislature, but I’d also 

extend greetings to his daughter Sope. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s infrequent the 

opportunity that I get to introduce somebody who is from 

Prince Albert, let alone somebody that lived across the street 

from me for 15 years. So I’d like to, if I could, introduce, at 

great risk, Sue Schigol who’s part of the delegation here with 

Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

Sue has, in her previous career, succeeded ably in what was 

previously a man’s profession, so she knows something of 

toughness. Her husband is a great hunter and used to walk up 

the stairs at our house with his hunting garb still on, full of 

blood, and my mom used to scream. He was good with a rifle, 

but I would argue that Sue could’ve chased the deer down and 

wrestled it to the ground herself without the help of her 

husband. So they are now entrepreneurs and work in the 

outfitting industry, and she’s a great ambassador for that 

industry and works very hard on their behalf. So I’d just like 

everybody to welcome her to the legislature today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present petitions on behalf of the people of Wawota and area 

who are very opposed to the closure of the beds in Wawota 

Deer View Lodge. Many of them have family members who 

have been placed outside the community, and they’re waiting to 

come, those people are waiting to come home to be with family 

and friends. They think it’s unfair and dangerous to separate 

members of the family and to make them drive, family 

members drive so far to see their loved ones in their last days. 

The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to stop the closure of these beds. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is another 225 signatures from the people of Wapella, 

Kelso, Pilot Butte, Wawota, Moosomin, Rocanville, Maryfield, 

Alameda, Weyburn, Kennedy, Whitewood, Langbank, 

Esterhazy, Fleming, Welwyn, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of eliminating poverty in Saskatchewan. 

And we know that freedom from poverty is an enshrined human 

right by the United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to 

social and economic security. And we know that 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Lumsden, Saskatoon, Langham, Regina, and we have some 



5766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

from P.A. [Prince Albert], Dalmeny, and Imperial. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students. A new Throne Speech yet no fix to the problems with 

the graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition with respect to potash in Saskatchewan 

because Saskatchewan has a thousand-year supply of the 

world’s highest quality potash — 53 per cent of world supply 

— but the people of Saskatchewan are the owners of this very 

strategic resource and deserve to receive the maximum benefit 

from its development, mining, processing, and sale. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to publicly demand 

the following terms and conditions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan of any foreign owners bidding to take 

over PCS: to ensure Saskatchewan people receive the 

maximum net benefit, a golden share and preferred shares 

so that the public participates in both the corporation’s 

future decision making and its profitability, public 

guarantees on a strengthened head office presence, support 

for Canpotex, long-term targets for potash production and 

employment, Saskatchewan representation on the board of 

directors, public agreements to ensure no loss of royalties, 

public commitments to meet world-class standards of 

corporate social responsibility, and an independent potash 

review commission with the power to monitor and enforce 

each and all of these terms and conditions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by the good folks from 

Saskatoon and Colonsay. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions as I have each day in this Assembly for over the past 

year, to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it 

relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances. 

They allude to the two consecutive deficit budgets, and they 

note the billions of dollars of debt growth ongoing underneath 

this government, actually projected by this government’s own 

budget documents to grow by 55 per cent or $4.2 billion by 

2014. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions signed here today are signed by residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Canadian Patient Safety Week 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask that all 

members of this House join me in recognizing November 1st to 

the 5th as Canadian Patient Safety Week in our nation. The 

Canadian Patient Safety Institute undertakes many initiatives to 

ensure the safety of patients throughout Canada. Patient Safety 

Week is one of their most successful efforts. This program’s 

goal is to increase awareness of patient safety issues and aims to 

share information about best practices in patient safety with 

health care providers, patients, and their families. 

 

The theme of this year’s Canadian Patient Safety Week is Ask. 

Listen. Talk. which seeks to promote the importance of 

communication between and among patients, clients, 

consumers, and providers and applies to all health care settings. 

This initiative rests upon the following mantra: “Don’t just 

think it, say it. Good healthcare starts with good 

communication. Don’t hesitate to talk openly.” 

 

The purpose of this week is to strive to ensure every Canadian 

in need of health care can be confident that the care they receive 

is the safest in the world. Our government remains committed 

to a publicly funded and administered health care system in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Canadian Patient Safety Week is part of our promise to deliver 

the best health care available to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame Inductees 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, this summer the history and 

heritage of baseball was again celebrated in the town of 

Battleford as friends and fans joined together for the 26th 

annual Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame induction dinner. 

 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5767 

Individual inductees included the late Ned Andreoni of Moose 

Jaw, the late Ab Bidart of North Battleford, Keith Czemeres of 

Hudson Bay, the late Norman French of Delisle, Peter Fylyma 

of Saskatoon, the late Bennie Griggs of Saskatoon, Hugh Huck 

of Regina, Robert McLane of Liberty, Jay-Dell Mah of 

Lloydminster, Gary Nordal of Bulyea, Doug Schultz of 

Watrous, Dennis Williams of Central Butte, and the late 

Roberto Zayas of Moose Jaw. 

 

The Fulda Flyers were inducted in the team category, and the 

Millard family of Canwood were inducted in the family 

category. And Wayne Hoffman of North Battleford was 

presented with the Dave Shury Cup in recognition of his 

extraordinary efforts in support of the museum in recent years. 

 

The highlight of the night for many, however, was the honorary 

induction of Jane Shury, the current president and CEO of the 

Hall of Fame and museum and wife of the Hall of Fame 

founder, the late Dave Shury. Jane of course is loved by 

everyone, and everyone knows how hard she works to keep the 

astonishing Hall of Fame and museum afloat. I call on all 

members to join me in congratulating the inductees and the 

association’s board of directors for continuing to support 

Saskatchewan’s wonderful baseball heritage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw’s Halloween Food Drive 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Sunday on Halloween evening, the good people of Moose Jaw 

opened their hearts and their pantries for the Better Together 

food drive in support of the Moose Jaw Food Bank. The food 

drive collected more than 9,000 pounds of food over last year’s 

record. And yesterday, after all the sorting was complete, 41 

pallets of food was delivered to the local food bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event is proving to be more and more 

successful year after year. Terri Smith, manager of the Moose 

Jaw and District Food Bank, was thoroughly impressed and 

enthused by the enthusiasm and the charitable spirit of the 

Moose Jaw citizens. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw just keep on giving 

and this year’s record-setting 52,000 pounds of food marks 

quite a significant increase in the total amount donated to 

ensure our fellow citizens do not go hungry. I’d like to 

recognize the Hillcrest Apostolic Church for their organization 

of the event and the hundreds of volunteers who helped make 

this year’s food drive the best yet. 

 

As food banks throughout the province operate their own food 

drives, I encourage the people of Saskatchewan to donate to this 

worthy cause. Thank you to the organizers, the volunteers, and 

the citizens of Moose Jaw for another successful food drive. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Heritage Centre 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre here 

in Regina is a national treasure. Yesterday we heard the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley send out birthday 

wishes for the 125th anniversary of RCMP Depot Division 

here. This is where our country’s Mounties are born, and the 

opposition gladly joins in this celebration. In fact the member 

from Regina Rosemont had a chance to take in every one of 

these celebratory events. 

 

But we were alarmed to hear that the federal Conservative 

government, of whom 13 members hail from our province, 

cannot get it together enough to ensure this iconic institution 

has what it needs to properly share the story of the RCMP with 

visitors from around the world. 

 

This cultural flagship proudly tells the story of the RCMP, but it 

also has a huge economic impact on this province, estimated at 

$54 million in Regina alone. It should not be forced to go 

around with a begging cup and operate on a skeleton staff with 

less than adequate resources to attract, engage, and educate 

visitors. 

 

This Sask Party government and this Premier need to do more 

than hand out platitudes and blow out birthday candles. The 

Sask Party government needs to step it up in securing support 

from their federal Conservative buddies and in doing their part 

to ensure the RCMP Heritage Centre is on strong financial 

footing. This is important to the RCMP, Mr. Speaker, to our 

country, to our province, and to this city, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

Pardon me, Saskatoon Northwest. Order. Pardon me, Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Islamic History Month 

 

Mr. Wyant: — On October 25th, 2007, parliament officially 

declared October as Islamic History Month in Canada. This was 

to recognize the important contributions of Canadian Muslims 

to our country’s society and focus on the cultural diversity of 

Canadian Muslim society. It’s important that all Canadians are 

aware of the importance of learning about one another to foster 

greater social cohesion. 

 

This last weekend, Islamic Association of Saskatchewan hosted 

a banquet commemorating this month. The focal point for this 

year’s banquet was the environment. This event was originated 

and sponsored by the Canadian Islamic Congress. The CIC 

[Canadian Islamic Congress] is Canada’s largest national 

non-profit and wholly independent Islamic association. It is an 

exclusive Canadian non-government organization with no 

affiliation to any group, body, ideology, or government. CIC is 

an independent voice of Canadian Muslim, Sunni and Shia men 

and women, youth and seniors. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also recognize the Islamic Association 

of Saskatchewan. Since 1970, the IAS [Islamic Association of 

Saskatchewan] has been the biggest Muslim organization in 

Saskatchewan, serving over 5,000 Muslims in Saskatoon. The 

IAS offers religious education and social services to its 



5768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

members, as well as information about Islam and Muslims to all 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize all members of 

Saskatchewan’s various Islamic societies. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Leadership 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as most of this House is probably aware, late yesterday 

the National Post and The Globe and Mail reported that 

Investment Canada had given tentative approval, signalling the 

go-ahead to BHP and their hostile takeover of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is a pivotal time in our province’s history. We need 

leadership we can trust and count on, and unfortunately we are 

not getting it from this Saskatchewan Party government. Mr. 

Speaker, to use a football analogy, it’s third and goal. The 

longest and most important yard is on the line for our province. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have put their trust in the Premier, 

and time and time again he has failed to deliver. On the big 

issues, he certainly talks a big game and pays plenty of lip 

service. However when it comes to delivering, he comes up 

short. 

 

The Premier’s performance in regards to potash has been weak. 

Ottawa knows it, and obviously foreign investors have noticed 

it as well. Leadership is about showing up in clutch situations. 

It’s about how you perform when it matters most. Instead the 

Premier has continually overpromised and underdelivered. 

 

Brad Wall has proven that he is incapable of managing complex 

files . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just ask the member to 

remember they are to refer to members by their constituency or 

title. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has 

proven that he is incapable of managing complex files. He 

doesn’t know how to negotiate with large corporations or the 

federal government, and the people of Saskatchewan are paying 

the price, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs. 

 

Gold Medal Plates Olympic Fundraiser 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, where in Saskatchewan would you find 

wild boar belly, Yukon Gold potato gnocchi, foie gras, crème 

brûlée, braised pig cheek, and Prairie Sensation apple perogies? 

In Saskatoon, of course, at Saskatchewan’s first ever Gold 

Medal Plates cooking competition, a fundraiser to support 

Canadian athletes. 

 

Members from Saskatoon Southeast, Saskatoon Northwest, 

Indian Head-Milestone, and I were most pleased to join 500 

people who attended this record-breaking fundraising event. As 

event Chair Zeba Ahmad said, the city and province love to put 

on a show and show the country what we can do, as she 

announced the nearly $400,000 that was raised to support 

Canada’s Olympic athletes, surpassing the $300,000 mark set in 

Vancouver. 

 

Cameco CEO Jerry Grandey served as the event Co-Chair. 

Catriona Le May Doan was the MC [master of ceremonies]. 

Fourteen Olympic athletes were in attendance. Musicians Jim 

Cuddy, Barney Bentall, and Colin James entertained the crowd, 

as did comedian Ron James. Mr. Speaker, I even saw one 

member of the press gallery there supporting her favourite chef, 

Malcolm Craig. 

 

In the end, Weczeria Food & Wine’s Dan Walker from 

Saskatoon took home the Gold Medal Plate and is off to 

Kelowna, British Columbia in February for the national 

competition. As Zeba Ahmad concluded, so many people from 

Saskatoon and Saskatchewan went to the Olympics. We had a 

great pavilion there and we are still carrying on that momentum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Saskatchewan Gold Medal Plates team. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it now appears that the 

efforts of the Premier to lobby the Prime Minister against the 

hostile takeover by BHP of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, that that lobbying effort has failed. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: does the Premier now admit 

that his lack of determination in getting a meeting with the 

Prime Minister and the lack of lobbying with the 13 

Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] here in 

Saskatchewan has led very directly to a failed effort to stop the 

takeover of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on October 12th the members 

of the opposition, led by the member that just spoke in this 

Assembly, gave up on Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They 

outlined a plan where they were negotiating the terms of 

surrender to this takeover, Mr. Speaker. At that time I said that 

no should still be considered as an option. 

 

We worked through all of the information, did all of the due 

diligence, did the analysis, and said no, Mr. Speaker. And then 

we built an alliance in support with other premiers across this 

country, with business leaders across this country, Mr. Speaker, 

with business interests across this country. We built that case in 

favour of Saskatchewan and in favour of Canada. 

 

We don’t have an answer yet from the federal government. That 

member is prepared to give up again. Not this side of the 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5769 

House, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to stand for Saskatchewan. 

We encourage the member to join with us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example 

of the Premier’s promise to overdeliver and now he is 

underdelivering and failing. And worse than that, I have never 

seen a Premier, Danny Williams for sure, blame the opposition 

for his lack of success, ever. That’s a new . . . Blaming the 

opposition for the lack of leadership in defending Saskatchewan 

potash is a new height of being ridiculous. 

 

Here’s a Premier who has failed to deliver on $800 million on 

resource revenue, failed on isotope reactor, failed the farmers 

who were flooded out this summer, and now has failed on 

potash. Can the Premier admit today that that lack of leadership 

and weakness is very different than a Danny Williams or a 

Premier of Ontario who fought for the auto industry? And will 

he admit today that it’s his weakness, not his caucus, not the 

MPs, but the Leader of the Sask Party, our Premier, who has 

failed the province when it comes to protecting our potash? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, given media reports, the 

Leader of the Opposition has given up on Saskatchewan’s case 

for no, in this instance. At this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

in fact today we communicated again with the federal 

government. And we let them know that in other instances of 

free market economies, where officials have actually 

recommended that a takeover be approved, that the government, 

the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to allow the 

Premier to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is examples where 

officials in other free market companies have recommended yes 

to a takeover, where the political representatives have actually 

overturned that recommendation and said no. 

 

In 2008 in New Zealand, ironically, the Canada Pension Plan 

wanted to invest 40 per cent in the Auckland International 

Airport in New Zealand. Officials said yes. The elected officials 

in that country said no, it was not in their strategic interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than playing politics, that member would be 

wise to join with this side of the House and join with the people 

of this province and say, it’s not too late for the federal 

government to do the right thing. But they’re happier, Mr. 

Speaker, to play politics. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I 

think the people of the province of Saskatchewan know what 

side of the House serves their interest. It’s certainly not that 

side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let me make 

one thing clear with the Premier. I haven’t given up on the 

economy of Saskatchewan or potash, but I, along with tens of 

thousands of people, have given up on the Premier of this 

province for failing to deliver. That’s who we’ve given up on. 

 

The fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is he, the 

Premier, has lost the battle with the Prime Minister. And all his 

special relationships with the Prime Minister, and all of the let’s 

give peace a chance are out the window as he fails to protect the 

potash in this province. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: given the fact that Tony 

Clement will likely tonight or early tomorrow morning make 

the announcement that the sale of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan will go through to BHP, can the Premier tell us 

now what his plan is to protect the taxpayers and the people of 

this province through legislation? When will he introduce it? 

When will the royalties change to make us whole on the losses 

we will take as a result of this? And on what day will we see 

that brought into the House? Because November 18th is a 

drop-dead date, and we need to have an answer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that plan will be unveiled to 

the people of Saskatchewan just as soon as we have the final 

decision from the federal government. They have not yet made 

their decision, Mr. Speaker. It’s the second time that the 

member opposite has given up on Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not going to be the case on this side of the 

House — not today and not ever, notwithstanding what we hear 

from the federal government, Mr. Speaker. One important point 

might be made to the federal government which is this: should 

they decide to say yes with conditions to this deal, that if they 

are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Athabasca will come to order and allow the Premier to respond 

to the question from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Should the federal government decide to say yes with 

conditions to this deal, I think it would be important for us 

obviously to have a contingency plan with respect to tax 

instruments for the province to protect the revenues of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But even before we do that, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to 

send a signal to the federal government. If they intend on 

approving this deal with conditions, Mr. Speaker, then if they 

want to make this deal, then they can indemnify the province of 

Saskatchewan against the costs. Mr. Speaker, if they approve 

this, this will be Ottawa’s deal, not Saskatchewan’s deal. And 

the people of Saskatchewan are not to be on the hook for it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — To quote an ex-NDP Finance minister, Mr. 

Speaker, roll over and tickle my tummy, Stephen Harper. It’s 

absolutely abhorrent. It’s a joke. Mr. Speaker, time and time 



5770 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

again, this Premier has promised big things for Saskatchewan 

people and failed to deliver — clean coal, carbon capture, a 

nuclear reactor, a nuclear isotope reactor, a domed stadium, and 

a fair deal for non-renewable resources. Now we have to add to 

that a better deal for potash. It’s another case where he has 

overpromised and underdelivered. So I have a simple question, 

Mr. Speaker. Why can’t he get anything done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

position of the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The position of 

the Government of Saskatchewan is well known all across 

Canada, and commentators are weighing in on this. The Globe 

and Mail has indicated that, and I quote: 

 

Brad Wall’s fight to stop the takeover of Potash Corp of 

Saskatchewan will not be in vain. The Saskatchewan 

Premier has shown that this country can drive a much 

harder bargain with foreign acquirers than the federal 

government has dared to [try] in the past. 

 

And I would add to that, Mr. Speaker, that when the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] had the file, when the Leader of the 

Opposition had this file . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Regina Rosemont, allow the minister to finish his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The NDP had this file, when the Leader of 

the Opposition had this file, what did he do for the people of 

Saskatchewan? He came over to the opposition, he lobbied each 

and every one of them to agree with his position, which was to 

give up the golden share — the very thing he asked for back 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for the people of 

Saskatchewan in reference to that answer, the medium is the 

message. Mr. Speaker, the Premier can talk tough all he wants, 

but his history in politics and business don’t match his rhetoric. 

In Toronto he tried talking tough like a rancher by saying, you 

don’t sell off the home quarter. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s his name 

on the 1989 document that was a press release from the 

government selling off the home quarter. PCS was privatized 

then for a fraction of its true value. And we know his history of 

private sector failure perfectly predicted what we see today — 

another failure on a big file for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that whether he’s dealing 

with Stephen Harper, PCS, or BHP, he simply lacks the 

fortitude, the basic competence, and courage it takes to get deals 

done for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when you ask the 

people of Canada and Saskatchewan that very question, a recent 

Angus Reid survey indicates that four out of five people in 

Canada agree with the Premier of Saskatchewan’s position. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that 

just a few short days ago that member and the Leader of the 

Opposition and all of their colleagues stood alongside this 

Premier and said that that was the position of Saskatchewan. 

But now it should be no surprise to the people of Saskatchewan 

that when it comes down to the crunch, the position of 

Saskatchewan is something that the Leader of the Opposition 

would fall out of bed as quickly as possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well speaking of falling out of bed, Mr. 

Speaker, people in Saskatchewan today are wondering if the 

Premier has gotten out of the left side of the bed or the right 

side of the bed this morning, or the side of public policy for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for the fourth or fifth time, this Premier has 

made the error of trusting Stephen Harper and his MPs to stand 

up for Saskatchewan’s interests, so he issues a statement 

expressing his “profound betrayal.” And this by a man and a 

caucus who failed to deliver on clean coal, carbon capture, 

agricultural disaster relief, and who broke a solemn promise of 

$800 million a year in resource royalty revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after this latest in a long string of betrayals, will 

the Premier finally agree that the only arguments that Stephen 

Harper understands are those done based on electoral math? 

And will he campaign against Conservative candidates in the 

next federal election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to 

what people are saying about this deal and the interests of 

Saskatchewan or the interests of Canada with respect to this. A 

recent report from Calgary, a business tycoon in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Richard Haskayne, a veteran 

Canadian member of boardrooms all across this country and a 

member of many, many senior management teams in many 

different companies, has said that this is going to be a very 

important issue. In fact, he’s gone on to say that it will be as 

divisive as the national energy program. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5771 

I would just say that, Mr. Speaker, that clearly the position of 

Saskatchewan has been put forward by the Premier. It’s 

understood all across Canada. It is accepted by the people of 

Canada, and certainly Saskatchewan has the right position. And 

I would just ask members of the opposition, just as they did a 

few short days ago, to join with the province of Saskatchewan 

and not give up on Saskatchewan and fight this to the end. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier said that 

the province had legal options at its disposal to challenge the 

takeover of PCS if the federal government approved the deal. 

But when pressed by reporters, he was unwilling to discuss the 

specifics of what he had in mind. To the Premier: is legal action 

a serious option for the government, or is he just blowing 

smoke? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to assure the 

member opposite that the Ministry of Justice is actively 

engaged in looking at all options that are available to the 

province. Those options include taxation, legislation, and 

litigation. And, Mr. Speaker, we are not letting go of any of 

those options. And we are actively engaged in looking at how 

those options might play out, so that we can ensure that 

resources are protected for the benefit of all people in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. That is the position that this government 

will take. 

 

This government will take every step to protect the people of 

this province. We are actively working on it. We’ve engaged 

with experts in other provinces. And we are actively working to 

ensure that those steps will be taken in a prompt and correct 

manner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, a decision by the federal 

government to allow the takeover of PCS would have serious 

implications for future provincial government services and 

revenues — the money we need to fund hospitals, schools, and 

roads. Now one legal option available to the province would be 

to resume the lawsuit filed by the previous NDP government to 

get Saskatchewan a fair deal on our non-renewable resource 

revenues, a deal which would net this province, as we all know, 

$800 million a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: given the utter failure of his policy 

of appeasement in getting the federal government to take this 

province seriously, is he now prepared to reactive this law suit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General has said 

that every single option will be pursued, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ll conduct ourselves like the have province that 

Saskatchewan is when we make our case through any manner 

that’s available to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll tell you what we won’t do. What we won’t do is take any 

lessons from the Leader of the Opposition who, when in 1994, 

in 1994 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be very, very clear. It 

was the position on the 12th of October put forward by that 

member that they give up on no being an answer to this deal. 

That was his position, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll take no counsel 

from him with respect to the deal, especially on the PotashCorp, 

because it was that member, when in cabinet on this side of the 

House, that agreed to the dilution of the golden share that 

existed after PotashCorp was privatized. Not Grant Devine, not 

the Conservatives, not the Liberals, but that member when he 

was the deputy premier gutted the golden share this province 

had, and in large measure is responsible for too much of the 

latitude that company has had to date. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier told 

reporters, and I quote, “If it’s not a bargaining position, there 

needs to be follow-through.” We couldn’t agree more, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But let’s look at the Premier’s follow-through on his last 

commitment to legal action against Ottawa respecting our 

natural resources. In 2005 the Premier said the fight to win a 

fair deal for Saskatchewan in non-renewable resources was “the 

most important issue facing Saskatchewan,” just as he says 

today about potash. But in July of 2008, he’d dropped the law 

suit shortly after admitting that the Prime Minister had asked 

him to do so. And knowing our Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m sure he asked very nicely. 

 

On resources, is it credible for the Premier to be Harper’s 

poodle one day and the people’s pit dog the next? I say no, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: given his history, why should anyone, including 

the Prime Minister, take his threats of legal action seriously? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we are a government that 

have had relationships with the federal government over the 

years. We have been open, clear, and candid with the public 

about what the intention is and what the expectations of our 

government is in dealing with the federal government. Mr. 

Speaker, with regard to this particular transaction, the particular 

takeover by BHP Billiton, the hostile . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the opposition members to 

allow the minister to respond to the question from the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will take every step to 



5772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

ensure that every legal option that is open to this government 

will be actively and aggressively pursued to ensure that we 

protect the interests of the citizens of Saskatchewan and the 

citizens of Canada. This is a takeover that is not in the interests 

of Canada, nor is it in the interests of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We will ensure that we take every option that is 

available to us. I’ve indicated what some of those are, and we 

have people that are actively and aggressively pursuing those 

options now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will continue to do this, and we will not be taking advice 

from the member opposite. Nor will we take advice from 

anybody on that side of the House because they don’t have a 

consistent position of any kind. They wait to see which way the 

wind is blowing, then they stand up and take a position at that 

point in time, and it changes the next day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, through his short tenure 

this Premier has already squandered billions of dollars of 

resource revenues and has launched us back into debt and 

deficit, all at a time of historic highs in revenues. Now the 

Premier has failed to make the case to protect our potash 

resource, a sell out of our prosperity and our control. The 

Premier has managed our finances, mismanaged our finances, 

when he was blessed with record revenues. Now he is digging a 

fiscal hole into our future. It is said that we stand to lose 

between 2 and $6 billion through this deal. 

 

My question is this: what is the Premier’s plan to recoup these 

revenues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, since the deal became 

known, I believe in about August the 23rd, there has been much 

work done. Much work done, not only from the Premier’s 

office, but also from the Ministry of Finance in time to ensure 

that there is complete understanding of whether or not there will 

be jobs lost, whether or not there will be revenue lost, whether 

or not we can ensure that contracts can be kept, Mr. Speaker. 

All of that analysis has been under way. 

 

We’re very, very concerned from the point of Finance to ensure 

that the growth of this province, the growth that we’ve 

expected, that people have expected, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not something that is strange to the people of 

Saskatchewan now. They understand that Saskatchewan is a 

have province, that Saskatchewan will remain a have province. 

And we’re going to continue to do that, Mr. Speaker, in spite of, 

in spite of the position of the members opposite who’ve given 

up on Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this failure 

couldn’t even connect the dots when the world economy 

collapsed just a little over a year ago, failing to understand the 

impact on Saskatchewan, our potash companies, our economy, 

and our finances — a contraction in our economy of 6.3 per 

cent last year, Mr. Finance Minister — not to mention the 

subsequent impact on Saskatchewan families and communities. 

Now he has failed to deliver and is squandering our prosperity. 

 

My question is this: what changes to royalty structure or 

taxation will the Premier implement to get a fair return for the 

potash of Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the record 

of Saskatchewan and this government over the last two years. 

Mr. Speaker, over the last two years, the population in this 

province is up 30,000, Mr. Speaker. The fastest growth in 

nearly eight decades, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the best job 

creation record in Canada in 2009, at a time when the member 

opposite says that we were falling apart because of the 

recession. Mr. Speaker, building permits up. Largest income tax 

cuts in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, oh, 

also, also, the largest property tax cut . . .  

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister will 

finalize his response. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can he shout any louder? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, the member opposite wishes to . . . so that I would speak 

softly, Mr. Speaker. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Nutana better understand that if she wants to hear me in a 

quiet voice, she’s going to have to remain quiet herself. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we are at a critical hour at 

this very moment as a decision that will affect a generation 

ahead of us is being made. We have a Minister of Finance who 

will not even focus on the question for which he’s asked, and he 

turns on the spin cycle. Turns on the spin cycle and turns up the 

volume, Mr. Speaker. This Premier has mismanaged our 

finances and squandered the prosperity of Saskatchewan since 

his election. 

 

On the very file of potash he never even understood his own 

royalty and taxation regime, tax write-offs and the impact on 

our finances as but one example. The result? A massive 

financial hit including cuts, deficits, and debt loading. 

 

The Premier who doesn’t even understand his own province’s 

revenues now pretends to be a protector of our resource. Well it 

appears he has shamefully failed Saskatchewan people yet 

again. 

 

My question is this: what price are the people of Saskatchewan 

going to pay for your failures? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the Deputy Premier . . . 

 

[Interjections] 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5773 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask members to allow the 

Premier to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you can hardly blame the 

Deputy Premier for not wanting to get up and correct that mess 

from that member just opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People all around this province know a couple of things about 

the new Saskatchewan. Since the day we got rid of those 

members opposite from government, Mr. Speaker, attitudes 

have changed in this province. Rural Saskatchewan has gotten 

some attention from the government. The agriculture sector’s 

been supported. Job creation records have been hit. Debt’s been 

reduced by 40 per cent. Record tax reduction. We’re leading the 

country in economic growth, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re 

defending the interests of our province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Well it’s . . . Order. Order. Order. Order. It’s 

obvious the member from Regina Rosemont . . . Order. You 

asked a question. Allow the Premier to respond. Order. The 

Premier can finalize his answer. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s just a few brief 

highlights of the new Saskatchewan, a place that has changed 

markedly since those folks were in office. A have province that 

is a leader in the country. A province that is listened to on 

natural . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the official time has elapsed, but 

the Premier has a right to respond to the question presented by 

the member from the opposition. The members of the 

opposition have the obligation to allow the public to hear the 

response. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a province that is leading the 

nation with respect to a discussion, a long-needed discussion in 

debate about the future of the natural resources of this 

resource-rich country, Mr. Speaker, unlike ever before, we’re 

punching above our weight. We’re leading the country, and the 

only people that don’t like it is that group over there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I 

was just getting started, Mr. Speaker. I’d been able to speak 

about some of the pieces of the Throne Speech that I thought 

were particularly important to my constituents and the people of 

Saskatchewan. Right around 10 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I got 

started on the potash situation, Mr. Speaker. I think that the 

members opposite might find some of this interesting. 

 

We started with in the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, that government 

decided that the NDP were going to run the potash mines in 

Saskatchewan. They passed legislation, Mr. Speaker, where 

they actively took the mines away from private companies, Mr. 

Speaker, that were producing the potash. This went on, Mr. 

Speaker. The NDP ran these mines. They ran them into the 

ground. 

 

And what we saw, Mr. Speaker, coming out of the ’70s was a 

potash industry which was in terrible shape, largely because 

these captains of industry, Mr. Speaker, were in charge. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is something that I think they’ve shown over 

and over again. The now Leader of the Opposition was a large 

part of running those potash companies into the ground, and 

that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Coming out 

of that terrible situation where the NDP were running the potash 

industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we came through the 

’80s, there was a certain movement to find if the private sector 

should be involved in the potash industry, Mr. Speaker. One of 

the most successful privatizations in Saskatchewan was the 

privatization of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s gone from a situation where it was a terribly run 

company under these members to where now it’s one of the 

biggest mining companies in the world, extremely successful. 

It’s currently under acquisition bid by an Australian firm, Mr. 

Speaker, which was some discussion about today. 

 

But in the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, these members won the election in 

’91. They became government. And the Government of 

Saskatchewan still owned a large portion of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan stock. At that time, Mr. Speaker, 

the then deputy premier, who is now the Leader of the 

Opposition, decided they wanted to sell what was left. That was 

the decision they made. I think if they thought they wanted to 

run the Potash Corporation again, Mr. Speaker, they knew that 

they weren’t any good at it. They tried it, they failed . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in 1994 after 

they’d sold off the last pieces of the Potash Corporation when 

they knew that they weren’t going to be able to run the potash 

industry any more, they introduced on April 27th, 1994 An Act 

to repeal The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Reorganization Act. And the Act contains . . . It was put 

forward by the Hon. Mr. Penner and in his comments when he 

introduced this Bill . . . I think the member opposite should 

listen to this, Mr. Speaker. I think he’d find it interesting. 

 



5774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

In his opening comments introducing this Bill, this is what he 

said, and I quote from Hansard on April 27th. He said, “This 

legislation is very simple.” It’s simple enough, Mr. Speaker, 

that if that member opposite listens, he’ll understand it. He said, 

“This legislation is very simple. Section 2 repeals The Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Act including 

restrictions on share ownership.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP in 1994 removed the legislation that had 

requirements on share ownership. Now they’ve had a 

conversion. Now they think, holy cow, we’ve got to get in front 

of this. Mr. Speaker, they were in front of this. They want it 

back again. I don’t know what they were thinking. 

 

Section 3 provides a clear definition of what constitutes 

PCS’s head office. It stipulates that this head office with 

these functions and jobs will remain in . . . [Saskatoon], a 

clear . . . [description] of what a head office of PCS is to 

consist of . . . 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker. What it essentially does, it allows 

PCS to move many of their head office jobs south of the border. 

It allows foreign ownership of large portions of the company. 

 

And now they’ve had a conversion. In fact their plan, Mr. 

Speaker, throughout this, is that the Government of 

Saskatchewan should buy a large portion of Potash Corporation 

and start producing potash again. We’ve come full circle, Mr. 

Speaker. I think the credibility they have on this issue is 

remarkable. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, they thought that the plan should be 

that they send their leader to Ottawa to stand beside the 

Premier. Well, Mr. Speaker, if there’s anybody that should not 

go to Ottawa it is a representative of that opposition and most 

certainly the Leader of the Opposition, who was deputy premier 

when they watered down the golden share, when they removed 

the ownership restrictions, Mr. Speaker, and who was involved 

in the previous ownership where they ran the potash industry 

into the ground. So I find it a little thick to accept their assertion 

that that’s a good idea. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did see some parallels in this situation to another 

situation where Saskatchewan lost another head office. It was 

actually . . . It was in 1997. Again back in the ’60s, ’70s, an 

NDP government decided that they were going to be oil barons. 

Yes, they thought that they wanted to wear the big cowboy hats 

and drive Cadillacs. So they jacked up the royalty rates, they 

jacked up the royalty rates, they made a bunch of laws and said, 

you know, if you’re not profitable, you can’t shut your oil wells 

down. If you do shut them down, we’re going to take them. 

 

And that’s what the NDP did, Mr. Speaker. They took a bunch 

of oil wells; they put them in a group; they called it Saskoil. 

They were oil barons. They thought they’d walk with the 

stetsons, go to the Petroleum Club in Calgary, and hang out 

with the boys. Well they got to Calgary, Mr. Speaker, and they 

realized that the boys didn’t want to hang out with them. In fact, 

it was probably those guys in Calgary who owned the oil 

companies in the first place and said, you know, get back to 

Saskatchewan and give us back our oil wells. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this went on for a while. They realized they 

weren’t any better at oil than they were at potash . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No. They were terrible at it. 

 

So again, the Conservatives came into power in ’82 and they 

had to straighten out the NDP mess. They reorganized it again, 

several things. They privatized Saskoil and again that was a 

very successful privatization. They privatized it. They sold off 

stuff. But the Government of Saskatchewan still owned a large 

portion of that company, Mr. Speaker. Until 1997, in fact, the 

NDP government sold off a huge portion of Saskoil. And not 

only did they sell off a huge portion of Saskoil. They changed 

the legislation. They changed the legislation to allow the head 

office to move, to allow ownership to be diluted. And you 

know, the parallels are striking. 

 

But this is where it gets problematic. With the potash situation, 

the now Leader of the Opposition was deputy premier and was 

largely pulling the strings of that. 

 

In the case of Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, the now Leader of the 

Opposition was minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. He was the guy that championed 

the legislation. He was the guy that decided to sell this asset. 

And I would like to make everyone aware of on July 22nd, 

1997, the then leader of the opposition, minister of CIC, went in 

front of the Crown and Central Agencies Committee to discuss 

a major transaction. It was the sale of Saskoil, then called 

Wascana, to Nexen, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if that rings a 

bell for anyone. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, he gets in front of the Crowns committee, he 

introduces his officials, and then he excuses himself. He says, 

I’m afraid I have a conflict. The cabinet is getting together. I’ll 

introduce our staff and then I’ll excuse myself. Let me just read 

verbatim from Hansard, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Having said that, I also have to apologize for the fact that 

we’re sort of doublebooked today with the cabinet meeting 

which starts in a few moments, and I will have to leave 

and then return at 1:30 for the issues that we have on this 

afternoon. But I’ll leave our operation here of CIC in very 

capable hands . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, he leaves the meeting. They discuss the issues of 

selling off Saskoil to Nexen. They have a break, and guess who 

shows back up to discuss the rest of the issues of the day as 

soon as that’s out of the way? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I guess maybe I’ll fill in what’s not in here. 

Shortly after, Mr. Speaker, after the sale took place, the then 

minister of CIC, deputy premier, he decided that it was time to 

look for greener pastures. He was going to apply for some jobs 

across Canada. He . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He hit the old dusty trail. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Yes, he hit the old dusty trail, Mr. 

Speaker. He had heard there was opportunity in Calgary, and I 

guess he floated a few resumés around. And you’ll never guess 

who thought that he’d be a great employee. It was Nexen, Mr. 

Speaker. Nexen hired the Leader of the Opposition to come on 

as a junior executive. And one of his first tasks, Mr. Speaker, 

was to come back to Saskatchewan . . . And maybe I will read 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5775 

one other portion. This is a portion that the Leader of the 

Opposition wasn’t in the room to give this answer, but he left 

his official to give this answer. 

 

In questioning, and I believe this is questioning from Mr. 

Gantefoer, Mr. Gantefoer asked a question about the head 

office. The Leader of the Opposition’s staff member said that 

blah blah blah, that Nexen was willing to keep in the spirit of 

the Act, “. . . keeping the head office and all functions 

associated with the head office in Regina.” I jump ahead a little 

further. “In fact we’ve had commitments that they may be 

increasing staffing rather than decreasing [staffing].” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what great news for the members of that Crowns 

committee to hear that more jobs were coming to Saskatchewan 

because this masterful deal put together by the NDP to sell off 

Saskoil to Nexen. As it turns out, shortly after he got employed 

in Calgary by the company that bought it, he came back to 

Saskatchewan to lobby his colleagues, I understand, to allow 

them to close the head office in Saskatchewan because it didn’t 

make sense and they needed it in Calgary. 

 

It may have made sense, Mr. Speaker, but looking through this 

example and looking at the similarities to the potash example, 

Mr. Speaker, it leaves me with a lot of questions as to the 

credibility of that side of the House in regards to this potash 

situation. I have questions. I think the people of Saskatchewan 

have questions and I think if he’s asking to go to Ottawa as part 

of a coalition to put forward Saskatchewan’s message, I say no. 

I say that I don’t want the guy that sold those shares of potash 

to now be saying, you know, I was wrong; I’m coming back on 

what we had committed to and changing the rules. So I think 

that we have made the right choice sending the best 

representative in Canada, the best representative in 

Saskatchewan, to represent our interests and we are well served 

by that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think I’m going to end my comments there, Mr. Speaker. I had 

opportunity to speak last night, but I know that many members 

on opposite side of the House will do a dutiful job of also 

shining some light on this very important issue. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy today to 

add some comments to the Throne Speech. Before I do that I 

would like to thank the people of Eastview for continuing to 

allow me to serve them. This is going into the 13th year, four 

elections. I’m very happy and very proud to continue to be the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

I also want to thank my family, my husband Don and my 

children and my mother who’s 85 who continues to campaign 

with me. And all my family for the support they give me that 

allows me to do this job and to live in Regina away from my 

family for a good part of the year. 

 

I also want to thank, in my office, April Anderson who runs the 

office so well, does a great deal of service for people, and they 

do appreciate all of her efforts. I want to thank the executive of 

Eastview who help me also in continuing to support me as an 

MLA and to continue to help the fact that as an NDP MLA, I’m 

going to be elected again. 

 

I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech, when I looked 

at the faces of the members opposite and the people in the 

crowd, didn’t touch anybody. I didn’t see any smiles. I didn’t 

see any nodding. I didn’t see any enthusiasm. I never heard any 

spontaneous applause. I think the Throne Speech, to be kind, 

underwhelmed most people. I think that it basically rehashed 

things that we’ve heard before. It was an opportunity for the 

Premier to put forward a vision. And I think he failed miserably 

as he has failed with many of the things we have recounted 

today in question period and member statements. I think the 

failures are quite evident. And I think people saw the Throne 

Speech for what it was, pretty much an empty document and a 

waste of an afternoon. 

 

The road that the Premier talks about is interesting because his 

analogy of a road and a new road. I think most people who see 

the Throne Speech and see the Premier’s actions and the actions 

of the government, the choices they’re making and the 

directions they’re going, would say that it’s not really a new 

road, that Grant Devine’s been on that road, and a lot of the 

signposts along the way are Grant Devine’s. And this 

government continues to mark those and celebrate those as their 

own. I think one of the interesting ones, I’ll talk about a little bit 

later, is privatization, and I think it’s something that the Premier 

has taken to his own peril. 

 

I think the people of the province . . . And I’m mostly going to 

talk around health care because the people of the province, I 

think, realize that they’re being manipulated when they’re being 

told that the public system cannot manage, so we have to turn to 

the private system. I don’t think anybody believes that. We’re 

getting phone calls and saying well please explain that to me. 

Saskatoon in the spring — in May actually — increased their 

surgeries. They did that because there was more money. That 

tells me that there’s capacity in the system, in the public system. 

More money produces more surgeries. You don’t have to put 

that money in a private clinic. It is clearly manipulating the 

public to believe something that’s not true. 

 

And I think it’s also interesting that people believe that there’s 

not enough diagnostic equipment. And I hear from many, many 

people who work in the system, who are close to those 

machines on a daily basis, that they are not fully used. They’re 

not fully used 24-7. So the claim that there are not enough 

machines in the public system to do the job and we absolutely 

have to put a private one in somewhere is again not true. 

 

And I think the public needs to know, and I think they are 

getting to know, that this isn’t true and what they’re being told 

isn’t the whole story. And I think that they’re confused, but 

they’re also disappointed. I think there’s a movement afoot, and 

it isn’t just in Saskatchewan, to undermine the public system so 

people will turn and say we need to have the private system. 

And that is so clear in this, the surgery centre operation that the 

minister and the government undertook this year. To tell the 

public that they needed to reduce wait times by turning over the 

surgeries to private clinics is just clearly misleading the public. 



5776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

And when the wait times have gone down for many, many, 

many of the surgeries with just different organization within the 

public system and money applied in the right places, then it 

does say the argument for private is totally bogus. 

 

And I think it was interesting when we had the kerfuffle about a 

Roughrider having an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], and 

everybody noticed that with money you could have one in 

off-hours. Well what it said to me was there was capacity in the 

system. Obviously off-hours the machine is sitting dark. So why 

doesn’t the public system use the machine more often, more 

hours, and unstop the backlog in the public system? It’s about 

money. 

 

And when we talk about money, it’s interesting. And I know 

my colleague from Dewdney last night talked about how the 

government’s claim that the debt is going down is also not true. 

I think people are going to wonder and of course people are 

wondering, where is the money coming from for all the 

promises? When you look at a deficit of $1 billion last year and 

we’re waiting to see the mid-year financials . . . I’m not sure if 

we’ll see them when the House is in session because that would 

sort of be a black mark on the government, so I’m sure that 

they’ll wait until after we are not sitting in this House so we 

don’t have the type of scrutiny that we would have if we were 

here. So it’ll be interesting to see the timing of those mid-year 

financials. But I’m assuming, given the way the finances have 

gone so far to this point, that we will see another deficit. 

 

And yet in Throne Speech, there were grandiose promises of 

helicopters for medevac, things like, yes, we are going to fund 

the long-term care facilities. The money was promised in ’09 

for 13 long-term care facilities. I visited 10 of those, by the 

way, this summer. And there’s certainly no, no dispute that 

those facilities need renovation. There is an infrastructure 

deficit in this province, but it is because of a financial deficit 

left to this province by Devine and colleagues of those members 

opposite. And we’re going still in that, we’re going in that 

direction again. 

 

Again my analogy, to paraphrase, the Premier’s going down 

this road. Like I said, the sign posts along the road are all from 

Grant Devine. Deficit, debt, privatization — those aren’t new to 

the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve been there, done that, and 

have the debt to prove it. We don’t have the T-shirts, but we 

could. 

 

And I think when our government left, we left over $2 billion in 

the bank. We left the money, and the money has been 

squandered. The money’s gone and we’re in deficit and the 

Crowns are being stripped. And I have people calling me all the 

time, telling me that this program or that program or this service 

or that service has been just quietly sold off. So the fear that the 

Crowns are being undermined is out there; people know it. 

Unfortunately it’s happening sort of under the radar. 

 

It’s interesting also when I look at the programs that are being 

stripped away from the health system because each health 

district, or health region as they’re now called, was underfunded 

as well. And this year, they needed 7 per cent of an increase in 

their budget to maintain the health services that they were 

delivering last year. They got 3.5, so half of what they needed. 

And this simply will not deliver the services that the people in 

those health regions need. 

 

So each health region has been instructed to find efficiencies. 

Well they started to look for efficiencies and started closing 

labs and closing ambulances and closing long-term care beds 

and cutting housekeeping and cutting dietary and cutting 

maintenance and not hiring staff and looking at sick cops to 

police sick time and overtime to find these efficiencies. But 

because of the underfunding and the choices that the 

government made to underfund the system, these things are 

directly affecting people. 

 

And if you’re looking at putting in an ambulance, a helicopter 

ambulance, when you haven’t got an ambulance on the road . . . 

The Neilburg ambulance, $75,000 to keep that ambulance 

running. STARS [shock trauma air rescue service], 17 million 

to run a year. You have to have the ground ambulance, the basic 

service, in place. So I understand putting the STARS in the 

Throne Speech. It’s popular. People like the idea of a helicopter 

coming in and saving them. But if you haven’t got the basics, 

you aren’t going to do anything. It’s not going to fix anything. 

It’s not going to fix your problem. 

 

And I do think, having been on the road for most of the summer 

into 55-plus communities, I understand that the rural vote is 

slipping and that there’s had to be something, something 

dramatic to appeal to rural voters because, in my travels with 

my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview, we visited 55 

communities and many more facilities because some 

communities we visited two, three, and four facilities in that 

community. So we have a really good sense of what’s 

happening in Saskatchewan, in small town and rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And people told us that they feel abandoned. They feel like 

they’re on their own. They feel like they’re paying twice for 

health care. Those are direct quotes from people in 

communities. And these aren’t disgruntled workers; these are 

town administrators, mayors, and business people in 

communities. So the feeling in rural Saskatchewan is not that 

positive for the Sask Party. And I think anybody over there who 

takes that for granted does so at their own peril. 

 

The things that we saw in our travels, of course we heard all 

about the closures and the cuts. And I do have . . . Yesterday I 

talked about Wawota. That is a symptom of what’s wrong. The 

district or the region was given a budget that was below what it 

needed to deliver its services for the communities that they 

serve, and they started making choices. There is a whole bunch 

of other issues in that region, dealing with the personnel, and 

that has, I think, been dealt with. But the five beds in Wawota 

in the Deer View Lodge in Wawota that closed, I think it is 

symbol of what’s happening around Saskatchewan because it 

isn’t the only place where people rallied in communities to 

protest the cuts. 

 

When the government made choices, the Sask Party 

government made choices to underfund the health system and 

gave, the minister said, gave the instruction to the regions to try 

not to let any front-line services be affected, well that’s just 

nonsense. You simply can’t find $25 million of efficiencies in 

Saskatoon without making some serious cuts in programs. Even 

smaller districts can’t find $3 million in efficiencies. They have 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5777 

to start cutting services. 

 

And the communities are saying that is enough. This is our line 

in the sand. No, you’re not taking the ambulance out of 

Neilburg. No, you’re not taking the lab services out of 

Nokomis. And communities in Kamsack and in Neilburg and in 

Wawota had hundreds of people come to public meetings that I 

attended and spoke at in some. 

 

And we started off on our tour — and I know the minister said 

he was tracking me and he will be interested to note — that we 

started off on our tour, we picked the communities. My 

colleague from Fairview and I, we picked the communities that 

we thought we’d try to get a flavour of each region. By the end 

of the tour, the communities were picking us. They were calling 

and saying, come here. Come and talk to us. This is an issue 

here. We want you to come and hear what’s happening here. 

Not only the communities were calling us, but I’d be 

interviewed by a media person in some town, and they’d say 

you should go to X town because they have this issue 

happening. So it was definitely a summer of interesting contacts 

and interesting observations. 

 

I do have another observation, and that was said to me and my 

colleague from Fairview over and over and over again, and we 

were in all the health regions except two, the two northern ones 

as yet. And everywhere we went, people said to me, I cannot 

get my MLA to return a phone call. I cannot get my MLA to 

meet with me — everywhere we went. So it wasn’t just a little 

pocket of dissent or unhappiness. It was a theme. 

 

When I had to present my themes to my colleagues, that was 

one of them. People were not being heard. They were not being 

heard. Their MLAs would not come and meet with them. So 

very few MLAs were mentioned by name that were helpful. 

And I think that that’s another issue that the Sask Party has to 

deal with. 

 

It’s interesting in Wawota. This is today’s news or yesterday’s 

news, I guess, that closing the beds in Wawota . . . My point 

will be that when you make a decision in isolation of the 

rippling effect of that decision, you don’t do anybody a service. 

And the closure of the beds in Wawota has now resulted in the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region opening new beds at 

Broadview because there is a spill over from Sun Country 

which is where Wawota is. 

 

So closing the beds in Wawota has now made Regina open up 

beds in Broadview. And of course the people in Wawota are 

going, what? Why would you do that? Why would you close 

them in Wawota so that you could open them in another town to 

deal with people that should be kept in our community? 

 

We heard stories in Wawota that would make you cry. People 

whose family member was taken to another town, say 100 

kilometres away, that only the wife could feed, and so the 

husband didn’t eat. He refused to eat. So he’s in Estevan 

hospital now, dying. Those stories are what’s happening when 

you do things like that. It’s not fair to people. And people are 

understanding that when you talk about three beds, it doesn’t 

sound like a lot. But it makes such a huge impact on peoples’ 

lives that I think it is a story that demonstrates what happens 

when you make cuts to the health system. 

[15:00] 

 

We are going to have rural round table. I promised everybody 

where I went that this would not be an exercise in futility, that 

they would come and talk to me and it would just go nowhere. I 

also didn’t come out to defend anything that had happened 

before. I came to talk about tomorrow. And I wanted to talk 

about what does rural Saskatchewan need to be healthy and 

what do communities in rural Saskatchewan need to grow 

because, interestingly enough, we saw communities that were 

having cuts — cuts were being made in lab or maintenance or 

whatever services — those cuts were being made and a new 

hotel was going up. And people were talking about new people 

moving to the community. Well those people were already 

considering putting signs up on their houses for sale because the 

clinic was closed. There were no doctors any more. So people 

aren’t going to move to communities nor stay in communities 

where there aren’t health services. 

 

And that whole issue of recruiting doctors was a huge theme of 

the tour. We had many, many, many communities talk to us 

about . . . They may be happy right now with the two or three 

doctors they have, and that’s adequate. But they know they’re 

just one resignation away from being in the same position as 

many other communities that had to shut their emergencies or 

shut their hospitals or discontinue all their health services. So 

they know out there in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And people said to us, rural Saskatchewan is paying twice for 

health care because they have to find their own doctor and they 

have to put the incentives together. Some communities actually 

have formalized holding companies, and they levy a health tax 

on their constituents. And this is how the doctor shortage and 

the doctor recruitment is done. People are starting to buy the 

doctors themselves because there’s no help from government. 

 

And this physician recruitment agency, no one heard about it. 

And when the new CEO was hired, I didn’t hear the word 

“rural” come out of his mouth once. So I don’t think anybody in 

rural Saskatchewan anticipates any help from there. I still heard 

that the minister or the department officials, someone had said 

when asked, that rural Saskatchewan or communities will still 

be asked to put together their own incentives, and basically 

they’re still on their own. And that’s another thing that I did 

hear. We’re on our own in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So there are communities who are building clinics. The 

community will own it, will build it, will finance it. And they 

will bring the doctors in, promise them certain things, 

guaranteed fee for service. If the fee for service, that number 

isn’t achieved, then the community will top it up. Pay for the 

equipment. Pay for the house. Pay for the car. Yearly incentives 

to stay. And all this is done with municipal tax money, so that 

people are not getting rinks fixed, highways and community 

roads being done. This is all taking away from the community 

use of the tax base. That’s why they’re saying rural 

Saskatchewan’s paying twice for health care. And this is 

because this government isn’t showing any leadership; it isn’t. 

 

And the minister goes on and on and on about recruiting nurses. 

That is one piece of the health care system. One piece. When 

we travelled, we found places where there were not enough 

LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. There were not enough special 



5778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

care aides. And my dad is in Sherbrooke, and who cares for him 

on a daily basis are special care aides. And the long-term care 

facilities we visited, special care aides do the hands-on care. If 

you don’t have enough special care aides, my dad doesn’t get 

out of bed. My dad doesn’t get fed. My dad doesn’t get dressed 

or bathed. You need special care aides. 

 

It’s great to say you hit your target of 800 nurses or exceeded 

your target, but you can’t live on that glory for very long when 

the rest of the system is suffering. And if you’re trying to get 

sick time and workers’ compensation and overtime decrease 

and you’re still working staff overtime . . . I’m not talking about 

nurses. You might have fixed that. I didn’t hear that either, by 

the way. Nurses are still feeling it. 

 

And I’m hearing new graduates are not getting jobs. I’m 

hearing there’s jobs being created in the system to make the 

minister’s target. Like this is not fixing the system. It’s good 

window dressing and it’s good PR [public relations], but it 

hasn’t fixed the system where I visited. 

 

And I didn’t just visit one community. When you visit 55, you 

pretty much know you’ve hit the right theme if you’re going to 

talk about themes because you have all the conversation, all the 

people, all the contacts we’ve made. I mean we talked to a 

thousand people, thousands of people, and those people were 

workers. And in every place we went, we talked to everybody. 

We looked at everything, but we also talked and we listened to 

what they had to say. And for the most part, the theme of those 

talks were that they were undervalued and underappreciated and 

in fact in some areas, disrespected, openly disrespected. 

 

And it’s pretty hard to . . . We of course were out during the 

summer when the contract was still not signed and the bitter 

atmosphere that Bill 5 and 6 that the government put in to go to 

war with labour. When the Premier said he was going to war 

with labour, well we saw the fruits of that statement. We saw 

what Bill 5 and 6 has done to the health care system and to the 

health care workers. It’s a long way back to repair that damage. 

 

Collective bargaining has been set back decades. There’s no 

trust. There’s no fairness. That process has been damaged, just 

significantly damaged. The contract that was signed, was signed 

without a great deal of enthusiasm and is not going to fix how 

angry people are there about how disrespected they are. 

 

There’s actually bullying and intimidation happening in the 

workplace. When some area where management can say to the 

staff, if you don’t like your job, Tim Hortons is hiring. Well as 

much as I enjoy a well-prepared cup of coffee, nicely poured, 

and I like Timbits every so often, I again think of my dad in 

Sherbrooke. He needs workers who are committed to long-term 

care and committed to geriatrics. I think it’s absolutely 

appalling that a manager would say that to the staff. And that 

was in Swift Current. And the Premier . . . That is the Premier’s 

riding, and that’s how management is talking to their staff in 

Swift Current. 

 

That goes a long way to tell me that when the Premier started 

his war with labour and made it quite clear to everyone that 

that’s what his mission was, that management, health districts, 

they’ve adopted that. And you can now see it coming through in 

how management deals with the health care workers. 

And when the member stood up yesterday and talked about his 

health care worker appreciation week, well small consolation. A 

member’s statement. When this whole province has . . . There’s 

80,000 people out there that belong to the labour movement, 

25,000 health care workers who feel disrespected. And this goes 

to exactly how the care is being delivered. 

 

And you might have fixed the nurses. You might have, and I 

don’t even say that that’s a fix because I’m now hearing 

students who can’t get jobs. And there’s nurses we talk to in 

facilities that still are underworked or overworked, sorry. And I 

think that to rest on your laurels with achieving your target of 

800 is not going to fix the system, is not going to help the 

system, is not going to move the system forward. 

 

So when we talk about the Throne Speech, I mean the promises 

that were made in there are just rehashing, and I think people 

understand that. That’s why I didn’t see any enthusiasm. I think 

it pretty much died in the water. I haven’t heard any media 

coverage of it. It just is a non-event. 

 

But some of the things that happen, you know, while we just 

take for granted that our world is going on, things are 

happening in programs that are really disturbing. There was a 

program in Regina that was swimming for arthritis. The people 

that were in the pool swimming to help limber them up and deal 

with their symptoms of arthritis, somebody marched in from the 

Regina Health District and told them to get out of the pool; the 

program was cancelled. 

 

So when I think about closing the beds in Wawota, when I think 

about closing the lab in Nokomis where the doctor said, if you 

close the lab, if you cut down lab services, I cannot function as 

a doctor . . . We simply have to give more thought to what our 

decisions are, and I think the decisions of the government to 

underfund the health system will have catastrophic effects. You 

can’t do it. The system is needed. There’s programs that are 

needed. 

 

We don’t even have a mental health strategy. Been promised. I 

don’t see it in the Throne Speech. There’s a huge need for 

mental health services in this province and it continues to be 

ignored. Yet we think we can talk about STARS. I don’t 

understand the choices. The choices do not . . . I mean it sounds 

good. It looks good on TV when a helicopter lands in a field. 

But when you have a person in your family who’s suffering 

from a mental illness and can’t get in to see a psychiatrist or a 

psychologist or have an in-patient bed, that helicopter isn’t 

going to do you any good. 

 

So I think we also have to talk about — back to my points — 

about privatizing. I think that’s a bogus argument that the public 

. . . I will be saying, and the member opposite last night was 

saying when I was on tour that I was scaring people silly. Well I 

was scaring them with the truth. And if the truth scares them, 

well those are the scary people that are doing that to them. 

 

And what I basically told people out in rural Saskatchewan in 

the communities that I visited that had the long-term care 

facilities promised to them in ’09 — the 13 communities and I 

saw 10 of them, as I said — I told them that there is a new deal. 

There is a new funding arrangement in Saskatoon and you 

should have a look at it. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5779 

And they said, what? We never heard of that. We don’t know 

about any new deal. We think we have to raise our 35 per cent. 

We think we’re going to have to put on a health levy. We think 

we’re going to have to have sales. We think we’re going to have 

to have community fundraisers. We think each community’s 

surroundings is going to have to contribute X number of dollars 

to this facility. And only when we get our 35 per cent can these 

plans that are sitting here on the desk or up on the wall able to 

move forward. 

 

And I said, oh no. No, no, no, you don’t have to do that any 

more. There’s a new funding arrangement in town. The minister 

said so. The Minister of Health said, here’s a new arrangement. 

You don’t have to pay anything. Amicus didn’t have to. And 

the government guarantees the loan. The taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are on the hook. Our finances are exposed and 

liable if that company goes out of business. 

 

Besides which, there is a more than normal levy per patient. So 

patients in long-term care at Sherbrooke or anyplace else in 

Saskatchewan don’t get the same amount of funding from the 

government as this new facility will, called Good Samaritan in 

Saskatoon. So why don’t you, in Rosetown and Kerrobert and 

Biggar and Meadow Lake and Tisdale and Kelvington, why 

don’t you ask for the same deal? And they said oh well, send us 

the information. 

 

So if that’s what’s scaring them silly, I think it should be 

scaring the Sask Party silly that people out in rural 

Saskatchewan are actually getting real information, and they’re 

not liking it. They’re not liking what they’re hearing. And one 

town mayor said he will shut the town down and bring it to 

Regina if the decision in that community isn’t reversed. That’s a 

pretty strong statement, and much as I like to see delegations 

come to Regina to make the government move on issues of 

importance, I think that’s pretty bad politics and it’s pretty bad 

policy, when you have angered communities so much that 

they’ll do that. 

 

And I know there’s a bunch of comments across the way, 

talking about 52 hospitals closed in the ’90s. I have tracked all 

those places, all those towns. There are only two — two — that 

don’t have health centre and special care homes. So when we’re 

talking about closing facilities, that is scare tactics. That is 

misinformation. That is misleading. And at some point during 

this session or in the spring I am going to list them all and what 

they’re doing, just so people will know, and those bogus 

arguments from people who haven’t a clue what they’re talking 

about will die. And not too soon for anybody, because those 

sorts of things, what I’m seeing out in rural Saskatchewan, 

people were not interested. 

 

In 55 communities I visited, and I haven’t even counted how 

many actual facilities — like I said, sometimes four, three, or 

two in a community — twice, twice I had someone say to me, 

well you shut our hospital. Twice. So that’s not a big issue, in 

case anybody’s interested in learning that. That is not a big 

issue out in rural Saskatchewan. And I was in all your 

communities. So if you think those people are interested in 

going back 16 years and talking about what the NDP did or 

didn’t do, you’re wrong. So the minister should get some new 

material because that’s not resonating out there. 

 

Those two communities . . . And when I said to those people — 

in case the minister from Weyburn, the member from Weyburn 

is interested — when I said to those people, I didn’t come out 

here to defend anything, I came to listen to what you think is 

good for the future, they said, oh good. They said, oh good. And 

no, I’m not going to name those communities because I don’t 

think he needs to know that. But I think most people know that 

I am not making it up when I said I visited 55 of them and many 

more of the facilities. So if they think I’m making this up, well 

go live in your la-la land then. 

 

But I think basically what we have seen when we were out and 

about, bed closures — long-term care and acute care. We saw 

service reductions: labs, ambulance, therapies, counsellors, 

social workers, EMTs [emergency medical technician]. We saw 

staff reductions in many, many facilities. 

 

We saw recruitment issues with doctors and nurse practitioners. 

One community couldn’t get a nurse practitioner funded. And 

people have also said, in Wawota too and in another community 

that was talking about the nurse practitioner, Foam Lake, said 

that, we can pay for this. Like we have the money. We could 

raise the money around the table right now while we’re having 

coffee. But why should we? Why should we? We already pay 

taxes. Why should we pay twice? 

 

And then people said, well why should we also, why should we 

put up with somebody that says you have to do it yourself? 

Why are we doing that? Why are we doing everything ourself? 

Why are the communities getting together? And as one of the 

Sask Party members said at one time in a public meeting, that 

you have to get into a bidding war with your neighbours. And 

they are. Because one community we visited bought two 

doctors from another community who lost them. They had more 

money because they’ve got oil rigs pumping around, around 

them. They can afford that. 

 

[15:15] 

 

What about communities who can’t afford it, who don’t have 

rich resources around them? They can’t enter into the bidding 

war. They don’t get a doctor; is that the answer? That’s what 

they’re thinking because there’s no help for them and they 

know it. It’s not coming. And nobody out there is holding their 

breath. They know that this party, this Sask Party has 

abandoned them. And they know it. 

 

And I know they can laugh over there and giggle, but go out on 

a tour. I didn’t see any of them. I didn’t cross paths with a 

single person out there. And I heard from everybody I met that 

they can’t get to their MLA. They won’t answer the phone call 

and they will not meet. So if you’re out there, nobody knows it. 

 

And the member from Cannington, well he had some wonderful 

press during the summer. You can choose between highways or 

health care — that was his big pronouncement. Yes, people 

really liked that in Wawota. They wanted me to move there. 

They wanted me to move to Wawota. By goodness’ sakes, these 

people are desperate for actual true representation. They’re not 

getting it from there. 

 

And actually that makes me . . . There’s a comment here in the 

paper that really you should hear . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 



5780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

You are going to hear. This is from Sun Country and this is the 

save our communities people who met with the health board 

from Sun Country. And he said, this is Dave Easton, he said 

that: 

 

“Our local MLAs have given us extremely negligible 

support. Where do we go from here? We’re still trying out 

how to pick ourselves up and where we go from here,” 

said Easton. 

 

That’s no support. That’s just one area. I heard many, many of 

them, that you are not returning your phone calls in your 

offices, you’re not taking meetings. So I don’t think people out 

there are confused about who’s representing their interests. And 

it isn’t the members opposite. It isn’t the Premier. It isn’t the 

Sask Party. The choices that are being made are affecting rural 

Saskatchewan in really, really negative ways, and we’re also 

losing the ability to move forward. 

 

One of my colleagues was speaking today about if we lose our 

potash resources, if we lose our royalty, if we lose the royalty 

structure, if we lose money in the future, how do we fund these 

programs? It’s all connected. These decisions aren’t made in 

isolation. If you are wrong in your budget, if you’ve misspent 

the money, if you’re stripping the Crowns, services are going to 

be affected. 

 

And you might not notice the program for arthritis and people 

can’t swim for arthritis anymore. You might not notice that a 

ranch is being closed for addictions, people who have 

addictions. You might not notice that. But you are going to 

notice that your ambulance isn’t there. You are going to notice 

that your doctor’s not there. You are going to notice that your 

nurse practitioner’s not there. You are going to notice that your 

meals are being reheated in the microwave. You are going to 

notice when you get MRSA [methicillin resistant 

Staphylococcus aureus] or VRE [vancomycin resistant 

enterococci], when you get these superbug infections because 

you have no housekeeping. You are going to notice that. And 

you are going to notice when no money’s coming to build your 

long-term care facilities. 

 

We were asking people, because they had plans laid out on their 

tables and, you know, push-pinned up on their walls, and they 

were very proud of these plans because they’ve worked on them 

for a while. And they were very excited because they were 

promised the money to have them built. So they haven’t got the 

money. It’s taken away in the budget. 

 

And I said, well have you any indication of when these projects 

will go forward? Yes, we do; in the fall of 2011. Like 

November of 2011, one of them said. I said, well isn’t that 

interesting? What else is happening in the fall of 2011? So I 

think light bulbs went on. And of course if you think people are 

scared silly, no. They’re actually learning what’s going on. And 

they like to know. And if you think people are going to be kept 

in the dark, they’re not. 

 

They came out . . . honestly when I went out, I wasn’t sure 

about the reception I would get. Truly I wasn’t. But when I 

went out there and people came in droves, not only the people, 

the staff, but the mayors would come, the RM administrators, 

the pharmacists from the community, the chamber of 

commerce. They were not afraid to come. And yes, we did get 

candidates, many candidates that we actually found. We did. 

We did. People came forward, and we did find candidates. That 

wasn’t the goal of the tour, but they came forward. I mean they 

came out of the woodwork. 

 

And it was interesting that the response — regardless of what I 

knew that riding was, that was represented by the Sask Party 

and had been forever — people still wanted to talk to me. And I 

think that they were sincere in their concerns, and they knew 

that I was sincere in coming out to listen. And I promised a 

round table and it will happen. And then we’re going to see 

what we, as a party, present to rural Saskatchewan as a new way 

for rural health care. 

 

And I think that when we talk about all the choices that have 

been made by this government and particularly underfunding 

health districts, people are seeing it in . . . You’re seeing it in 

groups of people that are swimming for arthritis. Those people 

aren’t going to be happy. They aren’t going to be happy with 

you. People that can’t get into the addictions ranch, they’re not 

going to be happy. The people that took me out there, they 

know who did it. They know who’s not helping them. And 

there’s lots and lots and lots of those people. They’re not on the 

front page of the Leader-Post. They’re not in The Globe and 

Mail, but they’re out there in Saskatchewan, and they’re going 

to vote. 

 

And so if the Premier thinks he can threaten everybody by 

calling an election tomorrow, go ahead. Go ahead. It’s an empty 

threat anyway, much as everything that he has said. In the 

answers to the questions today, the Premier got very frustrated. 

And he thought he should threaten us with an election so we 

could find out. Well he’s the one who did fixed election dates. 

So he’d be breaking his own law, which says quite a bit about 

his commitment to anything he’s actually said. And it does go 

to the fact that anything that he has promised, we haven’t seen. 

 

Small promises about this and that are small compared to no 

reactors, no medical imaging, no medical reactor, no carbon 

capture — nothing. Nothing. Children’s hospital, that’s a whole 

other story that you know nothing about. We started in the ’80s 

talking about the children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. And get 

me started. And the reason it didn’t move forward, for those of 

you who weren’t around in ’91 when the province was almost 

bankrupt because of Devine, because there was no money. 

There was no money in the ’90s. 

 

It took a decade to get this province out of debt. And I know 

nobody really wants to talk about that any more, but we’re 

living with the effect of that. When we talk about an 

infrastructure deficit we had . . . I know that’s the Minister of 

Health’s favourite line, 16 years of blah, blah, blah. But when 

we go back and talk about what was this province left with in 

the ’90s? It’s crippling debt, and we were almost bankrupt as a 

province. So you can’t be building highways and hospitals and 

schools when you’re bankrupt. There were some tough 

decisions that had to be made. 

 

I wasn’t there for it, but I saw what my colleagues had to deal 

with and what they did and what strength and wisdom they had 

for the things that they did. Now we’re seeing absolutely 

willy-nilly decisions, weak-kneed support for the province. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5781 

Anything that’s . . . You know if there’s a parade, this Premier 

who likes to jump in front of it. He can’t see a parade go by that 

he doesn’t want to jump in front of it. And I’m waiting to see 

the Captain Canada tights and the flag draped around him in 

some parade. 

 

Because this is not . . . You can’t lead by polling, and that’s 

what we’re seeing. You know, put your finger up; which way 

are the people going today? That’s where I’ll go with them, or 

that’s where I think I’ll follow. But this isn’t how people see the 

province. And I think it’s interesting that there’s still that era of 

arrogance and entitlement. 

 

I talked to somebody who said, they honestly thought — and 

I’m assuming this person didn’t vote for us — he honestly 

thought that this government would have a learning curve and it 

would be steep. And he thought that there would be, though, a 

time when they learned. He said, they have not learned. They 

have not learned. He gave them a chance, but they have not 

learned. And that’s a pretty damning comment, that people who 

are willing to give an opportunity to a party and politicians and 

MLAs to learn the business of government and to deliver that 

government for the people of Saskatchewan haven’t learned 

how to do it. 

 

So I think the Premier could yes, go ahead. Call an election, see 

what happens. But I think empty threats, empty promises, 

frivolous actions — those are the things that this Premier has 

now been labelled with. And he can get red and he can get 

pouty because, if you watch him — it’s too bad the camera 

doesn’t stay on him after he gives his answers — flings himself 

around in his seat, turns his back on the Assembly, gets all red 

and pouty. 

 

That’s really mature. That’s really mature. And I like to see it 

when there’s people in the gallery because they notice, and they 

remark on it. So if we talk about the behaviour of the members 

here, and sometimes, Mr. Speaker, I agree, you know, it doesn’t 

get too good. But when the Premier of the province pouts in his 

seat or disrespects the Assembly by turning his back, that’s 

something the people do notice. 

 

So I think that when we talk about the Throne Speech as being 

the Premier’s vision for the province, I’m not surprised that 

there was really underwhelming support and interest in it. I 

even saw some of the colleagues that are across the way, the 

government itself, yawning; not smiling. They were not 

interested. They were not into it at all. So I think that the 

Throne Speech itself is certainly nothing that inspires me, and I 

think the people that I’ve talked to around the province aren’t 

going to be supporting the things that are in the Throne Speech. 

They certainly have lost their support for the government. 

 

And it was interesting to reach out into rural Saskatchewan 

where I haven’t been for awhile. When I was associate minister 

of Health and minister of Learning, I visited schools and 

hospitals and health facilities all around this province. But this 

was a different view, a different view from an opposition point 

of view. And it was a different view and it was a different 

message. And it was interesting how people are thinking. 

They’re not supporting this government. They’re not being 

fooled, and they’re certainly not excited about the direction that 

they see this government taking us. They understand. 

And often when I was SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 

president, we talked about . . . I represented 8,000 nurses. If 

members had the right information, they made the right 

decisions. So that’s what I hope, the people of Saskatchewan 

get the right information. Because if the information is being 

manipulated, then people will make the wrong decisions. And I 

think it’s really, really . . . It behooves all of us as MLAs to be 

honest and to be forthright with the people so that the people 

can make the right decisions. 

 

I don’t know who is playing music in the Assembly but it’s 

interesting. Maybe it’s that wind-down, I’m supposed to quit 

because the music has started, the band is playing? So it’s the 

conductor playing the music at the Academy Awards that it’s 

time for me to stop. I was just getting on a roll, and I was 

having quite a good time. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s other members who want to 

speak and I’m quite anxious to hear their comments. Many of 

my colleagues have lots of interesting things to say and 

interesting views and interesting points to bring up from the 

Throne Speech. And I then would like to say, in closing my 

remarks, I will be supporting the amendment and not supporting 

the main motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to enter into this debate on the 

Speech from the Throne and to represent the people of 

Saskatoon Silver Springs in this constituency. 

 

I want to begin, like most members do with thanking their 

families for the opportunity to serve in the legislature. You need 

a supportive family, and I certainly have that in my wife Trish, 

who has her own career as a professional broadcaster but also 

takes part in many, many activities. She’s busy right now 

working towards the cancer fundraiser that’s happening this 

weekend in Saskatoon called Choc’laCure, where they work 

with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and see what types of 

new material they need or new machines they need, and they 

fundraise specifically for that one area.  

 

And that’s what she is doing, and as well as running our kids 

around to different activities and being a great mother that she 

is. My son, Carter, a very exciting weekend. Carter participated 

in the city finals of peewee football. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t get 

more exciting than that, 11 and 12-year-olds running around, 

playing football. City final, 0-0 at the end. Into overtime, 

double overtime, and his Peewee Falcons lost to the Steelers in 

Saskatoon. But a great league, the Kinsmen Football League. 

And he did very, very well. 

 

My daughter, not to be out-done. Paige swims with the Goldfins 

in Saskatoon and had a meet this weekend at the beautiful Shaw 

Centre in Saskatoon. And I understand she made a couple of 

personal bests, so I congratulate her as well. 

 

In thanking my family I have to thank my mom who wasn’t 

able to make it to the legislature for the Speech from the 

Throne. She likes to be here, but she wasn’t able to make it this 



5782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

year. But I always want to thank her for her support and, yes, I 

think it is the first time . . . [inaudible] . . . She always says that 

she spends her days watching the legislature in the afternoon 

and watching the Chicago Blackhawks at night, and she’s often 

asked what’s more exciting. I think we can all answer that 

question. But nevertheless she continues to tune in and to try to 

understand what members opposite are asking of the 

government. 

 

I also want to thank my CA, constituency assistant. I’ve had a 

very, very loyal constituency assistant for many years, Beth 

Epp, who has moved on to a new challenge, to a new career in 

the private sector and doing very well in Saskatoon. And I want 

to welcome a new CA, Travis Low, who comes to my 

constituency office from the financial sector, and himself a real 

contributor to his community. He recently organized a 

fundraiser — he’s in his 20s, a very young man — but he 

recently organized a fundraiser for Parkinson’s that had 500 

people attend. He asked the member from Melfort to be the 

guest speaker. The member from Melfort did a terrific job for 

Parkinson’s and talking about it. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I want to thank people from my ministerial office as well: 

Marlin, Jacquie, Jared, Kim, Annie, Marlene, people that 

continue to work each and every day to make sure that we have 

the research and the information that we need to do our job and 

that I need to do my job here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome my good friend, the member 

for Saskatoon Northwest. He will add a real presence to this 

Assembly. He did very, very well in the election. I had a 

chance, an opportunity to meet some of his constituents, to do 

some door knocking. And I knew that he would increase the 

plurality in that constituency, increase the popular vote. And he 

did that for many reasons, Mr. Speaker, most of all because of 

his own personal career, his work that he has done in the city of 

Saskatoon as a school board member. 

 

I had an opportunity to interact with him when we were trying 

to get schools in Saskatoon under that NDP government. Also 

the member had a stellar career as a city councillor in 

Saskatoon. And to him, I appreciate his friendship. I look 

forward to him being a colleague in the legislature, and I know 

that he will have a very rewarding career. And he will be here a 

long, long time, members say. And I agree with that, and I 

know that he will enjoy this career. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about this new road that was 

mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. It’s a new road that 

gives us direction and commitment for the government to the 

people of Saskatchewan. It’s a new road indeed that people 

want to travel in our province. They want a road that makes for 

a better life for each and every person. And, Mr. Speaker, it gets 

away from that pursuit of mediocrity that we had under the 

NDP for 16 long years in Saskatchewan. 

 

On this new road, Mr. Speaker, our government is taking action 

to ensure that important resources such as potash are managed 

in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. Now I’m 

sure I speak on behalf of all members in the Assembly that we 

are very, very proud of the Premier and the job that he has done. 

Not only has . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

You bet. Not only has he shown leadership and statesmanship, 

Mr. Speaker, for our province, but I would argue for our 

country as well. And that is echoed by some of his own 

colleagues. 

 

Let’s look at what Premier Ed Stelmach had to say in Alberta. 

He said, “The potash resource belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan and it’s of very strategic importance, not only to 

Saskatchewan but to the New West Partnership and really to all 

of Canada.” Premier Stelmach said, “Working with Premier 

Wall, I am confident in him. There’s certainly many aspects to 

deal with regarding this matter, but I really do support his 

position.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we see that echoed not only by Premier 

Stelmach, but by Premier Selinger as well in Manitoba, Premier 

Charest in Quebec. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can look to the newspapers, the national 

newspapers in this country on this very day, where they say the 

country owes a debt of gratitude to the work . . . No matter what 

the decision is out of Ottawa, the country owes a debt of 

gratitude to the Premier of Saskatchewan for the work that he 

has done. It’s today. Members opposite may not have had a 

chance to read the National Post or The Globe and Mail today, 

but they can see that that is indeed what the national papers are 

saying about our Premier and about our leader. 

 

It’s an honour and privilege to represent my constituents here in 

the legislature. Saskatchewan we know is growing, and 

nowhere is that seen more so than in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. The constituency will be almost 

double its size from 2003 to 2011 in the next election. The 

increase is tremendous. 

 

And I see it as I go and I meet those new constituents. They’re 

people that come from Alberta. They come from Manitoba. 

They come from Ontario. They come from England, from 

Germany. They come to Saskatchewan to start a new life, to 

take part in this very growing and thriving economy, Mr. 

Speaker. But what they have in common, and I know from 

talking to them and going on their doorsteps, what they all have 

in common is that they’re certainly not NDP. 

 

They often ask me to go through Saskatchewan political history 

and explain to them what exactly the NDP was all about and to 

explain why we stood still in Saskatchewan for many, many 

years when members opposite were in government. Thankfully 

that won’t happen again for a very, very long time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to give many speeches this summer 

across the province and to talk to many people, and one number 

that came up time and time again — 1,045,622 people, an 

increase of some 50,000 people from January 1, 2007. People 

are anxious to get on this new road in Saskatchewan. They’re 

anxious to work with this government. They’re planning for 

growth in the province, not like planning for decline that 

happened under the NDP. 

 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5783 

When you have a growing constituency, you need 

infrastructure. You need schools. You need highways. You 

need health care. Let’s talk about schools in my constituency. 

And I will give the opposition credit that the growth started 

when it was under them. It was modest growth, but nevertheless 

in areas such as Saskatoon Silver Springs there was some 

growth. 

 

But what was the answer from the NDP opposite when a new 

school was needed in Arbor Creek in the heart of my 

constituency? The answer: a resounding no, we can’t do it. We 

can’t provide those schools for people that are moving to our 

province and moving into constituencies like Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, Mr. Speaker. Arbor Creek, the NDP said no. 

 

Our government, our commitment for the future is to plan for 

growth. We have a very thriving and growing area in my 

constituency called Willowgrove. Willowgrove, the city of 

Saskatoon thought that it would fill up, it would take about 10 

years to fill up that neighbourhood. Well it’s well ahead of 

schedule. Many hundreds of children are growing up there. 

 

What was needed? Two schools were needed in the 

Willowgrove area of Saskatoon. What did the Sask Party 

government have to say? What did the Deputy Premier say 

when he was minister of Education? He said, you betcha. The 

people of Saskatchewan need schools. They need education. 

They need to send a sign to people that are moving to our 

province and to this constituency that Saskatchewan is a place 

to bring your family, to raise your family, to start your careers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some 1,000 new homes in my constituency, 2010 

— May 1st, 2010 over 2009. Now we’re seeing a new 

neighbourhood coming forward, the Evergreen neighbourhood. 

And every so often I get that burning political question in my 

constituency when I go to the doors. That burning political 

question is, when are we getting a Tim Hortons in Saskatoon 

Silver Springs? Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say even, under the 

Saskatchewan Party government, even the number of Tim 

Hortons are thriving, and we just had the announcement of the 

opening of the new Tim Hortons in our area not too long ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed something of a privilege to talk about 

the interesting times that we live in and the services that we’ll 

be able to provide for people in the province. And when I do go 

door to door, they talk about health care. They talk about health 

care concerns. And I know my seatmate from Indian 

Head-Milestone addressed many of those questions that the 

members opposite bring forward. 

 

They’re also very, very excited about the future in 

Saskatchewan and some of the health care initiatives that are 

undertaken. And I know my constituents, along with everyone 

here in the province, are very excited about the commitment to 

a new children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. Well the member 

opposite, when she was talking about it, she gave again today 

reasons why for 16 years they couldn’t make a contribution, 

they couldn’t build. They promised a children’s hospital in 

Saskatchewan, but what happened in the day that they left 

office? Only Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island were the 

two provinces that didn’t have a children’s hospital. 

 

Well what happened here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in the 

last couple of years? Two hundred million dollars was given to 

the Saskatoon Health Region for the construction of the first 

ever children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. The children are our 

future, and I’ve heard from many of my constituents that indeed 

this is one of the most memorable and significant contributions 

that our government can make and has made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It has taken the work of many volunteers for several years to 

make this dream a reality. I look to the Children’s Health 

Foundation, formerly the Children’s Health and Hospital 

Foundation, and the good work that they have done. And I 

know people from my constituency . . . The Chair of the board 

is Grant Kook, a resident of Saskatoon Silver Springs. Deb 

Wiegers lives in the constituency and has served on the board, 

and my good friend Brynn Boback-Lane as well. We’re all 

very, very proud to see that that children’s hospital is a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many other areas of health care, and we lead with 

innovation. We lead with best practices. And we look at what’s 

happening now and, as announced in the Throne Speech, the 

shock trauma air rescue service, STARS, helicopter emergency 

medical services that will be available to the entire province and 

make a very positive response in the emergency response times 

that are necessary. 

 

Now I don’t know. I heard the member opposite from 

Saskatoon Eastview. I wasn’t sure if she was in favour of it or 

not, and maybe other members can expound upon it. But I think 

that’s something that we can be very, very proud of. And yes, 

we talked about this. The member from Melfort talked about it 

many years ago and the opportunity just wasn’t there to 

proceed. But the opportunity now is here to proceed with that 

and again that will enhance the lives and the well-being of 

Saskatchewan residents. And I know with my duties as Minister 

Responsible for Northern Affairs and talking to people in the 

North that they are quite excited about it as well. 

 

Keeping on the theme of health care, Mr. Speaker, the new 

road, our government’s commitment to $5 million to fund 

clinical trials for the MS liberation procedure is something that 

we can all be proud of. 

 

I don’t know about other members in the Chamber here, but it’s 

not very often that you get people walking up to you on the 

street and saying thank you. And indeed that’s what happened 

and I’m sure it happened to members opposite and members on 

this side of the House when people thought about the leadership 

that the Premier demonstrated by announcing the clinical trials 

that’ll happen here in Saskatchewan. Those people, unsolicited, 

came up and said thank you for being part of a government, part 

of a government led by the Premier, that will take this 

procedure and bring it to Saskatchewan. And not only talk 

about it, but fund those clinical procedures and enhance the 

lives of people in Saskatchewan. That’s something, Mr. 

Speaker, that I indeed am very, very proud of and I know other 

members share that pride as well. 

 

Our government has surpassed the campaign promise for 800 

new nurses in Saskatchewan. We continue to recruit and retain 

more nurses and physicians in rural and urban Saskatchewan, 

and I think that’s something that we can take great pride in. Not 

only did we have the foresight to put goals in place, but we 

announced that we would do everything possible to meet those 



5784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

goals, to exceed those goals, and that is indeed what has 

happened, led by our Minister of Health. 

 

Third party delivery of outpatient surgical services now 

available in the Saskatoon Health Region, Saskatoon 

Surgicentre. I know in talking to residents of the Saskatoon 

Silver Springs constituency and, whether they be seniors or 

others, they said, cut the political philosophy. You know, we 

don’t need to debate the philosophy of health care. Let’s just 

talk about outcomes. How can we enhance the quality of life of 

those people that built this province? How can we do it? 

 

Well one way we can do it is by reducing their waiting times. 

Not only are we talking about it, Mr. Speaker, it’s done. It’s a 

promise made and it’ll be a promise kept. We’ll reduce surgical 

wait times to a maximum of three months by 2014, and I think 

that’s something that all members of this House can take pride 

in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I use this opportunity very often to talk about 

business and the thriving economy we have in Saskatchewan, 

and today I’m only just going to touch on it to say, why do we 

work so hard to ensure that we have an economy that is 

thriving, that is leading the country in many aspects, whether 

you look at jobs or gross domestic product or whatever 

indicator you look at? We work so hard at that so we can 

provide for the increase in quality of life for people in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s indeed what we are doing. 

 

I want to touch on my new responsibilities as minister in charge 

of First Nations and Métis Relations and Minister Responsible 

for Northern Affairs. First Nations and Métis people, we have 

incredible leaders in those areas in Saskatchewan and it indeed 

has been a pleasure to work with them, to talk about the 

challenges going forward, to talk about their goals and their 

aspirations. And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the leaders of 

First Nations and Métis community, what they want for their 

people are the same things that we want for all people of 

Saskatchewan. They want them to have jobs. They want to 

make sure that they have a great education. 

 

That is indeed what we are doing. And we have a commitment 

to pre-kindergarten programs for vulnerable three- and 

four-year-olds across our province. Already 75 such programs 

exist; 3,680 children have been added and taken part in 

programs like this. 

 

We also want to make sure that when something does happen, 

when we do have a disaster, that we are there to support 

Saskatchewan residents. And very soon after I became Minister 

of First Nations and Métis Relations, I had the opportunity to go 

out and meet with the people of Kawacatoose to talk to them 

and to hear what, you know, how they are dealing with the 

tornado, the devastating effects of it. And I can tell you that 

they’re very, very tough people on that First Nation, people that 

were very willing to pick up the pieces, but they’re also very 

appreciative of what their government was doing. 

 

And I arrived at that First Nation a couple of days after the 

tornado, and what did they tell me? They told me that the 

member from Wood River, my colleague, the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety, had already been there. Many of 

his staff had already been there. The ministry had been working 

and already putting the pieces back together and that started a 

relationship I think of sound partnership between the 

government and First Nations across Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And we had many discussions to show that that’s why we work 

so hard to build an economy, so we do have the wherewithal to 

address the needs of communities. And whether it was Maple 

Creek or whether it was Yorkton or whether it was North 

Battleford or Kawacatoose, this government did a job that I 

think all of us can be very, very proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we enhanced the provincial disaster program. We 

ensured that, whatever the events that we’re challenged with, 

that we have a government that responds not only very quickly 

but in a way that is equitable and a way that shows leadership 

across the country. 

 

Another area I had an opportunity to participate in, and the first 

time for me in my responsibilities as Minister of First Nations 

and Métis Relations, was the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] assembly that took place last 

week at the Dakota Dunes Casino. Chiefs from all over the 

province, some 74 were there, and I had an opportunity to talk 

about our government’s commitment to Aboriginal educational 

outcomes, how a growing economy is the best way to enhance 

the life for all people in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they certainly agreed. I heard concerns from 

chiefs around the province who want the same thing for their 

children as we do — an education, a good job, a prosperous 

future — and we agreed that together we will make that vision 

come true. 

 

This is a momentous year for First Nations and Métis people 

especially in Saskatchewan. 2010 is the Year of the Métis, and 

celebrations have been happening all over the province. One of 

the highlights of my summer was going out to Batoche to the 

Back to Batoche celebrations. And I was joined there by John 

Duncan who is the new federal Minister of INAC [Indian and 

Northern Affairs Canada], and Michael Ignatieff was there as 

the Opposition Leader. And many Saskatchewan members of 

parliament from the government were there as well, and the 

member from Cumberland was also in attendance. And we are 

now working on, as the Deputy Speaker will know, we’re 

looking at installing a Métis symbol in this legislature to signify 

the 125th anniversary of the North-West Resistance. 

 

As a government, we have released our consultation policy 

framework which honours our duty to consult with treaty and 

Aboriginal rights. We are also looking at launching our 

exploratory phase that will bring together Métis people, First 

Nations, and industry to work on issues that are not addressed 

by the consultation policy framework. 

 

It has been a year of growth and opportunity in northern 

Saskatchewan. The new northern enterprise regions are up and 

running, and we know that that they will continue to do so as 

we embark upon this new road. First Nations and Métis and 

northern residents will continue to add and to prosper in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to have this 

responsibility and to work with individuals across the province, 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5785 

that add so much to our communities and to our province as a 

whole. 

 

Also I have the opportunity to work with the Gaming 

Corporation. Gaming Corporation is a community and industry 

leader in the province. They are committed to providing quality 

entertainment for the people of Saskatchewan in a responsible 

manner. They are champions of corporate social responsibility. 

 

In 2009 Sask Gaming donated over $670,000, Mr. Speaker, to 

community groups, non-profit organizations, including more 

than $130,000 in sponsorships for Aboriginal groups and 

Aboriginal people. Last year Sask Gaming transferred $25.4 

million to the General Revenue Fund, and the money was used 

for commitments like the Community Initiatives Fund, the First 

Nations Trust, and the Métis Development Fund. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in 2009 Sask Gaming introduced a responsible gaming 

program which outlines players’ responsibilities, staff training, 

guest access to information, and our commitment to ensure that 

guests participate in self-exclusion decisions. Sask Gaming 

contributed to the more than $5.5 million being spent on 

problem gaming prevention here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Gaming is also proud of another fact. They 

are the Crown that has the highest percentage of Aboriginal 

employees in the government. Some 42 per cent of employees 

at Gaming Corporation are of Aboriginal descent. And they 

continue to work very well and to use their experience 

oftentimes in Gaming Corporation as a launching pad for other 

careers in our province. And I just think that that’s a job that is 

done very well by Gaming. 

 

Gaming has introduced an ethics training program, a 

confidential reporting hotline, and a website, that we are 

committed to providing a safe, secure place for employees and 

guests to continue to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has the 

fortitude to make decisions. We’re getting things done. On this 

new road, Mr. Speaker, we are paying less in property taxes in 

Saskatchewan. We have the largest education property tax 

decrease ever in Saskatchewan’s history. Mr. Speaker, in the 

Throne Speech, we announced that we will be implementing the 

final phase of our education tax reduction plan for a further $58 

million in reductions. Municipalities will finally have a stable 

source of government funding with the announcement in the 

Throne Speech, and yet another promise fulfilled by this 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know colleagues of mine take great pride when 

they come into the city of Saskatoon. And the mayor cannot 

give a speech without thanking the government for the work 

that we have done to provide money for infrastructure, to 

provide money for bridges, to provide money to ensure that we 

have the infrastructure necessary for a growing city such as 

Saskatoon is. Very pleased to hear the news yesterday in 

Saskatoon that Mr. K. Nasser is stepping up and will be the lead 

proponent of the River Landing facility in Saskatoon. And we 

all, I know, wish that group very, very well and Mr. Nasser and 

his group of local investors in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with $1.7 billion to highways and upgrades over 

the past number of years, our roads have surpassed our 

government’s commitment to dedicate 100 per cent of fuel tax 

revenues to highway repairs. Our highways will ensure that we 

do have a smooth road forward as we embark upon this new 

road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can have the assurance as well that it’ll be done in a fiscally 

responsible manner, Mr. Speaker, as our government has 

reduced the debt, the GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt, in the 

province by some $2.7 billion. A government that keeps its 

utility costs among the lowest in Canada. We can tell 

Saskatchewan people that we have a remarkable period of 

growth and prosperity in the last several years. But we will 

continue to have, as our focus, the increase in their standard of 

living. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, with that, I’d like to thank you for the 

opportunity to address the Speech from the Throne. And I can 

tell you; I’m very excited about the new road that it talks about. 

I know that there is no turning back on that old road of 

mediocrity that the NDP had us on for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a province that is led by a Premier who is leading this 

province and also leading this country in many respects. I am 

proud to be led by the Premier. His vision for Saskatchewan is 

moving us forward on this new road. Mr. Speaker, I am very, 

very pleased to vote in favour of the Throne Speech today, and I 

thank you for this opportunity. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to say very clearly that it is a great honour for me to speak in 

response to the 2010 Speech from the Throne on behalf of the 

people of Thunder Creek — people who are productive, 

hardworking and committed to our country and our province; 

people who work on farms and ranches and businesses and 

some who are various agencies of government and non-profit 

organizations throughout the length and breadth of one of the 

largest constituencies in the South; people who are honest and 

hardworking and no-nonsense. 

 

And their approach to their work, the issues we grapple with as 

a government and life in general, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have 

much patience for a lot of what happens in this place. They just 

don’t see some of it as very productive. And I know that they 

only support me in the way that they have because they 

recognize that I am one of them. What I say in this place is far 

less important to them than what I do when I’m not here. I 

respect that, Mr. Speaker. And I’m always proud to represent 

those great people and call many of them my friends. 

 

I want also to take a minute to recognize the sacrifices that have 

been made by my family so that I could give a few years of my 

time to be a small part of this government that is making 

Saskatchewan a much better place to live, work, and to raise a 

family than it has ever been, Mr. Speaker. There have been 

occasions over the years that I’ve not been available when my 

family would’ve liked me to be. But they have always remained 

supportive of what I am trying to do here because they 

understand what I am trying to accomplish for this province that 

I care so deeply about. 

 



5786 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

Our farm suffered profoundly in the early years that I was 

elected because I could no longer find the time to properly 

manage it, let alone do much of the work and do justice to my 

MLA responsibilities. Still, Linda, Alison, and Lee stand behind 

me and continue to sacrifice, and I thank them from the bottom 

of my heart. The good news is, Mr. Speaker, that my son Lee is 

recently married and back on the farm as a partner, and the farm 

is growing again. But this life certainly takes a toll on families 

and businesses, and we ought never forget that. 

 

I’d like to take a minute to welcome our new colleague from 

Saskatoon Northwest. I know that he will be a great MLA and a 

great member of this government. And he’s a pleasure to deal 

with. He’s a modest, quiet individual with a great track record 

of success in everything he’s done. He’ll be a tremendous asset 

to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This Speech from the Throne talks, Mr. Speaker, about the old 

road that Saskatchewan was on under the members opposite in 

those dark and dismal days when they formed the government 

of this province. We saw our roads and highways fall into 

disrepair in a manner that was unprecedented in the history of 

this or any other province. Mr. Speaker, a billion dollar 

infrastructure deficit is the legacy of the NDP. 

 

On the new road, Mr. Speaker, we actually see new roads and 

many thousand kilometres of roads that have been rebuilt or 

repaired. And that work goes on under our government and will 

need to go on for many years to make up for the neglect of the 

previous NDP government. 

 

On the old road, the NDP closed 52 rural hospitals, chased 

doctors and nurses to other jurisdictions, closed the Plains 

Health Centre in Regina, starved health care to the extent that 

Saskatchewan had the longest surgical wait-lists in the country. 

On the new road, our government has added 130 nurse training 

seats with 170 more on the way. We have recruited 830 

additional nurses that are now working throughout the province. 

Our government has established the Physician Recruitment 

Agency to help bring additional doctors into the province. Also, 

Mr. Speaker, our government is taking steps to substantially 

increase the number of physician training seats and residency 

seats so that Saskatchewan young people can be trained in 

medicine right here at home. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, our government is providing a leadership 

role in funding clinical trials for those of our citizens who are 

afflicted with MS [multiple sclerosis], a move that was 

courageous of our Premier to be out in front of every other 

jurisdiction on this file. The initiative has since gathered 

support from across the nation as an idea whose time has surely 

come. 

 

On the new road, Mr. Speaker, our government will provide a 

significant expansion of emergency medical services in 

co-operation with STARS, or shock trauma air rescue service of 

Alberta. This is a helicopter-based, EMS [emergency medical 

services] system with most of the assets on board the 

helicopters that are available in emergency rooms. This service 

will surely save countless lives in our province as it has in 

Alberta. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, surgical wait times are being shortened, 

and our government has set ambitious targets for further 

reductions. 

 

On the old road, Mr. Speaker, Olympians and Paralympians 

received no help from the former NDP government, as they 

claimed to not have money for such frivolity. But at the same 

time, that former NDP government managed to find the money 

to invest hundreds of millions of taxpayers’ dollars into 

businesses, losing in excess of $320 million of that money. On 

the new road, our government will support high-performance 

athletes to the tune of $6,000 a year in addition to any other 

programs that may exist, either federal or provincial. 

 

On the new road, Saskatchewan is a leader in the New West, an 

association of our three most western provinces which together 

are telling the impressive story of Western Canada to the world. 

On the old road, fraught with potholes and left turns, the former 

NDP government was jealous of our western neighbours and 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, didn’t have much of a story to tell 

themselves. 

 

[16:00] 

 

My constituency is one of if not the most agricultural 

constituencies in the province, Mr. Speaker. This has been an 

exceptionally difficult year for our agriculture producers with 

cool weather and rainfall all spring, summer, and fall that far 

surpassed all previous records in the province. Our producers 

fought the good fight and made the best of it that they could. 

I’m very proud to see a renewed commitment in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, to irrigation infrastructure by our 

government, spending that will generate more economic spinoff 

in the medium and long term than any other kind of 

infrastructure spending that I can think of. 

 

The new road is the high road, Mr. Speaker. In July we worked 

with the federal government to make $360 million available to 

farmers with flooded cropland. The excess moisture program, 

the EMP, provided $30 per eligible acre for cropland unseeded 

as of June 20th and cropland flooded out as of July 31st. The 

program also included coverage for forages seeded in both 2009 

and 2010 that failed to establish due to flooding in 2010; land 

that was intended to be seeded to forage in 2010 but could not 

be seeded because of excess moisture. The excess moisture 

program was cost shared federally and provincially. The 

provincial share is the largest one-time provincial response to 

an agriculture disaster in our Saskatchewan history. 

 

In his July 9th commentary on several Saskatchewan radio 

stations, Kevin Hursh said, and I quote: 

 

Rarely do governments act so quickly and decisively . . . 

The extra assistance is significant, particularly when added 

to the Unseeded Acreage Payments and Establishment 

Benefits available through crop insurance. 

 

The crop insurance benefits he was referring to have already 

provided an additional quarter billion dollars to Saskatchewan 

producers over and above the EMP program. 

 

The NDP fail to recognize the significance of this support. That 

is likely because they provided little help to producers in their 

16 years in government. In 2005 and 2007 under similar 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5787 

circumstances, at least in part of the province, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP provided no support. In 2006 they offered $10 per acre, 

which resulted in only $15 million in support. So it is 

understandable that they would fail to understand the support 

we have provided to our agricultural producers. 

 

Kevin Hursh also said in his commentary, and I quote again, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

There will always be some who says the assistance should 

have been greater. That’s the stance [he says] taken by 

NDP Leader Dwain Lingenfelter, but past NDP 

governments were reluctant to cost share even the existing 

farm safety nets and their response to disasters was to beat 

up on Ottawa for not fixing the problem. 

 

This is a government that is truly working to address the needs 

of producers, not paying lip service and playing politics like the 

members opposite. In addition to this support, farm and ranch 

families continue to benefit from the largest education tax 

reduction in our province’s history, as do all families, urban or 

rural. 

 

The NDP don’t like it when we talk about education tax on 

farm land, Mr. Speaker, because it’s one thing they failed to 

address when they were on this side of the House. They 

promised to fix it often enough, starting back as early as the 

mid-1940s when a young premier named Tommy Douglas 

promised to address the inequities of the property tax system as 

soon as finances allowed. Well, Mr. Speaker, every NDP 

premier since made a similar promise. 

 

But no action was ever taken until our Saskatchewan Party 

government was elected in 2007. It wasn’t even on the radar of 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker. They even stopped making 

empty promises before the 2007 campaign about the issue. 

They’d given up. We are going a different direction on the new 

road. We addressed education tax by implementing phase 1 of 

our plan in the 2009 budget, and we’ll implement phase 2 in the 

near future. 

 

On the old road, Mr. Speaker, aside from education tax there 

were a number of other things the NDP did not do to help farm 

and ranch families. They did not improve crop insurance. They 

did not address disasters including drought, or they did not 

adequately compensate producers for damage to crops and 

livestock caused by wildlife. They did not commit to fully 

funding their share of agriculture programs, often. They did not 

want to administer farm programs provincially. They did not 

help producers address gopher problems. They did not fix roads 

and highways. We have done all these things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what did the NDP do, would be the logical question. The 

NDP did close 31 rural Ag offices which includes 22 extension 

offices in 2004. They told people to call a toll-free line. They 

told farmers in rural Saskatchewan that the Internet had the 

answers they needed, where they hadn’t bothered to take any 

measures to provide high-speed Internet, by the way. 

 

They closed the doors and threw away the keys. They cut the 

GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program as one of 

their first orders of business when they formed government in 

1991, Mr. Speaker, after contracts had already been signed by 

producers. They were quick to promise they would replace it 

with something better, but yet again that was just an empty 

promise that was never fulfilled. 

 

The NDP did increase crop insurance premiums and decreased 

coverage. The NDP cut spot-loss hail, not once, but twice in 

their history. They now like to talk about how great spot-loss 

hail is, but it was their own government that axed it twice 

previously. They claimed their budget cuts were responsible, 

yet they still found money to invest in private business. The 

NDP lost significant taxpayers’ dollars in private investments 

— $320 million, Mr. Speaker, and still counting. But they 

couldn’t afford to address education tax, fix roads, fully fund 

agriculture programs. 

 

On this side of the House, we continue to address the needs of 

farmers, ranchers, and rural Saskatchewan. We do not just sit 

back and lay the blame on the federal government the way the 

members opposite do. This is a new road in the new West 

where Saskatchewan is a leader. In addition to the $360 million 

in the emergency moisture program, we have implemented 

many agricultural initiatives since forming government. And I 

congratulate our Minister of Agriculture as well as our 

government as a whole for these measures. 

 

We implemented a farm and ranch water infrastructure 

program. This program provides funding to help farmers, 

ranchers, and RMs develop long-term water supply such as 

dugouts, wells, and pipelines. This program was originally 

targeted to the Southwest to help address a drought — 

something the NDP refused to acknowledge even existed. It is 

now a province-wide, four-year $53 million program. 

 

Last year we provided $71 million to over 18,000 cattle and hog 

producers through the cattle and hog support program. We did 

this without assistance from the federal government. 

 

We have substantially improved the crop insurance program. 

We now provide 100 per cent compensation for wildlife 

damage. We have also improved the program to include 

coverage for swath, corn, and bale grazing damaged by wildlife. 

In addition, livestock producers who have animals killed or 

injured by predators are now eligible for compensation. We 

introduced a gopher control rebate program which compensates 

producers for up to 50 per cent of the cost of gopher control 

products. 

 

We are now administering the AgriStability program 

provincially in crop insurance. This after years of producer 

dissatisfaction with wait times and processing complications, 

which the NDP ignored. We have expanded our extension 

services including opening three new offices. We offer further 

programming through the growth of the Growing Forward 

framework to assist producers including voluntary livestock 

traceability rebate, farm business development initiative, and 

environmental farm program. Our government is fully funding 

agricultural programs. This was a promise made and another 

promise kept. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, we are investing 30 million over the 

next 10 years to rehabilitate and restore irrigation infrastructure. 

This includes $1 million this year for work on the M1 canal at 

Lake Diefenbaker. The NDP would not re-invest in this 



5788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

infrastructure, similar to highways, hospitals, and schools. 

 

This Throne Speech lays out the direction of our government 

and is a direction that will continue to work for farmers and 

ranchers and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Recently we were informed by PotashCorp that they were to be 

the subject of a hostile takeover by BHP Billiton of Australia. 

This company is well known for predatory pricing and refuses 

to market their products through Canpotex. Our government 

subsequently contracted the Conference Board of Canada and a 

major law firm specializing in hostile takeovers to advise us. 

 

A review was subsequently conducted to determine how such a 

takeover would affect Saskatchewan. The review focused on 

three key areas: (1), strategic interests of the province and the 

nation; (2), jobs; and (3), implications for provincial royalties 

and taxes. After this careful review, Mr. Speaker, it was 

determined that the Billiton bid does not meet any of the three 

criteria. 

 

The Conference Board of Canada determined that the Billiton 

takeover places at serious risk 750 permanent jobs and over 

8,000 person-years of construction work, also up to $200 

million per year revenue reduction to the province as Billiton 

writes off interest costs for the acquisition, and a possible $570 

million in lost revenue to the province annually as Billiton run 

their new asset flat out and take world price in a flooded 

market. As the Conference Board suggests, this takeover would 

reduce the world price of potash by up to 60 per cent. 

 

The NDP position on this matter is a two-headed, job-killing 

monster that combines the NDP’s failed nationalization policy 

of the 1970s with dramatically ramping up royalties to further 

decimate the industry. The Leader of the Opposition led the 

NDP charge in the 1990s to give away the so-called golden 

share that would have given the province some say in the affairs 

of PotashCorp. And he was so successful at that that he led the 

charge to do the same with Wascana Energy, earning himself a 

vice-presidency with Nexen after they promptly took over 

Wascana. 

 

Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, the NDP voted with the 

government to adopt our potash plan as the unified position of 

the province. Now, not knowing what else to do, they say we 

have no plan for potash. Clearly they thought we did last 

Thursday, Mr. Speaker, and they supported our plan then. We 

would certainly have a better chance of convincing the federal 

government of the wisdom of our potash position if the NDP 

would stop playing politics with this crucial resource and 

support our plan consistently. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be taking the new road, the 

high road. And I will be supporting the Speech from the 

Throne, and I will not support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

respond to the Speech from the Throne. And immediately 

preceding me was the member from Thunder Creek who said 

that after his speech he would be taking the high road. And I 

know we all look forward to seeing him do that, Mr. Speaker, 

and maybe in his next speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Throne Speech. This year’s Throne Speech along with last 

year’s Throne Speech from the Sask Party government started 

to establish a pattern, Mr. Speaker: one part revisionist history, 

and we’re hearing some of that revisionist history in speeches 

from members of the government; one part smoke and mirrors 

on deficit and debt; and one part one really bad idea. 

 

And last year, the really bad idea was restricting access to clean 

needles to those people most susceptible to HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] and Hepatitis C. I know that there are 

people who think those people actually deserve to die. I know 

this because I have read letters to the editor of my hometown 

newspaper. And the government’s proposal in last year’s 

Throne Speech to restrict access to clean needles to those 

people most susceptible to HIV and Hepatitis C, whatever the 

government’s intent, seemed to pander to the most 

mean-spirited among us. 

 

And this year’s really bad idea is to restrict the right to vote of 

those least engaged citizens in our society, those without the 

connections to our society and to our economy that many of us 

take for granted. At best, Mr. Speaker, at best this demonstrates 

a lack of appreciation for the central importance of citizenship 

in a democratic society. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s 

too high-blown rhetoric on my part. 

 

[16:15] 

 

In defence of this proposal, the Attorney General said yesterday 

and I quote: 

 

There will be an obligation on people to establish their 

identity. So they would be well-advised to have their 

affairs in order so that they are able to establish their 

identity and comply with the regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does that sound like a speech made by the leader 

of a democratic society? People would be well-advised to have 

their affairs in order so they can establish their identity and 

comply with the regulations. Does that sound like the 

democratic spirit, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think it does. I think it 

has a whiff of the authoritarian about it, Mr. Speaker, just at 

least a whiff of the authoritarian about it. And that seems to 

represent the government’s attitude towards citizenship and 

citizenship as the core identity of residents of a democratic 

society. 

 

At worst, at worst this proposal, if it proceeds into law, will 

limit the franchise of those least engaged in our society, 

disenfranchise those who are already less connected to civil 

society and to the economy than we would desire that they be. 

 

The government primarily . . . This government, this Sask Party 

government, primarily sees residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan as taxpayers or not, as customers and clients of 

government, as consumers more than citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is the language of this government. And I think the 

Minister of Justice, the Attorney General yesterday gave it all 

away when he compared the right to vote with the ability to 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5789 

open a bank account. Mr. Speaker, that was his analogy. 

 

The fact is that we are citizens whether we have a bank account 

or not. And if we are citizens, we have the right to vote. And we 

are citizens whether or not we own a house. And we are citizens 

whether or not we travel and possess a passport. And we are 

citizens whether or not we drive and have a driver’s licence. 

And because we are citizens, we have the right to vote — not 

because we have the identity papers necessary to comply with 

the regulations and to open a bank account, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those of us who do have photo ID [identification] in our 

wallets or in our homes are familiar with the scrutiny that 

accompanies the use of that ID because of what that ID 

represents, Mr. Speaker. If you have a driver’s licence, the 

driver’s licence represents the privilege to drive and the 

responsibilities to drive. And we know the scrutiny that would 

be applied to our driver’s licence by an officer of the law and 

the scrutiny that would be applied by, quite properly, by 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance about whether one should 

. . . and the courts, about whether one should continue to have 

that privilege or not, Mr. Speaker. And if you have a passport 

and you travel with your passport, you know what scrutiny 

other countries will apply to the users of a passport who are 

asking to be guests in that other country. 

 

And when, I think, last summer I travelled to South Dakota for 

the Midwest Legislative Conference . . . And it was an 

interesting conference. There were a lot of members of this 

legislature there — so many members from the government that 

I wondered who was doing the work of government at the time. 

And then I shook my head. I mean that was silly of me. I got 

over that quite quickly. But when I drove up to the border, I was 

asked one question. I was asked one question by the customs 

officer for the United States: had I ever been arrested? He didn’t 

ask me if I’d ever been convicted. He didn’t ask me if I had a 

criminal record. Well actually I could answer that question 

differently than some ministers of the Crown can answer that 

question, Mr. Speaker, so I’m not sure how much abuse I want 

to take from members opposite because I could say no. 

 

But he didn’t ask me if I had a criminal record. He didn’t ask 

me that question because I think Americans believe we hand 

out pardons in this country like cotton candy, and I think some 

members of this Assembly have figured that out as well, that 

that might indeed be the case. And I wonder if the former MLA 

from Saskatoon Northwest could have got to Rapid City, South 

Dakota as easily as I did, Mr. Speaker, because of the question 

that was asked. 

 

But that scrutiny makes sense, Mr. Speaker, because driving is a 

privilege that bears responsibilities, and travelling to another 

country is asking to be a guest of that country. And you’re 

going to have that kind of scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, and in these 

days increasingly more so. But voting is not a privilege; it is a 

right. And a society of another country requires a passport; 

voting in this country, in this province, should not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the government is justifying this proposal of photo 

identification for voters, arguing in part that it’s very similar to 

what the federal Conservative government has decided to do. 

And we believe here, like on potash, they will eventually buckle 

under to anything the federal Conservatives want to do, as it did 

on equalization, Mr. Speaker. But in the last federal election 

there were people who, realizing that there are a number of 

lower income people in Saskatoon who would be 

disenfranchised because they didn’t have the sufficient 

identification papers as the Attorney General required here in 

provincial elections, sufficient identity papers to comply with 

the regulations of the federal government and would lose their 

vote, even though they were citizens of this country, even 

though they were born in this country, even though in many of 

their cases their ancestors for thousands of years had been born 

here, before there was a country, Mr. Speaker, they would lose 

their right to vote. 

 

And I know of at least one individual who was harassed. And 

he had a small business, and he was in position to be harassed 

not because he was trying to get people to vote who weren’t 

entitled to vote, but because he was trying to assist people to 

vote for the first time who needed identification papers. And he 

was a member of the middle class, used to the system, was 

helping them do that, Mr. Speaker — and courageously so, as it 

turns out. 

 

If this proposal becomes law, Mr. Speaker, it would facilitate 

and assist the people who had harassed someone for trying to 

assist his fellow citizens in exercising their right to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. It would raise barriers to those citizens. It would raise 

. . . And people who attempt to assist them with those barriers 

could come to attention, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not like this 

hasn’t happened. It happened in the last federal campaign. We 

know it happened, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not saying this 

legislation is designed to facilitate or assist people who would 

try to impede citizens from voting and exercising their 

franchise, but it very well could have that result, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the Attorney General, after saying people would be 

well-advised to have their affairs in order and comply with the 

regulations, says that while we don’t need to be concerned 

about what the Bill that they’re going to bring forward says 

about photo identification because in regulations — in 

regulations — they’ll have alternatives. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

haven’t seen the Bill yet, but put it in the Bill. 

 

The Attorney General’s, the Attorney General’s assurance that 

he made yesterday, and I quote, that an alternative would be 

“enshrined in regulation” is not very reassuring at all. I know 

that the Attorney General, in opposition, wasn’t very fond of 

regulation, Mr. Speaker. He wanted it in the Bill. And now he’s 

raising regulation to the level of a constitution, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

going to be enshrined in regulation. Well regulation, Mr. 

Speaker, as we know, is cabinet-made law and what cabinet can 

give, cabinet can take away. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a contemptible proposal and is defended 

by contemptible means. Both the Premier and the Attorney 

General state that they are aware, at least of rumours, that 

people have voted in different constituencies than which they 

live. But neither the Premier or the Attorney General back up 

those allegations, and back off when asked to do so. 

 

The electoral office of Saskatchewan is unaware of this 

information that the Premier and the Attorney General seemed 

so concerned about. But even if such information was correct, 

even if there were cases of people voting in constituencies in 



5790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

which they did not reside, enforce the law, Mr. Speaker. 

Enforce the law and prosecute the breach. Do not disenfranchise 

the innocent. 

 

Now this proposal highlights another issue, Mr. Speaker, which 

I do not mean to suggest is nearly as important, as nearly as 

important as the legislation that’s being proposed that would 

disenfranchise Saskatchewan citizens. It highlights the attitude 

of the majority Saskatchewan government towards the 

democratic traditions and conventions of this Assembly and this 

province. 

 

Because we understand, Mr. Speaker, the reason that the Sask 

Party caucus has not been able to find a Chief Electoral Officer 

that they can support is because they cannot find somebody 

qualified for the job who supports photo ID, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why we have an Acting Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. 

Speaker, because that caucus, or at least that’s part of the 

reason. That caucus wants, that government wants photo ID, 

and they don’t want a Chief Electoral Officer who doesn’t 

support that. And they can’t find anybody qualified in the 

country who does support it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that takes us back to the decision of this majority 

government to veto, to veto the non-partisan selection of the 

Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker. It is all of one piece. And 

it has been years, it has been many, many years since election 

legislation was brought into this Assembly by any government 

without the concurrence, the advance concurrence of the 

opposition. 

 

And that Attorney General, Mr. Speaker, said he would not do 

that this time. But he has. That’s exactly what this legislation 

will be. It will be the first legislation brought in to change 

election rules in the province of Saskatchewan without the 

concurrence of the opposition, which the Attorney General 

promised he wasn’t going to do. It was a precedent, a tradition, 

and a convention he was going to honour. And not only is he 

breaching it, he breached it in the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the high road that the members of that 

government brag about. This is the high road that they brag 

about: using their majority to play around with non-partisan 

officers of this legislature; using their majority to ram through 

changes to election rules; using their majority to disenfranchise 

the poorest and most vulnerable citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I will not be supporting the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to say to start 

off my response to the Speech from the Throne, it has been 

indeed an honour to serve the residents and members of my 

constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

A huge thank you, of course, goes to my constituency assistant, 

Marie. And a thank you to our president, Sean Quinlan, and of 

course the constituency executive. 

 

I know those in my constituency are anticipating some things, 

and especially having to do with the initiative designed to cut 

red tape for Saskatchewan-based businesses. I know that in 

speaking with constituents, they’re waiting to see the details of 

that particular initiative and are excited about it happening. 

 

I want to speak also about, just take a few moments and speak 

about the growth that I have seen in my constituency over the 

last number of years. And a couple of months ago, we did 

notice that there were approximately 1,500 new postal code 

addresses in my constituency. And I do think that that speaks to 

the overall growth of this province — unprecedented growth of 

our province — and of course, the beautiful areas of east, 

southeast Regina, Pilot Butte, White City, Emerald Park. 

 

I’d like to focus my attention in particular on what our 

government is doing and will be doing. I don’t want to focus on 

what the NDP have done or what the NDP have not done 

because we’ll be here until 10 o’clock tonight, with me 

speaking, of course. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I want to start initially with, of course, the issues surrounding 

our health care: fully funding the province’s new children’s 

hospital, amounting to $200 million; exceeding, Mr. Speaker, 

exceeding a target of hiring 800 new nurses for the province. 

 

And I know the members opposite were speaking about, there’s 

not only just nurses in our health care system, and of course 

there are more than nurses in our health care system. However 

nurses are a pivotal and very important part of health care 

service delivery in this province and throughout North America. 

And us addressing this issue, and we know that there were 

issues surrounding the lack of nurses in our province — we 

couldn’t keep them in the province; we couldn’t get new nurses 

trained — has been an issue. And we certainly are on a great 

pathway to ensuring that we have an adequate number of nurses 

to service our health care delivery. Student nursing training 

seats — 130 added. And of course 170 more training seats on 

the way. 

 

Working to reduce surgery wait times to no more than three 

months. In Saskatoon, patients wanting more than a year for hip 

and knee procedures has dropped by 71 per cent. 

 

Expanding and enhancing emergency medical services through 

the helicopter bay shock trauma air rescue society, which 

another name for it is of course STARS, that we all know it by. 

Creation of a new health ombudsman. 

 

Five million for MS liberation clinical trials, a first for Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. We believe that this is a leap worth taking for the 

potential benefit of those who suffer with this insidious disease. 

 

A dedicated addiction agency and creation of an additional 100 

long-term addiction recovery spaces. Establishment — and we 

know our Minister of Health has spoken to this extensively — 

of the physician recruitment agency. Innovative funding models 

to address a shortage of long-care beds through partnerships 

with reputable third party agencies. 

 

Moving through to social services: 161 affordable housing units 

built or rejuvenated since October of ’09; 175 housing units for 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5791 

persons with intellectual disabilities had been completed or 

started since October ’09. Awaiting recommendations of course 

from the independent panel tasked with reviewing the 

Saskatchewan child welfare system. 

 

A new program called Head Start on a Home which will see the 

construction of 1,000 new, affordable homes over the next five 

years. Investment in public safety, telecommunications network 

that will ensure communities can maintain communications 

during emergencies. 

 

Our promise of 120 new police officers is now 75 per cent 

complete. And I recall, Mr. Speaker, back in the 1990s, then 

premier Romanow made a promise to a group, a convention 

here in Regina that — and it was a group of police officers 

across Canada — where he made that promise to hire 200 new 

police officers. Mr. Speaker, that was in 1990, and again we did 

not see the promised number of police officers at that time. Our 

government made the promise and we are keeping that promise, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

A fight against organized crime and gangs will be expanded to 

our adult corrections centres. We recognize the issues, and 

again these are not easy problems to fix and to address. And the 

best ones to address it are, of course, the police with their 

related training. New whistle-blowers legislation will be 

introduced in the Saskatchewan public service through 

establishment of a new public disclosure commissioner. 

Complaints involving provincial court judges will be 

streamlined to provide increased transparency and 

accountability. Human rights legislation will increase the 

efficiency and fairness of the complaints process. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to touch very briefly on 

agriculture. The majority of my constituency is an urban 

constituency. However, people that live in my constituency, as 

in most places in Saskatchewan, have a rural base at some point 

in time in their lives. And they know what a cow looks like. 

Over 300 million to restore and repair irrigation infrastructure 

in the Lake Diefenbaker area. And of course historic education 

property tax reduction. 

 

First Nations and Métis Relations. A commitment to improve 

educational outcomes for First Nations and Métis students. And 

I know that FSIN Chief Guy Lonechild believes, and justly so, 

that education is a key to the future for Aboriginal and Métis 

people in this province and throughout Canada. It is also the 

key for all people throughout Saskatchewan and throughout 

Canada. 

 

A commitment to pre-kindergarten programs for vulnerable 

three- and four-year-olds across our province. Already 75 

programs serving 3,680 children have been added. 

 

First Nations and Métis partners are part of a new and 

innovative approach to development of our northern forest 

under a new forestry management agreement. 

 

A new program for high-performance athletes. And I know in 

my time as minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport, this 

was something that came to the forefront repeatedly over my 

term in there, that they needed, they need support, financial 

support. Athletes, you know, athletes who have the potential to 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, that’s very funny. He 

referred to my member, one of my colleagues, as having, as 

needing this particular funding to the tune of $6,000 a year. 

 

And we all know that high-performance athletes, 

high-performance athletes — and I know Greg, my colleague, is 

probably looking forward to this injection — that we know that 

athletes, especially high-performance athletes, are virtually 

living at the poverty line and trying to pursue excellence in their 

area. And I’m sure $6000 a year will definitely help them 

pursue their goals. 

 

We worked to begin identifying locations for new provincial 

parks and begin public consultations. This of course, Mr. 

Speaker, is in addition to the 1000 electrified campsites already 

promised. 

 

The allocation of an additional 9.4 million to the EnerGuide 

budget, despite a federal decision to suspend the ecoENERGY 

program. An investment of 20 million over five years and a new 

technology commercialization fund. An enhancement of 

support for Saskatchewan graduate students, especially in fields 

of new technologies and communications. 

 

Potash belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. We introduced a 

resolution calling on the federal government to reject this 

hostile takeover of a great Saskatchewan company. Mr. 

Speaker, we will continue to act in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people, with this issue and all other issues. 

 

I want to speak just briefly if I could on the Global 

Transportation Hub. Of course it’s located in the city of Regina, 

even though the benefits will be felt by the entire province as 

well, obviously, as the city of Regina. The Global 

Transportation Hub will be a transportation and logistics hub. It 

will include CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail’s new intermodal 

facility. Clustered around this hub will be a variety of 

distribution and warehousing operations such as Loblaws. This 

in turn will attract a variety of related service providers like 

trucking companies. 

 

The GTH [Global Transportation Hub] will increase 

Saskatchewan’s intermodal capacity, improve the supply chain 

access and efficiency, and of course advance economic 

development and business opportunities in the province as part 

of a globally integrated marketplace. Phase 1 of the western 

distribution centre will be completed and operational later this 

year or early in 2011. Phase 2 is planned to be completed and 

operational in 2012. The CP intermodal facility is expected to 

be fully operational in 2012, probably the latter part of 2012. 

 

The GTH will benefit the economy with new jobs and new 

investments. It will have an initial impact on job creation with 3 

to 400 new jobs in the winter of 2011 alone. It has the potential 

to attract upwards of 1,500 new jobs through its completion. 

The GTH also has a strategic impact on our economy, with 

about two-thirds of Saskatchewan’s economic activity derived 

from exports. Regina is well-positioned to facilitate the flow of 

imports from Asia and the Pacific Rim bound for North 

American consumer markets. At the same time, Regina also has 

an advantageous location to facilitate these flow of exports. 

 

The west Regina bypass, work is progressing on the 



5792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

construction of the two-lane roadway from Highway No. 1 to 

25th Avenue, and upgrade Pinkie Road from 25th Avenue to 

Dewdney Avenue, and of course Dewdney Avenue to the GTH 

access road. This provides the interim access to the Global 

Transportation Hub while the remainder of the new bypass is 

constructed. The cost for this stage is estimated at 22 million. 

When fully developed, the bypass will consist of a four-lane 

divided expressway from Highway 11 to Highway No. 1. Of 

course the Lewvan and Highway No. 1 estimated 34 million, 

and it will be completed, estimated completion date late fall of 

2011. 

 

I want to just briefly address before I conclude, the issue of 

presenting photo identification or having photo identification 

when you are exercising your right to vote. And just today I 

returned an item to a department store here in Regina. Lo and 

behold, before I could return this item I had to present photo 

identification to the clerk before she would refund my money. 

 

Saskatchewan is part of a global network, part of the rest of the 

world, rest of North America, rest of Canada. And we have to 

be and must be careful about who we’re dealing with, who 

we’re giving things to, and we must ensure the identity of that 

particular person. As a former police officer, of course 

identification was pivotal to performing duties. And it is just . . . 

People are starting to expect that you’re going to have to 

present photo identification, whatever form that is, to prove 

who you are. And I think that being a part of the world, being 

part of North America and the world, we are coming to expect 

certain things. 

 

And I certainly believe that a person should be required to 

identify themselves in whatever means is prescribed under 

regulation, so that the person receiving and looking at the 

identification is certain of the identity of the person who’s 

purporting to be whoever they are. I think it’s just a natural 

course, and it’s something that’s occurring in the world and in 

Saskatchewan. Hello, get on board. So I will . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Hello, get on board. 

 

Anyway, in conclusion I will not be supporting the amendment. 

I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services, the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to stand 

here today and represent the people of Kelvington-Wadena and 

reply to the Throne Speech. This has been my opportunity for a 

number of years to . . . I think this is 16 Throne Speeches I have 

had an opportunity to be part of, and I’m honoured. 

 

There is a number of people that I should be thanking today, but 

most importantly I will start with the people that I love dearly: 

my family, my children. I have been fortunate, Mr. Speaker. I 

think I have the most children of anybody in this Assembly. I 

have five children and seven grandchildren. Most of them are 

still in the province, and they are proud of the work that I’m 

doing. And I have to tell you I’m very proud of the work 

they’re doing in their various areas. 

 

I have a son that is an accountant. I have a daughter that’s a 

nurse. I have another son that’s a lawyer, one that’s a 

kinesiologist, and one that’s a computer engineer. And they are 

all doing their part and knowing they’re being part of 

Saskatchewan. And being part of what we do know as a 

workforce and making peoples’ lives better by doing your job, 

getting up in the morning and going to work and taking on the 

responsibilities given to you, makes everybody’s life better. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, my seven grandchildren are an important part of 

my life. My oldest granddaughter just got her driver’s licence 

this weekend and just turned 16, so I know that I have other 

things to think about in the near future. And I just came back 

from visiting my youngest one in Toronto. 

 

When I realize how lucky we are in this province, and they 

know as well that to call Saskatchewan home or to be able to 

say that Saskatchewan was your home is an important part of 

who they are. Whether they’re living in Calgary or Edmonton 

or Toronto, there is a Rider pride and a pride of being part of 

the Saskatchewan nation that they’ve taken with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been elected since June of 1995, and I have 

had one of my constituency assistants, Linda, has been with me 

since the day I was elected. She does my work in the office 

when I can’t be there. She keeps in contact with me many times 

during the day and gives me the opportunity to know what’s 

going on back in the constituency. I don’t think we realize how 

fortunate we are to have somebody who can listen and work 

with us and to make sure the message gets back to the people 

who actually put me here. And I value her. In the last couple of 

years I’ve had a new assistant. Rhonda has started to work with 

me. She is absolutely a delight as well and I consider myself 

very fortunate. 

 

Most of the members here know that I was given a different 

responsibility in June of this year. I’m now Minister 

Responsible for Social Services and Public Service 

Commission, as well as the Status of Women. And I now have a 

new chief of staff and I’d like to thank Kelly and Sherry and 

Shelley and Theo and Amanda and Kim in my office — an 

incredible group of people. 

 

I have said very often in public and I want to state to them right 

now: nobody works for me; they work with me. Together we 

have a team of people that want to make a difference. I’m proud 

of the work that we do and their advice at all times, and I’m 

thinking that it’s a rare . . . when we come to work in the 

morning and know that the day is going to get better because of 

the people that we have around us. 

 

I have the people from my constituency. We never want to take 

them for granted, and I thank them for their hard work and for 

everything that they do for me. It’s one of the best experiences 

anybody could ever have was being elected. It’s an honour for 

me every time I stand in the House and someone says, and the 

Speaker will say, I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. I never take that for granted because I 

know that I’m the voice of 19,000 people out there — the 

people that expect me to bring what they are thinking and 

saying and doing into the legislature. 

 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5793 

I think that before I go into the Throne Speech, I’d like to first 

of all welcome the new member. I know many of my colleagues 

and members opposite have welcomed him into the legislature 

and I know that we’re going to rely on him, his advice and his 

wisdom in areas that some of us haven’t worked in. But I know 

that I’m honoured to have a new constituent here and I know 

that his wife and family . . . I believe he’s a new grandpa as 

well. He’s going to understand what the role of being an MLA 

and how it adds dignity to our life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a very, very busy year in 

Kelvington-Wadena. We’ve had a number of 100th anniversary 

celebrations — the RM of Lakeview and the RM of Foam Lake. 

We have a number of churches in the area and some of these 

celebrations I was able to participate in and I’m always 

delighted to be able to talk to the people. And the meals that are 

served are always unbelievable and I consider myself a very 

fortunate person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected, it was kind of a rarity to 

sign congratulations to people who have celebrated their 50th 

wedding anniversaries. But now they’re rather commonplace. 

 

However this year I had the opportunity to attend a 74th 

wedding anniversary. On October the 17th, Peter and Lena 

Holowaty of Foam Lake celebrated their 74th anniversary. And 

their daughter attests that their longevity is owed to their taking 

care of each other, to their families, and the community. And 

I’d like to congratulate Peter and Lena. I have to correct myself. 

I didn’t get a chance to attend this. I wanted to. It was one of the 

. . . The people that told me about it told me it was absolutely a 

great event. 

 

I was also proud to attend the 35th anniversary of Mallard 

Diversified Industries on Saturday night. It truly is a diversified 

business that’s grown from making plastic flowers to a 

manufacturing industry, a recycling program, a shoe repair 

department, and a first class catering department. 

 

And this past weekend I attended the retirement roast of Bonnie 

Wallin who is the CEO of Mallard Diversified Industries. Mr. 

Speaker, Bonnie is a good friend of mine. She also has worked 

on my campaign. And she’s been the manager of a group home 

and the industry that’s made a big difference to the lives of 

people in Wadena. It was probably one of the best events I’ve 

attended in a long time, Mr. Speaker, because we had, the 

people with various abilities came on stage and talked to 

Bonnie about how she’d made a difference in their life. 

 

Bonnie’s one of the people to talk to us in government about 

some of the needs that we as government have when it comes to 

a responsibility for people with disabilities. She’s one of the 

people that encouraged us to develop programs like the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program, 

programs where we actually look at . . . see people with their 

abilities in varying degrees and see how they can work, fit into 

our community and how they can make a difference. 

 

Mallard actually has a catering service and they put on many 

functions and supply wedding receptions and anniversary 

receptions. And we are all very proud of the work they’re 

doing. 

 

Bonnie has been an inspiration to all of us. And when I think 

that somebody who is supposedly seen on the right side of the 

political scale, and yet her heart and soul has been to work with 

people with disabilities all her life and has made such a 

profound difference to their lives, it maybe is something that 

isn’t recognized as can be done. 

 

In fact, the members opposite like to believe that they are the 

ones that see the needs. But I know that people like Bonnie — 

who actually works with those people and know that we as 

government have some responsibility — has made a huge 

difference in their life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the record flooding and the wild weather 

this summer, the people of Kelvington-Wadena have reacted 

with their typical helpfulness and perseverance and hard work. 

Our farmers who are dealing with a tremendous amount of 

water this year, Mr. Speaker — I think the RM of Invermay had 

43 inches of rain and last week we had about 8 inches of snow 

on top of it — there are still people who are having a difficult 

time getting what hay bales they had out of the field. 

 

But they asked for help from the provincial government and our 

government did not shy away from the challenge. We actually 

participated with the federal government in the excess moisture 

program and we provided $30 per eligible acre to Saskatchewan 

producers who had land that was too wet to seed because of 

flooding. But that isn’t the only program that we’ve helped our 

farmers with and my farmers in Kelvington-Wadena 

constituency are well aware of it. We’ve invested $71 million in 

the cattle and hog support program. We paid $40 for a cow to 

nearly 18,000 producers, and we tried to get the feds to follow 

to add their $30 per cow. We have a $53 million province-wide 

farm and ranch water program. We have an infrastructure 

program that pays up to 50 per cent rebate to dig dugouts and 

wells. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on top of what we’ve dealt with, the education tax 

that has been talked about for so long in this province, the 

education portion of property tax was a burden to everybody, 

but a particular burden to our farmers. And this year we will 

reduce the mill rate from 7.08 per cent to 3.91 per cent and our 

farmers are well aware of the difference that’s making in their 

lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have the coyote control program. We 

reduced the population of coyotes by 71,000. We have the 

gopher control rebate which provides a 50 per cent rebate on the 

cost of gopher control products. We have the livestock loan 

guarantee program, the principal deferment on breeder loans. 

We have a $60 million short-term cattle loan. It was announced 

in December of ’07. Producers have the option to defer their 

principal payments to 2008-2009. 

 

We also had the wildlife damage compensation program 

changes. Now compensation for 100 per cent of livestock 

deaths caused by predators. For injured animals, producers will 

be compensated up to 80 per cent of the market value for 

injured livestock regarding veterinary services. There’s also 

compensation now provided for wildlife damages to crop and 

feed, for swath, bale, and corn grazing. 

 

We also removed the $5,200 limit for wildlife damage to stack 



5794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

feed in a yard site. Mr. Speaker, to many people that might not 

sound like a big issue but to the people that are actually farming 

and having to deal with issues with feed in the field, it made a 

huge difference to their life. Mr. Speaker, we also spent $5 

million on Saskatchewan voluntary livestock feasibility 

program. There’s rebates of up to 70 per cent on electronic ear 

tags. We’ve moved AgriStability to Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has not forgotten rural Saskatchewan, 

and it did not forget Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within my constituency our government has 

invested money as well. And I have a number of my 

constituents say, I’m so pleased that now that government is 

there, they have not neglected rural Saskatchewan. They know 

that Kelvington-Wadena has had needs for the last 16 years, and 

they are appreciating the money that we put into this 

constituency. We’ve improved schools in Foam Lake, 

Kelvington, and Wadena. 

 

We’ve built a brand new high school in Porcupine Plain. We’ve 

invested in theatre in Foam Lake and their daycare programs. 

Kelvington received funds to upgrade the swimming pool. Rose 

Valley has a new water treatment plant and a new well. And 

Lintlaw was able to complete their regional waste management 

landfill. Porcupine Plain received funding to upgrade their 

sewer system. And we’ve actually had some highways built in 

our constituency, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased. We have more 

to go, but the work is under way, and I’m very pleased about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that I’m also responsible for and 

I’m so honoured that the Premier has asked me to look after the 

autism and FAS [fetal alcohol syndrome] file. I think many of 

the members opposite know that the FAS file is near and dear to 

me. It’s something that I have had an interest in for many years. 

 

FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] is a lifelong disability 

caused by prenatal alcohol consumption. It’s a permanent, 

irreversible brain damage, and it is caused by maternal drinking. 

And in theory it is 100 per cent preventable. It affects 

approximately nine in every 1,000 babies born. In a province of 

approximately 1 million people, that means we have 9,000 

individuals that are affected with FAS. 

 

Our government has recognized that there is a need for a 

client-focused, FAS-specific strategy, and we are to address 

prevention and intervention. And we are dealing with it. The 

comprehensive service supports individuals with ASD [autism 

spectrum disorder] and FASD, and FASD prevention is being 

developed. And we’re going to have options with a 

comprehensive integrated service framework to meet needs, 

universal and target FAS prevention strategies, and we’re 

actively engaging the regional and human service providers and 

the community-based organizations and other interested 

stakeholders in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now back to the debate that we have at hand. I’m 

pleased to speak today because this Throne Speech sets out a 

positive agenda for the future of our province. Saskatchewan 

people made it very clear on November the 7th, November 

2007 to go a different direction. The people in this province let 

the members opposite know and our government know that they 

were tired of the old road, tired of NDP politics, and tired of a 

government that was afraid to set goals. They were tired of a 

government that wanted to be measured more by their words 

than their deeds. 

 

And now for the last three years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been on a 

new road. We’re travelling a new path. Our government has set 

clear goals and asked the public to keep us accountable for 

them. Our government is open and it’s transparent. Our 

government endorses economic growth and welcomes 

challenges and opportunities that presents growth. 

 

And if you don’t mind, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take a few 

minutes to outline some of the changes in philosophy in the 

ministries that I am responsible for. 

 

In Social Services, Mr. Speaker, we are beginning to roll back 

the system with systematic challenges . . . roll back the 

challenges that have been in place and were never addressed by 

the previous government. Under the NDP, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, it was easier to track a library book than to track a 

child in our system. Under the NDP, the Provincial Auditor and 

the Children’s Advocate repeatedly warned the lack of effective 

tracking for children in care put them at risk. And nothing was 

done under the NDP. Our government responded by investing 

$15 million for an automated tracking system. Under the NDP, 

the pressure . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., this Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5763 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5763 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5763 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5763 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5763 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5764 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5764 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5764 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5764 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5764 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5765 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5765 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5765 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5765 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5765 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5766 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5766 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5766 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canadian Patient Safety Week 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5766 

 Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame Inductees 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5766 

 Moose Jaw’s Halloween Food Drive 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5767 

 Royal Canadian Mounted Police Heritage Centre 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5767 

 Islamic History Month 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5767 

 Leadership 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5768 

 Gold Medal Plates Olympic Fundraiser 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5768 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5768 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5768 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5769 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5770 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5771 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5771 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5772 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5772 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5773 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5775 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5781 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5785 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5788 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5790 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5792 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


