




















































Hansard: May 04, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 55A  TUESDAY, MAY 4, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5327 

 May 4, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly, it‟s an honour to be able to introduce some very 

special guests that are seated in your gallery. They helped us 

mark, this morning, a very special day in Saskatchewan when 

we declared it Navy Day in the province of Saskatchewan to 

commemorate the 100th anniversary of Canada‟s navy. 

 

Joining us in the gallery is a group including Captain Louis 

Christ, the naval reserve director of training and educating — 

yes, please stand, Captain, thank you — western region adviser 

as well as senior naval officer in Saskatchewan. Commander 

Randy Hanson is the commanding officer of HMCS [Her 

Majesty‟s Canadian Ship] Unicorn. Lieutenant Commander 

Corey Thiemann has also joined us today as the commanding 

officer of HMCS Queen. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, we are joined by a 

number of other guests who have joined us today. They are the 

command teams of both the HMCS Unicorn and the HMCS 

Queen, as well as other representatives from Saskatchewan‟s 

naval community and cadet organization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We understand how important the navy is to the country, how 

important they have been to our history, how in many ways the 

country was born on the decks of our ships and also borne on 

the shoulders of navy women and men down through the years, 

and we understand how important their sacrifice and service is 

even today as we rely heavily on secure global trade for our 

economy and for our prosperity. 

 

And we are reminded, Mr. Speaker, of the sacrifice that is paid 

as within 24 hours, 24 hours ago, Mr. Speaker, we lost a 

member of Canada‟s navy serving in Kandahar in Afghanistan, 

Mr. Speaker. We honour these and those they represent and 

commemorate the 100th anniversary of Canada‟s navy, and we 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Premier and introduce to you and through you and other 

members of the Assembly, a group of individuals, service 

women and men, gathered here on the occasion of Canadian 

Navy Centennial Day. 

 

Canada‟s navy, Mr. Speaker, came into existence, as we know, 

100 years ago with the granting of Royal Assent to the Naval 

Service Act. And I know the motto of Canada, Mr. Speaker, is 

“From Sea to Sea.” And it reminds us that ours is a nation of 

maritime people whose shores are washed by the waters of the 

Atlantic, the Pacific, and the Arctic Ocean. 

And over the last century on those waters, on many others 

across the world, Mr. Speaker, the men and women of Canada‟s 

regular and reserve naval force have served their fellow citizens 

with courage, honour and, as the Premier says, in many cases 

with great sacrifice. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, I want to thank them and 

their families and colleagues for their service to the peace and 

security of the world around us, and to all of Canada and 

particularly to Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort, the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

introduce to you a group of grade 5 and 6 students from 

Englefeld School in Englefeld, Saskatchewan. They‟re in your 

west gallery, Mr. Speaker. They‟re here with their teacher, Ms. 

Jolene Gullacher, and we had an opportunity to meet briefly this 

morning. 

 

And I certainly am ready for question period because the 

students provided me with a lot of practice. So, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re here to visit and to go to the Science Centre and also to 

the IMAX theatre this afternoon. So we will certainly forgive 

them if they don‟t stay for question period. There‟s a much 

better show playing at the IMAX. I‟d ask everyone to join me in 

welcoming them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members of the Assembly, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce in your gallery, the Speaker‟s gallery, 

some members of the consumer group, Midwifery For All. 

They are here . . . This particular group wonders why, despite 

the government‟s commitment to fund midwifery, why only 

women within the city limits of Saskatoon have access to this 

funded service. 

 

So I just would like to name some of the members here. If I 

miss you, please forgive me, but just give us a little wave. Erin 

Laing, Angela Miki, Sara and Erin Beckel, Kellyn Johnston, 

Nicole Dunn, Kim Smith, Tanya Apadaca-Melby, Kelly 

Negrych, Andy Knoll, Baby Kai who I see there, and student 

midwife, Janice McCaskill. 

 

I‟d also have to give a . . . Sonya Duffee, who was a midwife 

here practising pre-regulation who is now just in the process of 

the assessment, is here today, Sonya, and as is Ros Lydiate who 

is a registered midwife and practises in Saskatoon. And actually 

I had the great pleasure of having Ros as my own midwife who 

caught my baby, Ophelia, in my home birth a couple of years 

ago in Saskatoon. So with that I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these women and men and babies to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

While I‟m on my feet, I also would like to introduce Heather 

Malek with SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] 

Matters in the east gallery who . . . west gallery. I‟m a little 



5328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

directionally challenged — my apologies. Heather is a member 

of SCN Matters and is a film and television editor here in 

Regina, and is optimistic that there might be a positive outcome 

somehow with the sale of SCN Matters. But she was at 

committee last night and I don‟t think she‟s holding her breath. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a privilege on behalf of government to welcome 

the midwives and support to their Legislative Assembly on 

behalf of government. The midwives do a very . . . provide a 

very important service in a very complex health care system. I 

want to thank them for being here today. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet with Janice McCaskill and Sara 

Beckel just briefly this afternoon over the lunch hour and 

certainly heard a few of their concerns that they had. I‟ll be 

looking forward to dealing with those concerns as we move 

forward. And perhaps we may even have an opportunity to 

discuss some of those issues in about 20 minutes. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like all members to also welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me great pleasure to acknowledge two constituents of Regina 

Walsh Acres who are here with many others in support of more 

accessible midwifery services in Saskatchewan. Sonya Duffee, 

and perhaps she could give a wave, and her sister, Erin Beckel, 

and perhaps she could wave as well, are certified doulas with 

the Childbirth and Postpartum Professional Association, 

otherwise known as the CAPPA Canada. CAPPA Canada is a 

national organization that provides certification for childbirth 

professions including doulas. 

 

For members of the public that may not be familiar with the 

term doula, a doula is an assistant who provides non-medical 

support in the childbirth process. And based on their training, 

doulas may offer support during prenatal care, childbirth, or the 

postpartum period. As doulas, these exceptional young women 

play an important role in improving emotional and educational 

support for women experiencing childbirth and their partners. I 

ask all members to join with me in welcoming Sonya and Erin 

and others to the Legislative Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar, the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I‟d like to introduce 33 students seated in the west gallery. 

These students are from Delisle Elementary School, grade 5 

students. And accompanying them today is Mrs. Dreher, Mr. 

Reis, and Mrs. Schnitzler as their teachers. 

 

I‟d just like to make a comment about Mrs. Dreher. She‟s 

faithfully brought her students to the legislature year after year 

and like to congratulate her on her dedication. 

 

Accompanying the students from Delisle also is Mrs. Dueck, 

Mr. Coulin, Grandpa Don, and Grandma Covelin. So please 

join me in welcoming the students from Delisle to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I hope I‟m not pre-empting 

another member, but I can‟t let this pass without introducing to 

you and through you to other members of the Legislative 

Assembly, Peggy McKercher and her husband, Robert 

McKercher. Peggy was chancellor of the University of 

Saskatchewan while I was Chair of the board of governors and 

at that time I gained a small insight into her contribution to the 

Saskatoon community. 

 

I‟m not sure why they‟re here. I ran into them in the halls and 

Peggy said that they were here to watch their taxpayer dollars at 

work. I suggested there might be more edifying places to visit 

to the same effect without even leaving Saskatoon than to come 

all the way down here. But since they are here, I hope members 

will join me in welcoming Peggy and of course her husband 

Bob to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 

through you to other members of the legislature, I‟d like to 

welcome Bob and Peggy McKercher to their Assembly. I met 

them at the early part of my political career and we both are 

rooted in the liberal side of the family and got on quite well. 

 

Bob has been a Q.C. [Queen‟s Counsel] and senior partner for 

quite some time and Peggy has been two-year chancellor, 

two-year term chancellor of our university in Saskatoon. So I 

would like to welcome them to their legislature and have 

everyone join me in doing so. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce to you and through you Dr. Red Williams, I believe is 

up there, sitting beside Captain Louis Christ. He was recognized 

Saturday night at the community dinner at the Unicorn and he 

entertained us with a few thoughts when he reflected on the 

Battle of the Atlantic and ended his remarks with a few sea 

shanties. They were very well done. It was a great supper. We 

had about 250 people out. And I just want to welcome Dr. 

Williams to his legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m wanting to join with the member from Biggar in 

welcoming the group from Delisle and making a special 

introduction as well to Natalie Bartsch. Natalie is a godchild to 

my wife Trish and myself. Natalie‟s mom is originally from the 

Philippines and has been a Canadian for many years. She‟s 

married to Les Bartsch, and Les and Alma are good friends of 

mine. I‟d like to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5329 

While I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to introduce 

three people from SaskEnergy. Dave Burdeniuk, the manager of 

communications, is here along with Casey MacLeod, a 

communications officer, and Paula Haubrich, a Gradworks 

intern. If you could give us a wave, and also I ask all members 

to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Minister for Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the legislature students from Countryside School 

just outside of Saltcoats, grades 7, 8, and 9. Mr. Speaker, their 

teacher is also with them, Melissa Wiens, and a number of 

chaperones: Ray Isaac, Sheryl Isaac, Don Barkman, Charlene 

Barkman, Myron Wiebe, Twila Wiebe, Daryl Toews, Sue 

Toews, Narcenio Cano, and Loly Cano. I would ask all 

members to welcome these students and their chaperones to 

their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I‟d like to join the 

member opposite in introducing Dr. Red Williams, a 

distinguished naval veteran, a remarkable scholar of 

international repute, and makes a great contribution to 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

And I would add as well, Mr. Matt Dalzell, and he was the MC 

[master of ceremonies] this morning for the ceremony here in 

the rotunda. He works at the Canadian Light Source 

synchrotron. And it‟s great to have you both in our Assembly, 

and I would ask all members to welcome them to their 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

rise on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who are concerned over 

the condition and the safety of our highways. This petition 

pertains to Highway 135 which runs through the community of 

Pelican Narrows. Currently the highway is a gravel road, but it 

would be a very good investment for the government to 

consider in the safety and well-being of Saskatchewan people 

and people in Pelican Narrows if the road was to be, or the 

government was to fulfill its commitment in paving that section 

of road. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The prayer of the petition, Mr. Speaker, reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August the 24th, 2007. 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Pelican Narrows. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat lands. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s well recognized that The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands, or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in its natural state, and that the government 

currently has changes on the table repealing the scheduled 

listing of these designated lands. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of concerned citizens in 

Regina and Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who know 

that seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, 

emotional, and financial abuse, and they also think that seniors 

have a right to social and economic security and a right to live 

free from poverty. They also think seniors should have a right 

to protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. The prayer 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors‟ Bill of Rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signators on these petitions are from 

Saskatoon, Humboldt, Bruno, Muenster, Liberty, Imperial, and 

Dodsland. That‟s it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 



5330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

support of maintaining educational assistants, and the residents 

that have signed this petition want the government to know that 

your own data shows the growing number of students requiring 

additional support. In addition, educational assistants provide 

support to students with special needs, including learning 

disabilities and behaviour problems. There is a document that 

was published by the ministry that calls for the drastic reduction 

of the number of EAs [educational assistant] in the province. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And this petition today is signed by people from Moose Jaw. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Saskatoon. And we know that tenants in Saskatoon 

are seeing a dangerous combination of increasing rents at 

alarming rates and a shrinking vacancy market. I‟d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more 

people in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan and that the 

government also implement a process of rent review or 

rent control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing market. 

 

And the people signing this petition come from the city of 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for university students 

here in the province. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. The petition is being signed by 

Saskatchewan residents because of the exorbitant amount that 

Duck Lake citizens pay for clean, safe drinking water. And it‟s 

causing them hardship, and in fact I‟m told by community 

leaders that it‟s driving people from their community. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks from 

Beardy‟s, Duck Lake, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who are dealing with water issues as well. The 

government ministry has directed that customers may no longer 

treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health; and that Furdale residents in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. 

 

The alternative water supply referred to by the government 

ministry is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized 

water at great cost, with no guarantee of quality, quantity, and 

availability of water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002, and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan‟s essential 

services legislation is making a mockery of the collective 

bargaining process. And the government should realize that the 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5331 

utilization and value of full-range professional skills offered by 

health care providers is promoted through the address of 

retention and recruitment issues, and that such can only be 

actually achieved through commitment to adequate funding and 

installation of good faith collective bargaining. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective agreement with health care providers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about this government‟s disregard for constitutional, legal, and 

human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, Regina, and Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m honoured 

to rise here again today and present petitions on behalf of 

concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive $1 billion deficit 

budgets and they allude to the billions of dollars of debt growth 

under the Sask Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of 

Preeceville, Canora, Beaubier, and Estevan. I so submit. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to present a petition today in support of midwifery in 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by citizens concerned that 

despite the fact the government proclaimed The Midwifery Act 

two years ago and committed to funding midwifery services, 

the only place these services are available to women is within 

the confines or the city limits of Saskatoon. So I‟d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray that the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan‟s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And, furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Navy Day in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, for more than a century, women and men from across 

our great country have come forward to defend our shared 

values of freedom and democracy. This includes the many 

women and men who serve in the Royal Canadian Navy. 

 

The navy has long had a close connection to Saskatchewan. In 

fact one of the first naval engagements in Canada occurred on 

the South Saskatchewan River in the days leading up to the 

battle of Batoche in 1885, some 35 years prior to the official 

birthday of our navy. 

 

On May the 4th, 1910, the Royal Canadian Navy was created, 

and in 1923, the Royal Canadian Navy Volunteer Reserve was 

created with 24 divisions across Canada, including two half 

companies — one in Regina and one in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to provide sailors for our 



5332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

navy, and our naval reservists have served with every part of 

Canada‟s navy and in operations as diverse as the Gulf War and 

peacekeeping missions from Cyprus to Bosnia. 

 

I was proud to join the Premier and others earlier today in this 

Legislative Building to honour the centennial of the Royal 

Canadian Navy and to proclaim today, May 4th, Navy Day in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I encourage everyone to take some time to reflect today on the 

Royal Canadian Navy‟s 100 years of service and to celebrate 

the rich naval heritage of our country and our province. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Centennial Navy Day 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, today marks a special 

milestone in Canadian history. It was 100 years ago today that 

the Naval Service Act was passed, officially creating the 

Canadian Navy, and in recognition the federal government has 

declared today as Centennial Navy Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s engaging in battle in the Atlantic, 

protecting sovereignty in the Arctic, or serving a humanitarian 

role in Haiti, the navy truly does have a proud legacy in our 

country. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we have many reasons to 

recognize the contributions of the critical role the Canadian 

Navy services daily do for the province, for our nation. Even 

here in the most landlocked province of the nation, we find that 

40 per cent of our provincial trade travels by sea, so without a 

doubt maritime security is an important issue for our province. 

 

Navy Captain Louis Christ, Saskatchewan‟s senior naval 

officer, remarked that it‟s often been that a prairie people make 

the best sailors. Perhaps it‟s our willingness to work hard or our 

affinity to the wide open spaces, but I know that hundreds of 

Saskatchewan families who have sent their sons and daughters 

to join the navy throughout the last century would firmly agree. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in celebrating 

Centennial Navy Day and recognize the history, the heritage, 

and the honour that the Canadian Navy represents to this great 

country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Historical References 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know 

that this government thinks they have a divine right to cut 

programs, sign deals, and make legislation without consultation. 

It‟s true, Mr. Speaker, that Grant Devine plunged this province 

into financial disaster which the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

was left to clean up. These are days we certainly don‟t want to 

commend, but Devine does have a edge on today‟s government, 

Mr. Speaker. At least he had something to show for his 

financial disaster. 

 

Devine wanted to build an upgrader, so he built it. This Premier 

wanted to build a nuclear reactor, so he paid an overpriced 

consultant $45,000 a day to talk about it. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Devine built a paper mill. This Premier wanted a paper mill, so 

he recruited a candidate to promise it, guarantee it, but do 

nothing about it. 

 

Devine built a fertilizer plant. This Premier wanted a carbon 

capture facility in Montana so he put out a press release, signed 

an MOU [memorandum of understanding], but oops, forgot to 

build it. 

 

The same can be said with respect to the children‟s hospital, the 

surgical care centre, 13 long-term care facilities, and a medical 

isotopes reactor as well as a clean coal facility — a lot of talk 

and promises but little action from a Premier who appears to 

suffer performance anxiety, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So after their first two years of divine rule, what does this 

Premier and this government have to show for it? A 

Devine-style billion dollar deficit, and a Grant old list of billion 

dollar promises. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Trails of 1885 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was privileged on 

Thursday of last week to attend in Saskatoon, along with our 

Premier, Vice-chief Morley Watson, MNS [Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan] President Robert Doucette, Dr. Lynda 

Haverstock, and Senator David Tkachuk, the historic launch of 

Trails of 1885. This year is significant because it is the Year of 

the Métis and the 125th anniversary of the North-West 

Resistance. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the 1885 North-West Resistance 

was significant in forming the history of our province and our 

nation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, as our Premier said in his speech, 

and I quote, “This is a painful story to tell, but it must be told. It 

is high time that we make that history come alive.” 

 

Making History Come Alive is the theme of this initiative as it 

marked the start of an ongoing campaign of historic and cultural 

themed events at the important sites across Saskatchewan. 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan President Robert Doucette said it 

best during his address: “Mr. Premier, you are leading the way 

in Canada with respect to building bridges between Métis and 

First Nations people.” 

 

I ask all members to join me and celebrate all the events 

planned for this 125th anniversary of the 1885 North-West 

Resistance. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Committee Meeting 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport seemed to forget that he was in estimates last 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5333 

night. The members on this side of the House were under the 

impression we were attending a committee of this Assembly 

marking the only opportunity opposition, on behalf of the 

public, has to hold the government to account. We thought we 

would be discussing budgetary decisions and all programs in his 

ministry. 

 

But the minister seemed to think we were at a kid‟s birthday 

party, and the games were on. Instead of giving a clear and 

concise answer to questions, he played hide-and-seek, hiding 

the reality, avoiding answers, and seeking an escape. Instead of 

exposing the truth about SCN‟s future or why his government 

pulled its funding, he played duck, duck, goose, ducking from 

his obligation and responsibilities as a minister to provide the 

public with some explanation. 

 

Instead of telling us where the cuts would happen in the 

ministry, he thought, hey, let‟s play a new game — pin the tail 

on the money. See if you can find our revenue and expenses 

blindfolded. Instead of explaining his government‟s programs 

such as community vitality, he played the good old game — hot 

and cold. Was the CIF [Community Initiatives Fund] funding 

diverted? We were warm. Is the program accounted for? Cold, 

Mr. Speaker, cold. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if I‟d known we were going to play kids‟ 

games last night, I would have brought the minister a gift, 

something he could really use, something he could study, like 

perhaps the estimates to his own ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Children’s Hospital 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A recent NDP 

pamphlet claims that the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 

ask the opposition members to allow the member, government 

member — order — to make her statement without interference. 

On a number of occasions, some members continue to interfere, 

and I ask them to allow the statement to be made without 

interference. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. The member can start over. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A recent NDP 

pamphlet claims that the children‟s hospital has been cancelled. 

This is simply false, Mr. Speaker. Our government is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A recent NDP 

pamphlet claims that the children‟s hospital has been cancelled. 

This is simply false, Mr. Speaker. Our government is absolutely 

committed to a new children‟s hospital, and funding will be 

provided as required. The Saskatoon Health Region is presently 

undertaking a study to confirm the best place for the children‟s 

hospital, taking into consideration future . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Statements by members, over the years, have 

been opportunities to share about advances or promotions and 

constituents. And generally speaking, we have allowed 

members to present their statements without a lot of undue 

interference. And I would ask the opposition members to now 

allow the statement to be presented as their statements were 

listened to by other members. The member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Saskatoon Health Region is presently 

undertaking a study to confirm the best place for the children‟s 

hospital, taking into consideration future demographics and the 

structural footprint on campus. We will do this right the first 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, citizens of this province have spent years 

fundraising for a children‟s hospital. Children‟s Hospital 

Foundation CEO [chief executive officer] Brynn Boback-Lane, 

appeared on a Saskatoon radio show this morning to refute the 

false claims of the NDP. 

 

She said, “When misinformation is circulated it really doesn‟t 

help our cause for the . . . fundraising that it will take to make 

this a truly dedicated children and family hospital. Who it really 

hurts are the families and the children expecting this facility.” 

 

The NDP need to apologize to the Children‟s Hospital 

Foundation for jeopardizing their good work and fundraising 

efforts by spreading misinformation. 

 

I‟ve seen a lot in my life, Mr. Speaker, but the behaviour of 

members opposite in this case is nothing less than cruel. The 

men, women, and especially the children of our province 

deserve better from those members opposite. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

Personal Health Information 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of people 

in the province have indicated they disagree with the Premier‟s 

decision to release people‟s private health information, and 

that‟s true of the Privacy Commissioner as well, who has raised 

significant concerns. But against all of these wishes and against 

the advice of experts, the Premier pushes ahead with releasing 

this private information. Why is the Premier so intent on 

breaching the privacy of Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this has been discussed 

many times. It‟s a regulation change to The Health Information 

Protection Act. The regulation change allows for health regions 

to enter into negotiations with foundations to exchange only 

name and address. 

 

It has met with concern from the Privacy Commissioner and 

that‟s absolutely correct, Mr. Speaker, as has other changes to 



5334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act]. In fact a 

number of years ago, when the former government changed a 

regulation regarding disclosing patients‟ names in cases of gang 

involvement or drug use, Mr. Speaker, the privacy information 

officer at that time disagreed with the government, Mr. Speaker, 

and the government went ahead with that change anyway 

because they thought it was the best thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re doing the same thing on this regulation 

change. We are ensuring that only patient name and address 

will be passed on if the patient doesn‟t opt out at many different 

levels. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it might be an idea that the 

Premier would look at, of allowing the individuals and the 

public to opt in as opposed to putting reverse onus on the public 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a testament to the lack of judgment of this 

Premier when you realize that this Premier sat while his 

minister on various occasion claimed that he had consulted with 

the Privacy Commissioner. In fact the minister said, the 

Minister of Health said he had consulted four times. And the 

Premier sat while this was going on. 

 

Now my question to the Premier is this: is it acceptable that the 

Minister of Health provides false information to the people of 

the province, to this Assembly, and to the press? Is that 

acceptable behaviour from a minister of his government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, my statement is very 

clear in Hansard. I said that we, meaning the Ministry of Health 

which I am in charge of, have consulted on a number of 

occasions, three occasions, with the Privacy Commissioner. 

And I stand by that statement because the Ministry of Health 

did, we‟ve had conversations with the Privacy Commissioner. 

Even though the formal text wasn‟t handed over regarding the 

regulation, Mr. Speaker, we had conversation with him. 

 

But I tell you, it is prime coming from those members opposite 

talking about misleading the public, after a pamphlet that they 

sent out all over Saskatoon saying the children‟s hospital is 

cancelled. Mr. Speaker, that‟s an outright lie. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to 

withdraw that last comment and apologize. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw 

that last remark and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. As we know now, his Minister of Health claimed that 

he had consulted the Information and Privacy Commissioner on 

this very regulation, not on some other regulation, but this very 

regulation. But he hadn‟t; he didn‟t consult. And the fact is 

there‟s a result: the House, the media, and the people of 

Saskatchewan were knowingly left with false information. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: what kind of leadership does 

this demonstrate from his government and from the Premier of 

this province to allow that kind of false information to be 

brought to this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister has 

answered that question. The minister indicated that the ministry 

was in consultation with the officer of the Legislative 

Assembly. The . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. A moment ago, 

when I stood in my place to ask members to come to order, I 

would also suggest that where the speaker would be allowed an 

additional question. If members don‟t come to order, they‟ll 

lose that opportunity. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding 

the challenges to the Chair from the members opposite, I would 

just say this, that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I just ask the 

Premier to go directly to the response please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that 

the minister has indicated that the ministry did consult. He used 

the word “we” in Hansard. It‟s exactly what happened, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Consider and compare what members opposite have done on 

the important issue of the children‟s hospital in Saskatoon, 

where they have knowingly, with taxpayers‟ money, distributed 

a mailout to every person in the province that does not tell the 

truth about what‟s going to happen with the children‟s hospital. 

It says the project is cancelled. 

 

The foundation raising money for this important project, Mr. 

Speaker, is decrying the NDP today. It . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what they are doing is putting 

at risk fundraising for the children‟s hospital. It‟s not the 

government that‟s saying it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote will allow the Premier to respond. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It‟s not the government saying that to 

members here or anywhere else. It is the foundation raising 

money for that hospital, Mr. Speaker. We stand with them and 

the people of the province while the NDP are making mischief 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5335 

and putting at risk that important project in Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell the Premier what‟s 

jeopardizing the children‟s hospital: it‟s the running of a deficit 

in this province for the first time in many years. Mr. Speaker, 

everyone in this province is asking where has all the money 

gone, and if the Premier wants the children‟s hospital built, why 

doesn‟t he simply give the money so the hospital can be built? 

Why doesn‟t he do that? Just give them the money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this. The people of 

the province don‟t want their health information given out. 

That‟s a fact. The Information and Privacy Commissioner 

thinks that this flawed idea of the Premier will violate the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms for the people of the province. 

Even at that, his minister has brought false information to this 

Assembly. When will this Premier come to his senses, 

demonstrate some leadership, withdraw this crazy idea, and 

deal with his minister here in this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is prone to 

hyperbole. The same initiatives, the same initiatives in other 

provinces have not brought forward a Charter challenge. The 

minister‟s been pretty clear. The minister‟s said, we‟re going to 

implement this policy in an effort to help foundations raise still 

more money in the province of Saskatchewan. We‟re going to 

implement this measure, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll carefully review it 

with foundations, with health regions. 

 

There needs to be an agreement between the regions and 

foundations in the first place, Mr. Speaker. An important health 

care fundraising foundation in the province of Saskatchewan 

today is the Children‟s Hospital Foundation . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the health region in Saskatoon 

and those raising money for that children‟s hospital, that 

foundation understands clearly that the money will be there 

beyond the NDP‟s press releases, Mr. Speaker. We have 

moved. The commitment is, money will be there as it needs to 

flow. The biggest threat to that project, Mr. Speaker, is the 

irresponsibility of that Leader of the Opposition and the New 

Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

New West Partnership Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, according to this morning‟s 

Leader-Post: “. . . Premier Brad Wall‟s government should 

likely put this deal to the scrutiny of a legislative review — 

either through a ratifying bill or at least a motion in the 

legislature . . .” 

Will the Premier put forward a ratifying Bill or at least a motion 

about the New West Partnership so that it can undergo the 

scrutiny of a legislative review? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re considering both of 

those options. We have an implementation date for the 

agreement of July 1, 2012. Mr. Speaker, there‟s been a lot of 

debate on this particular measure in a legislative committee. 

There‟s been consultation with stakeholders, with the municipal 

sector, Mr. Speaker, with health boards, with universities, 

effective September ‟09 when we signed the memorandum of 

understanding with the other two provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will no doubt see more debate in this 

legislature on the issue, whether it‟s in question period like we 

had yesterday and now today, or a motion of the Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, all of those options are available to us, but there 

already has been ample consultation and debate, and the people 

of this province are happy that we are moving forward with the 

New West and continuing Saskatchewan‟s leadership position 

in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — The Leader-Post goes on to say that “. . . as the 

NDP suggested in Monday‟s question period, he [the Premier] 

did acknowledge that other jurisdictions would get to preview 

our laws to ensure that they comply.” 

 

The new TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement] will require the Saskatchewan government to 

consult with Alberta and BC [British Columbia] before making 

regulatory or legislative changes. Will the Premier commit to 

bringing forward a motion or Bill about the new version of 

TILMA to the legislature so that there can be a public debate on 

why this government consults the Alberta and BC governments 

before the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, at least the hon. member has 

backed off the nonsense he was saying yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 

about the agreement. Yesterday he was postulating that because 

of this agreement, the Government of Saskatchewan would 

submit its measures covered by the agreement to businesses in 

those other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in any agreement, in a trade agreement, even in 

the Agreement On Internal Trade which that party in office 

advanced and facilitated under former Premier Calvert and 

former Premier Romanow, Mr. Speaker, there is a verification 

process to make sure each of the parties, all of the provinces in 

the case of the Agreement on Internal Trade, and all of the 

parties with respect to the New West Partnership that‟s now 

been signed are taking measures that are in accordance with the 

agreement they‟ve signed.  

 

Members opposite, members opposite are shouting, well and we 

consulted on the Agreement on Internal Trade. Mr. Speaker, 

there was not one legislative hearing on the Agreement on 

Internal Trade, Mr. Speaker, and I don‟t remember a Bill 

coming before this House. It advanced anyway, Mr. Speaker, as 



5336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

a matter of course. It was a good thing Mr. Romanow did for 

the Government of Saskatchewan. This is a positive step for the 

province of Saskatchewan in 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s unfortunate for the Premier 

that the people of Saskatchewan don‟t believe him anymore. 

The issue here today is the fact that the Premier has gone ahead 

and signed an agreement which he kept in secrecy until last 

Friday without consulting the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, will the Premier commit to bringing the whole New 

West Partnership Agreement to this legislature for proper 

scrutiny? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll leave it to 

the public of the province who‟ve been surveyed recently in 

large samples; very recently in fact, post the budget. We‟ll leave 

it to those people, the people of the province to determine who 

they trust to be the government and who do they do not trust to 

be the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP on this issue of the New West 

Partnership have been doing gymnastics on this thing because 

when it was first, when the technical briefing first happened last 

week, and early on when the agreement was signed they said, 

well this is the same as TILMA. If it is the same as TILMA, 

then it has been subject to the scrutiny of the legislative 

committee of this legislature for weeks when they were the 

government of Saskatchewan. And subsequent to that, 

September of ‟09, we consulted widely with third parties. Mr. 

Speaker, this was about as secret as the Internet, Mr. Speaker, 

for the last three years. 

 

It‟s been signed now. The people of the province of 

Saskatchewan like the leadership position that this gives us, that 

the government has worked hard to give this province within 

the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are having their trust sorely tested. We see what happens with 

wildlife habitat lands. We see what happens with SCN. We see 

what happens with other pieces of legislation brought forward 

to this House without consultation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have an agreement here which affects all 

of the businesses of Saskatchewan. But more importantly it 

affects the taxpayers because the taxpayers will pay the 

penalties under this agreement. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier 

commit to bringing forward this Bill about this particular 

agreement, or to have a proper legislative scrutiny here in this 

House because the people of Saskatchewan deserve it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad. I am glad there‟s a 

new-found interest on the part of the NDP in consultation. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, when they ripped up GRIP [gross 

revenue insurance program] all those years ago, there was no 

consultation. When that member voted to close 52 hospitals in 

Saskatchewan, including the Plains, there was no consultation. 

When they got involved and embroiled in scandals, there was 

no consultation. When the Leader of the Opposition signed up 

1,100 members in Meadow Lake, there was no consultation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There has been ample consultation on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s part of our plan to keep the economy moving forward. It‟s 

supported by the people of the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t have to take my word for it. When 

asked, the people of Saskatchewan — almost 60 per cent — say 

they‟d vote for this side. That side‟s working on 28 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Spot Loss Hail 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Minister of 

Agriculture on an issue that he did consult, and he did, that he 

did consult . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The hundredth and one question I ask; 

I‟ve got answers for 40 of the 100 I‟ve asked so far. But my 

question to the Minister is this. In one area, your government 

did consult, was on the issue of spot loss hail and crop 

insurance. You consulted widely. You had a consultant, I 

understand, who came in and you did a lot of work. And as a 

result of that review, the number one issue that farmers wanted 

was reinstatement of spot loss hail and crop insurance. 

 

Can the minister advise the farmers of the province, who are 

now getting ready to seed and planning for the hail insurance 

premiums this summer, will they and can they expect an 

announcement, a positive one from the minister that spot loss 

hail will be put back in crop insurance? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s nice to have 

actually a live question for a change in this legislature. Mr. 

Speaker, to the member opposite though, I know when you look 

across agriculture in this province right now, it‟s probably hard 

to find a question on behalf of the NDP, the previous 

government. And when he does ask a question, he brings up the 

issue of a program that the NDP cut when they were in 

government. So what he‟s saying is, Mr. Speaker, don‟t do as 

we do, do as we say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have consulted with the farmers across this 

province. And we‟ve explained to them that when spot loss hail 

was cut by the NDP government, the federal government took 

their share of that dollars and put into other programming. And 

as we know, Mr. Speaker, they will not cost share in spot loss 

hail right now. So it would cost the province of Saskatchewan 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5337 

about $70 million a year to reinstate spot loss hail, thanks to the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP had not cut that 

program, we would still have it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in this year‟s budget, we all 

know that the biggest cut in the whole budget, and there were 

many of them, happened in the Department of Agriculture 

where this government and that minister took almost $100 

million out of agriculture, out of ag stability. And many farmers 

are asking whether or not that money could be put back and put 

into spot loss hail. 

 

Now they‟re not very impressed with your plan to cut the paws 

off coyotes. Everybody knows that, and you‟ve now done away 

with that plan. We understand that. And we also understand that 

there are many areas where farmers are asking for some help. 

Net farm income this year is expected to be down considerably.  

 

My question to the minister is this: even at this late date, is it 

possible that the $100 million in extra money you admit to 

having in your department could be put into spot loss hail for 

the farmers of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we see 

the lack of understanding of what‟s going on in rural 

Saskatchewan from the Leader of the Opposition. The coyote 

program, if he would check with ranchers and farmers across 

this province, was well-received, well-utilized, and is to the 

benefit of every farmer and rancher in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And if the member also would know and remember back when 

he was the minister of Agriculture, he might remember, if he 

did understand at the time, that programming costs go up and 

down. 

 

The federal government projects the costs — AgriStability, Mr. 

Speaker, crop insurance. Every year those projections come 

from the federal government, and last year they went up 

dramatically. This government has made a commitment to fully 

honour our commitment and fund programs adequately as they 

come out. We have done that, Mr. Speaker. This year the 

projections that have come out are lower. Next year they may 

go up again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But having said that, replacing money that the NDP has cut, on 

behalf of the federal government, it‟s hard for this side to keep 

going up and down, filling in, backfilling the cuts that that 

member made. Mr. Speaker, if that member was interested in 

rural Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister 

was about the spot loss hail insurance and putting the money in 

that he had in the department. It‟s nothing to do with anyone 

else‟s money. He admitted that this government in his 

department had $100 million. He had a choice. Sending it back 

to the Minister of Finance who‟s mismanaging the finances so 

badly, I think that money would have better been put back into 

spot loss hail. That‟s the question: is he going to do that? 

 

Now the minister said, when it comes to dealing with the 

federal government, he was at a meeting, and he said this to 

producers, and I quote, “We have all the power in the country 

now. When we go to Ottawa, the whole picture has changed. 

We scared the hell out of them down there.” 

 

That‟s what you said. You said you scared them in Ottawa. 

Why are you saying now you can‟t get any money from them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to go over 

. . . The member wants to talk about $100 million. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Members want the opportunity to ask 

questions, and I would ask them to allow the minister to 

respond. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition talks about the $100 million. Well I‟d like to talk 

about Ag budgets in this province of Saskatchewan. I look back 

for the last 16 years under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, and then I 

look at the first three years, two years of Ag budgets in the 

province of Saskatchewan under a Sask Party government. You 

might notice, Mr. Speaker, that last year the actual dollars spent 

on agriculture by this government was $375 million. That‟s the 

same budget again this year, Mr. Speaker. And the average 

under that government was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

excess of $200 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government cares about rural Saskatchewan. 

We care about farmers and ranchers, and it shows in the Ag 

budget of the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

[14:30] 

Midwifery Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Health estimates on 

April 19th of this year, the minister said he was going to be 

rolling out a midwifery program. To the minister: is he going to 

be announcing a comprehensive midwifery program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, currently we have five midwives working in the 

Saskatoon Regional Health Authority. Cypress Hills has one 

hired and another one coming. Those services, midwifery 

services will be provided in the Cypress Health Region. Regina 

Qu‟Appelle is working on recruiting two midwives, as well as 

P.A. [Prince Albert] and Athabasca are also looking at 

recruiting more midwives, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve come a long 

way in the two years. There‟s more to do. Absolutely, there‟s 

more to do, Mr. Speaker, and we‟ll be moving in that direction. 



5338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

But I find it very curious, Mr. Speaker. I was elected in 1999, 

and one of the first pieces of legislation that came before this 

House in 1999 was the midwifery Bill that that government 

passed and then sat on it, sat on their hands for eight years, Mr. 

Speaker. Didn‟t do anything for eight years. In the first year of 

our government, in 2008, we have proclaimed that legislation, 

and since then we have five working and a number more 

coming, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll take no advice from that side opposite 

on what to do with midwives. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As in the case with 

most of the minister‟s announcement . . . And obviously he 

takes advice from no one; the Privacy Commissioner is pretty 

clear on that. The minister has provided no details of the 

program. So there‟s five midwives working. Well 16 people are 

here today to say that‟s not enough. In two years you‟ve hired 

five people? That is not a big celebration. 

 

So my advice to the minister would be, let‟s hear some details 

of the program. If he‟s going to be rolling it out, what exactly 

are the details of the program? Not just who‟s going to be hired 

where, but what‟s the program going to be? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, a very, very important 

issue because the services that midwives provide across 

hopefully eventually the province, and that is the goal, to have 

midwifery services across the province. Mr. Speaker, there are 

only, as I say, in Saskatoon right now. I wish you would have 

had more than a minute and a half to two minutes to debate this 

on question period, Mr. Speaker. Two questions quite frankly 

does not do the program justice, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving in the direction to increase the 

services, because quite frankly under 16 years of NDP 

government, how many midwives were working in the 

province? Zero, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re on the way to trying to supply midwifery services around 

the province, Mr. Speaker. Health regions have been funded. 

They are looking for midwives. And, Mr. Speaker, as we move 

on we‟ll see more midwives working here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, under section 14.1 

of The Provincial Auditor Act, I do lay on the Table the 

auditor‟s report presented by the Acting Provincial Auditor. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Privilege  

 

The Speaker: — I have a response to the request . . . Order. I 

have a response to the question of privilege raised by the 

Opposition House Leader yesterday, and I would ask for 

members‟ attention as I read this statement. 

 

Yesterday the Opposition House Leader gave notice of the 

question of privilege. The notice concerned responses by the 

Minister of Health made during question period on April 12th, 

2010, about proposed regulations under The Health Information 

Protection Act. Members will recall, yesterday I requested that 

the Opposition House Leader provide me with the details of his 

case in writing. Following adjournment of the Assembly, I 

received written information for which I thank the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Details of the case were provided to the Government House 

Leader in accordance with rule 12(2). Both House leaders also 

provided comments about the case when the Opposition House 

Leader was invited to state his case on orders of the day. 

 

I want to reiterate that I allowed the case to be made without 

notice given the circumstance of the extended sitting hours then 

in operation. 

 

The Opposition House Leader‟s case is that the Minister of 

Health committed contempt by purposefully misleading the 

Assembly about consultations that were said to have taken place 

with the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 

In question period on April 12th, 2010, the minister said, in 

responding to a question, and I quote: 

 

. . . the Privacy Commissioner was consulted formally 

four different times on this very regulation, Mr. Speaker 

. . . and yes we know his opinions on this regulation as 

did the former government know his opinions as they 

worked through this regulation over the last four years of 

their mandate. 

 

To refute this claim, the Opposition House Leader provided a 

letter from the Information and Privacy Commissioner that he 

argues demonstrates, and I quote, “The Minister of Health 

clearly misled this Assembly.” 

 

The charge that a member has made deliberately misleading 

statements, if well founded, has been treated as contempt by 

this Legislative Assembly and other parliaments. On November 

3, 2009, I addressed another case of alleged contempt for 

misleading statements. In that case, I referenced precedents that 

established differences in the way such cases are treated in 

Saskatchewan compared to other jurisdictions. I will not repeat 

those precedents except to say that they are dated November the 

18th, 1975, and July the 13th, 1982. 

 

These precedents establish that in Saskatchewan the threshold 

of proof of an offence is not restricted to an admission of guilt. 

Contempt has been found on the basis of evidence. In this 

situation the minister has not admitted to have misled the 

Assembly, so the case must be reviewed on the documentary 

evidence provided by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The evidence provided by the Opposition House Leader is two 

letters: one addressed to the Leader of the Opposition and 

another addressed to all members of the Assembly. The letter to 

the Leader of the Opposition is in response to queries made on 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5339 

April 14th, 2010, in regard to the exchange in question period 

about regulations two days earlier. In this letter, the 

commissioner states that rather than respond to him directly, he 

has decided to respond to all members and to publish a report 

on the regulations. 

 

Of material importance to this case is the letter to all members 

which is dated May 3rd, 2010. The letter begins with the 

following statement: 

 

On April 12, 2010, the Minister of Health made reference 

in the Legislative Assembly to the Office of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner in the course of 

discussing the new Health Information Protection 

Amendment Regulations 2010 (Order in Council 

187/2010) (the Regulations). In addition, I have now 

received a request from a member of the Legislative 

Assembly for written documentation on any verbal or 

written consultation I have conducted with the Minister, 

or his representatives, regarding the disclosure of 

patients‟ health information to a third party. 

 

I have determined that the most appropriate way to 

respond to certain statements made by the Minister on 

April 12, 2010 and the query for information from 

another MLA, would be through this letter to all MLAs. 

 

On page 6 of the letter, the commissioner addresses the question 

about consultations he and his office has had with the Minister 

or the Ministry of Health. For the record, I will quote the first 

four paragraphs of the letter because they are at the heart of this 

case. Quoting: 

 

The new Regulation is similar to the 2007 iteration. There 

is a significant change, however, in the new Regulation in 

the substitution of “personal health information” for “any 

information about a client‟s health care or state of health” 

in subsection (7). The statutory definition of personal 

health information is much broader. 

 

I had not seen the new Regulation until a copy was 

emailed to my office at my request on April 13, 2010 at 

2:47 p.m. by Saskatchewan Health. 

 

I have not received any draft documentation with respect 

to the type of contract that Saskatchewan Health will be 

introducing pursuant to subsection 7.1(1)(i) or (8) of the 

Regulation. In my view, Saskatchewan Health should 

have completed those pieces and made them available for 

public comment prior to proclamation of the subject 

Regulation. 

 

In summary, for my office, there was only the public 

consultation in 2004, the exchange of correspondence in 

2006 and a further exchange of correspondence in June 

2007. I am not aware of any other formal consultation on 

the matter of a fundraising Regulation under HIPA. I also 

wish to stress that, in each of the three consultations, the 

text upon which I was commenting was different; none of 

the three consultations involved text identical to Order in 

Council 187/2010 although the 2007 consultation text was 

very similar but for one significant difference. 

 

I repeat what the minister said in question period on April 12, 

2010: 

 

. . . the Privacy Commissioner was consulted formally 

four different times on this very regulation, Mr. Speaker 

. . . and yes we know his opinions on this regulation as 

did the former government know his opinions as they 

worked through this regulation over the last four years of 

their mandate. 

 

The commissioner states in his letter that the regulations being 

proposed are significantly different than those proposed in the 

past. He states he only saw the regulations in question for the 

first time on April 13th, 2010, one day after the exchange in 

question period. This is three years after the last consultation 

the commissioner says he had with the ministry. 

 

It is not common for an independent officer of this Assembly to 

respond in such a direct and formal way to statements made in 

proceedings. It is apparent from the letter that the commissioner 

had been consulted but not about the regulations recently put 

into existence by the order in council noted. It is also apparent 

that the commissioner was consulted, but between 2004 on 

regulations which had, in his words, significant differences. 

 

If the regulations are indeed significantly different, the Speaker 

wonders how the minister can claim the commissioner was 

consulted. The distinct impression left by the comments by the 

minister is that the regulations in question are, to use the 

minister‟s words, the very regulations provided to the 

commissioner. The Speaker also wonders why, if consultations 

had taken place on these regulations, the commissioner states he 

first saw them on April 13th, 2010. 

 

Because of these troubling questions and inconsistencies, I find 

there is sufficient evidence and reason to warrant the Assembly 

taking up this question and as such find that a prima facie case 

has been established. 

 

I remind members that it is not the role of the Speaker to decide 

if contempt has been committed. This is a question that only the 

Assembly can decide. It is the Speaker‟s role to decide where a 

prima facie case has been established. I have determined that 

there is sufficient reason to merit setting aside the regular 

business of the Assembly to debate the matter. 

 

I now invite the Opposition House Leader to put forward his 

motion so that the Assembly can decide whether or not 

contempt has been committed. 

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

move that: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of the statements made 

to this Assembly by the Minister of Health on April 12th, 

2010, and report back to the Assembly and that, until such 

time that the committee reports, the Minister of Health 

shall be removed from his position as a minister. 



5340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question put forward by the Opposition House Leader: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of the statements made 

to this Assembly by the Minister of Health on April 12th, 

2010, and report back to the Assembly and that, until such 

time that the committee reports, the Minister of Health 

shall be removed from his position as a minister. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the . . . Oh, 

pardon me, I should actually allow the member to speak and 

then come back . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member is 

right. And the member has moved his motion and has lost his 

right to speak, so I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

[14:45] 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I moved the motion at the request 

of the Speaker, and had I not been instructed to do so by the 

Speaker, I would‟ve spoken first and then moved my motion. 

You instructed me. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. While the Speaker did ask for the 

member to place his motion, the members . . . It‟s a 

long-standing practice that members would speak before they 

place the motion. However I will ask the Assembly if the 

Assembly would allow leave for the member to speak to the 

motion that was presented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 

standing today, or I am standing today, to talk about a very 

serious situation. Mr. Speaker, we have before us a situation 

that no members of this Assembly, including myself, would 

ever like to have to deal with. Mr. Speaker, we have an issue 

where we have had information put before us of a very serious 

nature, that a minister of the Crown has misled this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister stood and answered his 

questions, we in this Assembly have to take those answers in 

good faith. We have to be able to believe that what we are being 

told is true. And, Mr. Speaker, when it is not true, that brings 

dishonour upon us all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the seriousness of this situation is important to our 

parliamentary democracy, important to our ability to represent 

our constituents, and important to our ability to represent the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I spoke yesterday, I can‟t say that was what 

I‟d call a highlight of my political career. It is one of the times 

where you wish you didn‟t have to ever bring forward an issue, 

that you ever had to speak to, Mr. Speaker. But the privilege of 

being a member elected to this Assembly and the privilege to 

represent the people of the province of Saskatchewan is one that 

none of us should take for granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, few people ever have the opportunity to be elected 

to represent their constituents and to represent the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly is 

our opportunity to represent the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s 

our opportunity to ensure that the voices of the people of 

Saskatchewan are heard and, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to 

hold a government accountable for its actions, the opportunity 

to question the government about its intent, about its programs, 

about its legislation, and about its budget are the role of the 

opposition in order to represent the people of Saskatchewan and 

ensuring that the outcomes of legislation, estimates, and the 

actions and program of the government are in the best interest 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a long-standing tradition of this Assembly 

and the House of Commons, Mr. Speaker, and in fact the 

Houses in the British Commonwealth, that the opposition would 

ask the government questions. And, Mr. Speaker, a member of 

the Executive Council doesn‟t have to answer the question, Mr. 

Speaker, if he‟s not sure of the facts. If he‟s not sure of what the 

action of the government was, Mr. Speaker, he can take note of 

the question and rise the following day or, Mr. Speaker, even 

two or three days down the road after he has had an opportunity 

to check what the facts are and respond to the question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the response to those questions form the opinion 

of the people of the province of Saskatchewan as to the actions 

of the government, and those answers are the responses to the 

official opposition whose role it is to hold the government 

accountable. Mr. Speaker, how can we hold a government 

accountable for actions when we aren‟t getting answers, 

accurate answers, Mr. Speaker, in which to form an opinion on 

what the government is doing? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in this particular case we asked a very 

specific question. It was very clear that the people of 

Saskatchewan, many, many people have been raising this as a 

concern, the issue of their health information being provided to 

third parties for fundraising, Mr. Speaker. And those people 

have a right to have those questions asked, and they have a right 

to have an answer that they can rely upon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at this very moment we have before us a 

situation where the information provided to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, through a member of the Executive 

Council, wasn‟t accurate. And that information has been used 

for subsequent judgments by many people, Mr. Speaker, 

including foundations that would go out and want to raise 

money, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, even the foundations would 

have believed, by the minister‟s answers, that in fact the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner had been consulted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have independent officers of the legislature for 

a reason. They are the watchdogs. And, Mr. Speaker, I mean 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5341 

that with a great deal of respect. But they are the watchdogs of 

the public of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, to 

ensure that we as legislators are doing our jobs and that we are 

protecting their best interest. Mr. Speaker, the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner is one such independent officer. 

 

They don‟t work for the government. They don‟t work for the 

opposition. They work for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And they are in fact, Mr. Speaker, the people‟s 

representatives in ensuring that, when we are undertaking our 

jobs as legislators, Mr. Speaker, that we are adhering to the 

rules, Mr. Speaker, and to the laws of our province. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a very serious situation when one of our 

independent officers tells us that we‟re not doing the job the 

way we should be doing it. And we should take that very, very 

seriously. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate it‟s a very rare 

occasion that we would have a letter sent to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly about the comments of a member of this 

Assembly. In fact in my 12 years, coming up on 12 years, Mr. 

Speaker, having been elected to this Assembly, I don‟t recall 

ever having received such a letter. And, Mr. Speaker, that in 

itself should serve notice to all of us in this Assembly about the 

importance of the issue we are dealing with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situation that is before us can be dealt with in a 

number of ways, Mr. Speaker. But first and foremost, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to deal with an issue of integrity of the House 

. . . Because it‟s about the integrity of this House, Mr. Speaker, 

and about the integrity of our role as legislators, that people can 

rely on the information that is exchanged in this House in a 

formal way to be accurate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think we will all understand that there are 

issues of debate where we have opinions on issues. And when 

you‟re debating an issue is one thing, Mr. Speaker. Then there 

are differences of opinion. But in formal questions, either 

written or verbal, Mr. Speaker, of the government and a 

member of the Executive Council, Mr. Speaker, we have to be 

able to rely on the answers being accurate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just over a week ago I rose on a point of order 

about some written questions, Mr. Speaker, where the answer 

provided was not an answer. Mr. Speaker. Those raised grave 

concerns of that date for me. But, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re 

dealing with today is even of greater concern because, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been provided information that wasn‟t 

accurate, not on one occasion but on several occasions in the 

House. And, Mr. Speaker, the issue before us is on a single 

occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last several months in this session of the 

Assembly, this is the second time I‟ve had to rise on an issue of 

a member of the Executive Council providing us with 

inaccurate information, Mr. Speaker. In the first case the 

member stood and apologized to this Assembly acknowledging 

that, Mr. Speaker, prior to coming to the point of having to deal 

with the issue. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that this is 

a situation that I actually commend the member for standing 

and doing that at the time because, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not just 

. . .Any of us can make a mistake. Any of us can do something 

we wished that we would not have done after, Mr. Speaker. 

But what we‟re talking about today is a more serious situation, 

Mr. Speaker, because there were opportunities between when 

the time this motion was brought forward yesterday . . . or 

pardon me, the issue of privilege was brought forward 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and to when the motion was made 

today for the minister to stand and apologize to this House. And 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what I expected would 

happen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that opportunity was not taken. The minister 

had his opportunity to stand prior to this motion being made 

formally and apologize to the House. Mr. Speaker, that 

opportunity was not taken. So that makes the situation even 

more serious, Mr. Speaker. And because when you have an 

opportunity — if you make a mistake or you‟ve done something 

wrong — to correct it and you choose not to correct it, Mr. 

Speaker, then it goes to what is the intent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, far be it for me or any member of this 

Assembly to say that we‟ve never made mistakes, that we never 

have done things we wish we hadn‟t done, that we haven‟t had 

to apologize for things, Mr. Speaker. Because if any member of 

this Assembly told me that, Mr. Speaker, I would have grave 

concerns because all people, all of us have made mistakes. All 

of us have done things we wish we wouldn‟t have done, Mr. 

Speaker. But the real, the real test here, Mr. Speaker, comes 

when there are numerous opportunities to reply, to say, I made a 

mistake, and, Mr. Speaker, to correct that error. And that 

opportunity is not taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated some minutes ago, the seriousness 

of the situation when an independent officer would in fact reply 

on the comments of a Member of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s rare. And in fact I don‟t recall in my 12 years — 

and I‟m not saying it perhaps hasn‟t happened — but in my 12 

years I cannot remember such a circumstance. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Information and Privacy Commissioner 

also responded very directly, very directly in his response to the 

issue of the language used, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

like to read into the record the paragraph from the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner: 

 

A review of my records indicates that there were only 

three consultations with my office that could be described 

as formal and those consultations spanned the period 2004 

to 2007: 

 

1) In August 2004, Saskatchewan Health published, in 

draft form, a set of HIPA Regulations and invited public 

comment [Mr. Speaker, and invited public comment]. 

This included an item described as Proposed Regulation 

#11, Disclosure of registration information for Regional 

Health Authority and affiliate fundraising. This 

fundraising Regulation differs significantly from the 

Order In Council 187/2010. I responded, by means of 

my Report on the Health Information Protection Act 

Draft Regulations, dated September 10, 2004. My 

Report is available at our website under the „Resources‟ 

tab. 

 

2) On August 11 2006, Saskatchewan Health provided a 

draft Regulation for consultation. The draft Regulation 



5342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

differs significantly from Order In Council 187/2010. I 

responded, by means of a letter, to the Executive 

Director of Policy and Planning, Saskatchewan Health 

dated September 18, 2006. In that letter, I advised that if 

the Department proceeded with the draft Regulation or 

published the draft Regulation for public scrutiny and 

comment, we would also publish our commentary on 

our website. In that case, our comments may be 

reorganized and appear in a somewhat different format 

but nonetheless would be consistent with this letter. By 

a letter dated November 22, 2006, the Executive 

Director of Policy and Planning, Saskatchewan Health 

responded to several suggestions I had made for 

amendment. I was advised that one data element that we 

had objected to would be deleted from the Regulation. 

 

[15:00] 

 

On June 1 2007, Saskatchewan Health provided a draft 

Regulation for consultation which reflected further 

revisions to earlier iterations. I responded, by means of a 

letter, dated June 12, 2007. In that letter I noted some 

positive changes. I made the observation that our office 

had still not seen evidence that the requirement of 

express consent is not feasible and appropriate. I 

advised that as noted earlier, at such time as the 

Department proceeded with the draft Regulation or 

published the draft Regulations for public scrutiny and 

comment, we would also publish our commentary on 

our website. I advised that the Department could expect 

that our comments may be reorganized and appear in a 

somewhat different format but nonetheless would be 

consistent with this letter. 

 

I understand that Saskatchewan Health has suggested that 

there was also a consultation on fundraising in May 2006, 

. . . to the best of my knowledge my office was not 

involved in that consultation and I can find no record of 

such a May 2006 consultation. 

 

[An issue of] Consultation since 2007 

 

The new Regulation is similar to the 2007 iteration. There 

is a significant change, however, in the new Regulation in 

the substitution of “personal health information” for “any 

information about a client‟s health care or state of health” 

in subsection (7). The statutory definition of personal 

health information is much broader. 

 

I had not seen the new Regulation until a copy was 

emailed to my office at my request on April 13, 2010 at 

2:47 p.m. by Saskatchewan Health. 

 

I have not received any draft documentation with respect 

to the type of contract that Saskatchewan Health will be 

introducing pursuant to subsection 7.1(1)(i) or (8) of the 

Regulation. In my view, Saskatchewan Health . . . 

[would] have completed those pieces and made them 

available for public comment prior to proclamation of the 

subject Regulation. 

 

In summary, from my office, there was only the public 

consultation in 2004, the exchange of correspondence in 

2006 and a further exchange of correspondence in June 

2007. I am not aware of any other formal consultation on 

the matter of a fundraising Regulation under HIPA. I also 

wish to stress that, in each of the three consultations, the 

text upon which I was commenting was different; none of 

the three consultations involved text identical to Order in 

Council 187/2010 although the 2007 consultation text was 

very similar but for one significant difference. 

 

I have also enclosed a document entitled Report on 

Health Information Protection Amendment Regulations, 

2010 (Order in Council 187/2010), May 3rd, 2010 that 

outlines my views and concerns regarding the new HIPA 

fundraising Regulation for your information. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for an independent officer of the legislature 

to write such a letter indicates to myself, and I would hope all 

members of this Assembly, the very grave situation that we now 

face. Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that members of this 

Assembly need to consider very carefully and need to consider 

what direction or action you wish to take. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I read from the first page of the letter: 

 

On April 12, 2010 the Minister of Health made reference 

in the Legislative Assembly to the Office of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner in the course of 

discussing the new Health Information Protection 

Amendment Regulations, 2010 . . . In addition, I have now 

received a request from a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly for written documentation of any verbal or 

written consultation I have conducted with the Minister, or 

his representatives, regarding the disclosure of patient‟s 

health information to a third party. 

 

I have determined that the most appropriate way to 

respond to certain statements made by the Minister on 

April 12, 2010 and the query for information from another 

MLA, would be through this letter to all MLAs. 

 

I am also available to meet with any Standing or Special 

Committee of the Assembly to discuss the Regulation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this letter makes it very clear that the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner has grave concerns about the 

regulation but also makes it very clear that he was never 

consulted about the regulation implemented by order in council 

187/2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the two occurrences that we‟ve seen in the last 

several months are and should be of concern to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan and of concern to all members of 

this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, the people of the province have a 

right to expect — in fact demand — that the answers provided 

by members of the legislature in this House are factual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to safeguard our democracy. We need to 

safeguard our processes to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan know and understand that not only is it a 

requirement. And it is a requirement, Mr. Speaker. Our rules are 

clear that you must answer the questions. You have options. 

You don‟t have to answer the question, Mr. Speaker, but it has 

to be relevant to the question asked. And if you don‟t have 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5343 

specific information you can in fact take note of the question, 

get the information, and answer it at a later date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to provide that inaccurate information and to 

mislead the House is a very serious — and, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to repeat that — a very, very serious issue. Mr. Speaker, we 

have before us a situation which we have to take seriously. And 

as I indicated some time ago, Mr. Speaker, I fully expected 

prior to getting to a motion on the floor that the minister would 

have simply stood up and apologized and, Mr. Speaker, we 

wouldn‟t be dealing with this issue. 

 

Because as I indicated before, I think as all members of this 

Assembly would say with, I think, you know, some degree of 

humbleness, that we‟ve all made mistakes. And we‟ve all done 

things we wish we hadn‟t have done. And we‟ve all had the 

opportunity to in fact then, Mr. Speaker, apologize for it. And I 

was, as were my colleagues, hoping and looking to the minister 

to simply stand and admit that he had made that mistake. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that didn‟t occur. And for myself and other 

members of the Assembly, that should raise even greater 

concerns, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And in my time in the legislature of Saskatchewan, we haven‟t 

had a privilege motion debated in this House. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn‟t an issue to deal with lightly. It isn‟t an issue 

to rush through. I think it‟s been many, many years since we‟ve 

had a issue of privilege actually debated in our Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — More than 30 years. 

 

Mr. Yates: — One of my colleagues is telling me it‟s been 

more than 30 years since we‟ve actually debated a motion of 

privilege in this Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, if that is in 

fact, it‟s been more than 30 years, Mr. Speaker, that should also 

indicate to us the seriousness of the issue before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, the issue before us is the 

statement made by the Minister of Health on April 12th, 2010. 

And it‟s recorded for the public record on page 4704 of 

Hansard. And when the minister said, and I quote, “But it‟s . . . 

also to know, Mr. Speaker, that the Privacy Commissioner was 

consulted formally four . . . times on this very regulation, Mr. 

Speaker.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a letter this morning to all the members . . . or 

yesterday morning, pardon me, the Privacy Commissioner 

clearly questioned that. Mr. Speaker, it then was an issue which 

was raised in question period yesterday and, Mr. Speaker, the 

actions and answers defended. We attempted to give the 

minister the opportunity yesterday to say, after he would have 

received the report like all of us, in question period yesterday, 

to respond and say otherwise, Mr. Speaker. That opportunity 

wasn‟t taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then I stood and raised the issue of privilege at our 

earliest opportunity, expecting that there would be considerable 

time before a decision. And when I talk about considerable 

time, there were several hours, Mr. Speaker, overnight and then 

until after question period today, giving the minister once again 

the full opportunity to stand and simply apologize, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, that opportunity wasn‟t taken. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that that is unfortunate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have before us is a situation where we 

were misled by a minister and then, I would argue, Mr. Speaker, 

by his failure when he had the opportunities to correct that 

situation, Mr. Speaker. He chose not to, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, in choosing not to correct that, Mr. Speaker, that goes 

to the issue of contempt of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, because 

the inaccurate statements could have been corrected and were 

not. The minister chose instead to allow this motion to be 

debated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government has the majority, and the 

government can overrule the minority. But I say to all members 

of this Assembly, the facts are there. You may disagree with the 

facts. You may not like that someone‟s been called upon it. But 

this is an issue of the very integrity of a government. This issue 

goes to the very integrity of a government.  

 

Mr. Speaker, if a government uses its majority to overrule a 

minority when they know what they‟ve done is wrong, Mr. 

Speaker, that goes to the very character of a government. It‟s no 

longer the responsibility of a single minister, Mr. Speaker. It 

becomes the responsibility of a government, a government that 

has chose, knowingly and willingly that what was done was 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, to not deal with it, to try to make what was 

wrong right by using their majority, Mr. Speaker, by voting 

against a motion to deal with the situation when a member of 

the Executive Council in the province of Saskatchewan misled 

the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the fact that when 

opportunities presented themselves that no opportunity was 

taken, goes to the intent. Mr. Speaker, if you‟re looking at an 

action and you‟re looking at what should be found in an action 

by an individual, there‟s both under law what‟s called the actus 

reus and the mens rea, Mr. Speaker. One is the action itself and 

one is the intent. Mr. Speaker, the fact that the member chose 

not to apologize when he could have shows that clearly the 

intent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, not since 1982 I‟m told now, 28 years ago not 30 

years ago, have members entered into such a debate in this 

Assembly. At the time the member for Prince Albert-Duck 

Lake claimed that the minister of Mineral Resources under 

Premier Grant Devine deliberately misled the House in answers 

he had given during question period on July 8th, 1982. The 

Speaker found a prima facie case of privilege and it was 

debated in this Assembly. Today once again, we are faced with 

a grave matter considering whether a member has deliberately 

misled this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read from Hansard, July 13th, 1982: 

 

A point of privilege was raised on Friday, July 9, 1982, 

by the hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 

claiming that the Minister of Mineral Resources 

deliberately misled the House in answers he made to 

certain oral questions on July 8, 1982. I am satisfied that 

the member raised the matter at the earliest opportunity 

. . . 



5344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that: 

 

Based on the information I have in front of me, [the 

Speaker ruled] I rule that a prima facie case of privilege 

has been established, which justifies giving this matter 

precedence over the orders of the day. I now leave the 

matter in the hands of the House to deal with it as it sees 

fit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not since 1982, 28 years ago, almost 30 years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, has this Assembly had to deal with a prima facie 

case of privilege. Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier in my 

comments, I wish we weren‟t dealing with this issue, and I 

think all members of this Assembly wish we were not dealing 

with this issue. Because, Mr. Speaker, the integrity of our 

parliamentary system and the integrity of this Legislative 

Chamber, it should be important to us all. 

 

It should be important enough to us all that we put it first, Mr. 

Speaker, that if we have differences of opinion, and we do — 

we have differences of opinion, Mr. Speaker, on how to get to 

the end goal — but I think, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of 

us should be elected here with a goal to make our province a 

better place to live, a better place for our children and our 

grandchildren. And, Mr. Speaker, I want that, and I‟m not going 

to claim for one second that there isn‟t a single member of this 

Assembly that doesn‟t want that, that doesn‟t want to have a 

better Saskatchewan for their children and their grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being a grandparent — I became a grandpa at age 

40 — being a grandparent was one of the proudest days of my 

life. And every single day I spend time thinking about the 

province I want my grandson to live in, the province in which I 

want my grandson to grow up. And I know that every single 

member of this Chamber, regardless on what side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, shares a belief that they want the very 

best Saskatchewan for their children and grandchildren and for 

generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the calling to public life is perhaps the most 

difficult calling that any of us will ever have. And the job we do 

on a day-to-day basis in this Assembly and around the province 

is far more difficult than many of the people in this province of 

Saskatchewan understand. But I will stand today and say I 

believe that every single member of the 58 members wants the 

very best for our province. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to cherish 

the Chamber in which we work. We have to believe that our 

actions and what we do are more important than any one of us. 

And we have to work to make that Saskatchewan a better place. 

 

And the people of the province of Saskatchewan look to us for 

leadership. And yes, we can have our differences of opinion and 

disagreements, Mr. Speaker, on how we get to the end goal of 

making Saskatchewan a better place. But it‟s our job to get us 

there, not alone because, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t control all the 

factors and levers that make Saskatchewan a great place. 

 

There are tens of thousands, Mr. Speaker, in fact every one of 

Saskatchewan‟s citizens plays a major role in making 

Saskatchewan the great province that it is. Our business and 

community leaders play a huge role in building our economy 

and moving us forward. Mr. Speaker, those employed in the 

public service, those employed in judiciary, those employed in 

so many roles in our province, Mr. Speaker, all play such a key 

role in making Saskatchewan the great place it is. 

 

But the 58 members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, are tasked 

at even a higher level, Mr. Speaker. We are tasked with the 

responsibility by our actions to help make Saskatchewan the 

great place it can be. Mr. Speaker, that has to start here in this 

Assembly. So our actions need to be, need to be considered 

carefully, and the rules of our Assembly must be followed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be the first to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

members of this Assembly in general follow the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, because we do. 

 

But we have to hold those rules to very high account, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have to believe in the democracy that we 

represent, and we have to believe in the integrity of this 

Chamber. And we have to believe in the future of our province. 

And we have to demonstrate, Mr. Speaker, standards that we 

want others to live to, and we have to demonstrate in a tangible 

way the leadership that we have been elected to demonstrate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in debates and in . . . We can disagree and 

we can argue on points and we often do. And I think I‟ve 

argued, as I look across, with virtually, at one point or another, 

every member on the other side. And let me tell you this, Mr. 

Speaker: I respect them all. I respect them all for one reason, 

Mr. Speaker, is they step forward in a very difficult role to 

represent the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟ve done so. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as can be demonstrated by the fact we 

haven‟t had to debate an issue of this seriousness in 28 years, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it‟s appropriate to say that all members 

of this House have diligently tried to represent their constituents 

and the people of Saskatchewan in a very forthright manner, at 

all times trying to represent the best interests of their 

constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we tend to agree with a lot more than we disagree 

in this House, contrary to what many people would hear from 

watching the news. They‟ll probably agree on 95 per cent of 

everything and the disagreements on 5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately it‟s the 5 per cent that the public often hears about 

and often focuses on. But in general, I would say that 95 per 

cent of all items that have come before this Assembly, that most 

people . . .that we agree on. Because, Mr. Speaker, it goes to the 

fact that, as I said earlier, the members of this Assembly truly 

want what‟s best for their children and grandchildren, truly 

want what‟s best for our province and truly want what‟s best for 

our futures. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the very important issue 

before us, I need to talk for a few minutes about the fact that our 

rules and our democracy has been built and developed over 

hundreds of years. Mr. Speaker, over hundreds of years, coming 

out of the British Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker, our rules of our 

Assembly have been developed. 

 

And they‟ve been debated first in England, Mr. Speaker, when 

Canada was controlled by what was known then as the British 

North America Act. Mr. Speaker, it was just a very short few 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5345 

years ago that our constitution was in fact endorsed, brought 

forward in the lifespan of our country, just a very short . . . 

years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parliamentary privilege is a fundamental right 

necessary for the exercise of our constitutional function. It is 

necessary for us to represent the people of our constituency. Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

In any constitutionally governed country, the privileges, 

immunities [rights] and powers of its legislature as a body 

and the rights . . . of the members of such bodies are 

matters of primary importance. 

 

As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, these are words from 

chapter 2 of Parliamentary Privilege, second edition, Mr. 

Speaker, and those are words that we should in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, pay great attention to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that no Legislative Assembly would 

be able to discharge its duties with efficiency or assure its 

independence and dignity unless it had adequate powers to 

protect itself and its members and officials in the exercise of 

their functions, Mr. Speaker. But in order to do that, we have to 

have rules, and we have to live by those rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today we have before us a situation where 

one of those rules has not been followed, Mr. Speaker, and that 

is of serious concern. Mr. Speaker, as any motion in this 

Assembly that‟s debatable, the government that has a majority 

can simply vote that the action taken was right, but to do so is to 

make a mockery of this Assembly and to make a mockery of 

our democratic rights and principles. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

urge the government not to do that. Mr. Speaker, what we‟re 

dealing with is more important than any individual member, 

more important than the government, more important than the 

opposition. It‟s about the fundamental principles of our 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, privilege in the legal sense, an exemption from 

some duty, burden, attendance or liability in which others are 

subject. To determine what constitutes parliamentary privilege 

in the Senate and House of Commons we are directed by the 

Constitution Act, 1867 and of the Parliament of Canada Act to 

the privileges in the British House of Commons, 1867. And it 

says under clause or section 18, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The privileges, immunities and powers to be held, 

enjoyed, and exercised by the Senate and by the House of 

Commons, and by the Members thereof respectively, shall 

be such as are from time to time defined by Act of the 

Parliament of Canada, but so that any Act of the 

Parliament of Canada defining such privileges, 

immunities, and powers shall not confer any privileges, 

immunities, or powers exceeding those at the passing of 

such Act held, enjoyed, and exercised by the Commons 

House of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great 

Britain and Ireland, and by the Members thereof. 

 

. . . such and the like privileges, immunities and powers as 

at the time as the passing of the Constitution Act, 1867 

were held, enjoyed and exercised by the Commons House 

of Parliament of the United Kingdom and by the members 

thereof, insofar as to seem consistent with and not 

repugnant to this Act, and that such privileges, immunities 

and powers as are from time to time defined by Act of 

Parliament of Canada not exceeding those at the time of 

the passing of such Act held, enjoyed and exercised by the 

Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom 

and by the members thereof respectfully.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the general definition goes on to say that 

parliamentary privilege, which is an important part of the law 

and custom of parliament, is part of the general and public law 

of Canada. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why it‟s so very important that we as 

members of this Assembly uphold the principles of the 

privileges we have, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why it‟s so even 

more important, Mr. Speaker, that in the situation that we are 

now facing, when the opportunities presented themselves, that a 

minister chose not to take the honourable, to take the 

honourable step forward, Mr. Speaker, and just simply 

apologize. 

 

Parliamentary privilege is the necessary immunity that the law 

provides for members of parliament and for members of the 

legislatures of each of the ten provinces and two territories in 

order for these legislators to do their legislative work. It is also 

the necessary immunity that the law provides for anyone while 

taking part in a proceeding in parliament or in the legislature. In 

addition it is the right, power, and authority of each house of 

Parliament and of each Legislative Assembly to perform their 

constitutional functions. Finally, it is the authority and power of 

each house of Parliament and of each Legislative Assembly to 

enforce that immunity and to protect its integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes to the very point I made just a few minutes 

ago. It‟s our responsibility to protect the integrity of this 

Chamber and of our rules. Mr. Speaker, that‟s why it goes 

beyond any of us. The issue before us is more important than 

any single member, the government, the opposition. It‟s about 

all of us believing in the integrity of our Assembly, believing in 

the integrity that it‟s the role of the opposition to question the 

government and to get answers back, Mr. Speaker, that are in 

fact truthful, Mr. Speaker. The answers from any member of the 

Executive Council that are speaking to the issues before the 

province of Saskatchewan need to be truthful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislative body needs this legal protection of 

immunity so to perform its functions, defend, and vindicates its 

authority and dignity. Mr. Speaker, it‟s important that we have 

that dignity. The members of the legislative body enjoy these 

rights and immunities because the legislature cannot act or 

perform without the unimpeded use of the services of its 

members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk for a minute about a practical 

definition, a common sense definition of immunity. If someone 

improperly interferes with the parliamentary work of a Member 

of Parliament, i.e., any of the members‟ activities that have a 

connection with a proceeding in parliament, in such case that is 

a matter involving parliamentary privilege. the authority and 

power of each house of Parliament and of each Legislative 



5346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Assembly to enforce that immunity.  

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to perform its functions as a legislative 

body, a legislature requires absolute certainty certain privileges, 

rights, or immunities. That is to say it cannot carry on unless it 

has them. Mr. Speaker, the rights of us as members, though, are 

subject to the procedures of the House. Mr. Speaker, we must 

set an example. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, in general that has 

occurred, because over 28 years we have not seen an issue of 

privilege before the House. 

 

While we‟ve seen that the member enjoys all the immunity 

necessary to perform his parliamentary work, this privilege or 

right such as freedom of speech is nevertheless subject to the 

practices and procedures of the House. Our House, Mr. 

Speaker, that we, as the 58 elected members of this Assembly 

should cherish the role in which our constituents and the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan have bestowed upon us. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we should not take, we should not take it lightly. 

 

Because of its nature, a true question of privilege should arise in 

the House only infrequently and that, Mr. Speaker, we have 

seen. It‟s been 28 years since the last time a question of 

privilege has been raised in this House. To constitute privilege, 

generally there must be some improper obstruction to the 

member in performing his parliamentary work in either direct or 

a constructive way, as opposed to a mere expression of public 

opinion or of criticism of the activities of the members.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have that very situation 

before us today. Mr. Speaker, we have a situation when we 

haven‟t had the opportunity to be afforded the answers 

appropriately to the question asked by a member of the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a breach of privilege is when any of these rights or 

immunities is disregarded or attacked by any individual or 

authority and raised in the House of Commons, the offense is 

called a breach of privilege and it is punishable under the law of 

parliament as a contempt of that parliament.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we‟re dealing with today. And it 

is a serious issue, an issue which any government should be 

concerned, an issue which all of the members of this Assembly 

should be concerned about. Mr. Speaker, we have to be 

concerned about it and we have to be concerned about the issue 

before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, contempt of parliament may be more aptly 

described as an offence against the authority of the House, our 

House. This Assembly is the House of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan which the 58 of us elected have the 

honour to represent on behalf of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we do represent the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan and we have a responsibility to 

do so, Mr. Speaker, in a very professional and appropriate 

manner, and to respect the very rules and laws of this Assembly 

and of this province and of this country, Mr. Speaker, and 

long-standing traditions of what I think is, without doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, the best system of governance in the world, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We as Canadians — and I would argue in particular in the 

province of Saskatchewan — live in a province with great 

potential, great political history but, Mr. Speaker, also great 

traditions in respect of our Legislative Assembly, respect of our 

Chamber, and, Mr. Speaker, I would hope at all times and I 

believe in almost every situation, respect of the members of this 

Assembly for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, the 

very people that we each represent in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

in this Chamber. 

 

As in the case of a Superior Court, when by some act or 

word a person disobeys or is openly disrespectful of the 

authority of the House of Commons or the Senate or of 

their lawful commands, that person is subject to being held 

in contempt of the House of Commons or Senate as the 

case may be; therefore . . . [we see in] the Senate and the 

House of Commons have the power or right to punish 

actions that, while not appearing to be breaches of any 

specific privilege, are offences against their authority or 

dignity. These may include disobedience to their 

legitimate commands or libels upon them, their offices, or 

their Members. 

 

Such actions, though often called “breaches of privilege,” 

should be more properly considered “contempts.” 

 

While it will become evident that one of the corporate 

privileges of the House is the power to punish for 

contempt, there is no restriction on what may constitute a 

contempt of parliament. It will be seen in chapter 13, 

however, that a breach in question is brought to the 

attention of the House by means of a question of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

Contempt cannot be codified. [And] Contempt has no 

limits. 

 

As a Speaker said [Mr. Speaker] “. . . the dimension of 

contempt of Parliament is such that the House will not be 

constrained in finding a breach of privileges of Members, 

or of the House. This is precisely the reason that, while 

our privileges are defined, contempt of the House has no 

limits. 

 

When new ways are found to interfere with our 

proceedings, so too will the House, in appropriate cases, 

be able to find a contempt of the House has occurred.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that we have the ability as a 

legislature, as does the House of Commons, to continue to 

evolve our rules and our responsibilities and, in fact, what is 

contempt as our rules change, Mr. Speaker, as the expectations 

of our community and our society and province change, Mr. 

Speaker. We can in fact continue to look at each of the cases 

before us and deal with it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, for 28 years we haven‟t had the issue of 

contempt raised in this Assembly. We haven‟t had the option, 

had the situation of debating a motion of privilege in the 

Assembly. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a very serious 

situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re also dealing with a situation where we have 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5347 

an independent officer of this Assembly who has in fact 

provided information clarifying the statements of a minister. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on the record in saying that no 

independent officer of this Assembly should ever have to fear 

for their job for ever raising an issue to this Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, independent officers need our support. They need to 

be considered independent of the government, independent of 

the opposition, and be able to perform their functions without 

fear of retaliation or without fear of not being appointed or 

reappointed to their positions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to watch this situation very carefully 

over the next months and years to ensure that, as a result of 

bringing forward information, that no independent officer is 

ever, ever in fear of not being reappointed, Mr. Speaker, for 

doing their job. And that‟s a responsibility of all 58 members of 

the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it‟s important upon all of us, an 

important goal and responsibility and duty of all of us, to ensure 

that the Assembly functions well, but also that our independent 

officers function well and that they have the ability to challenge 

any one of us, Mr. Speaker, and have no fear that they won‟t 

receive reappointment for simply doing their job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation in this Assembly where a 

committee recommended to . . . that we would appoint a Chief 

Electoral Officer. This Assembly recommended to the various 

caucuses and, Mr. Speaker, we had a situation where after a 

bipartisan board that consisted of two members — consisted of 

the Speaker, the Minister of Justice, myself, and an outside 

independent third party selected by the members, Mr. Speaker, 

of the hiring committee — brought forward a name. We spent 

months going through a selection process, months going 

through a selection process. And, Mr. Speaker, for the first time 

in my 12 years of political life, after we had agreed in a 

bipartisan group to send a name, the government rejected that 

name. And, Mr. Speaker, that raises many, many questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility to uphold the rules of our 

Assembly. We have a responsibility to act in the best interests 

of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

and we have a responsibility to ensure that in our actions we are 

representing the interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Not the interests of our political parties, Mr. 

Speaker, not the interests of special interest groups, Mr. 

Speaker, but the interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with a situation where we 

have before us answers provided during oral questions that were 

not accurate. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve raised the issue. We 

raised the issue to the members of this Assembly and, Mr. 

Speaker, that would have afforded many opportunities in the 

adjoining period for a correction of what was said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got members opposite saying things about my 

riding, Mr. Speaker, and making comments, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been elected now four times, once in a 

by-election and three times in a general election. And if the 

citizens of Regina Dewdney want to remove me from elected 

office for standing up for the parliamentary rules of this 

Assembly and for holding a government accountable, Mr. 

Speaker, then they can do so. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, this is much more important 

than any one of us. And to have members chirping from their 

seats about my re-election and about the comments I‟m making 

here on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan in a situation 

where a prima facie case of privilege has been established for 

debate in this House, goes to the character of the government of 

the day, Mr. Speaker. And I would think that there are members 

of the government that would want to say to those members 

challenging whether I should be elected again, Mr. Speaker, 

would want to tell them to keep their comments to themselves. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why are they making those comments, Mr. 

Speaker? I‟ll tell you why they‟re making those comments. For 

the very reason we‟re having to have this debate. It‟s 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the issue before us is one of 

character. Mr. Speaker, we have seen many, many situations 

over the last several weeks that go to the character of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a budget that was tabled that said that we 

had . . . The debt wouldn‟t go up, the debt wasn‟t going up, Mr. 

Speaker. Yet you go to page 62 of the budget book and, Mr. 

Speaker, it shows that the debt is significantly increasing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members are talking about what‟s the 

relevance. Well the relevance is this, Mr. Speaker, and I‟ll point 

this out for them. The motion is dealing with a breach of 

privilege when a member has misled this House, provided false 

information to this House. Well, Mr. Speaker, that goes to the 

character, Mr. Speaker. And telling us the debt isn‟t rising, Mr. 

Speaker, when it is, that also goes to character, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can have members opposite try to make 

fun of what is a very serious issue before us, but this is a serious 

issue. And, Mr. Speaker, they say they just want to get on and 

they want to vote. They‟ll use their majority, Mr. Speaker, to 

vote down, vote down the opposition, Mr. Speaker, and not deal 

with the fundamental issue before us. That‟s shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where we have a United 

Nations body, the International Labour Organization, who 

wrote a report about pieces of legislation the government 

brought forward. And, Mr. Speaker, it talked about the fact that 

legislation brought forward, there‟d been no consultations, and 

that the government should take a step back and go consult, Mr. 

Speaker. They chose not to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue before us, it is an issue of respect for 

this Assembly and for its members and, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re dealing with a motion of privilege. And 

members opposite want to talk from their seats, Mr. Speaker, 

but this is one of the most serious issues in some 28 years we‟ve 

ever had to deal with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to once again talk about parliamentary 

privilege, Mr. Speaker, and I want to talk about why we‟re 

having this debate. We‟re having this debate because a minister 

of the Crown chose not to do the right thing. He had the option 



5348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

and opportunities, Mr. Speaker, but he chose not to. Mr. 

Speaker, that goes directly to the issue of intent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite can be disinterested in the 

topic before us. They can not care about the importance of the 

issue before us, Mr. Speaker, but this is a very, very important 

issue. Mr. Speaker, the issue of parliamentary privilege extends 

well beyond any of us in this Assembly and goes to the actual 

fundamentals of what is important. Mr. Speaker: 

 

Individual privileges of members of the Senate and the 

House of Commons are the absolute immunity they 

require to perform their parliamentary work. Corporate 

privileges are the necessary means for each House to 

effectively discharge its functions. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] Thus a breach of any privilege constitutes a 

contempt of the House rather than that of the member, 

because the member would not require the privilege if he 

or she were not a member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these quotes are from Parliamentary Privilege, a 

general view, chapter 2. Mr. Speaker, members: 

 

. . . would not require the privilege if he or she were not a 

member. Nevertheless, such individual privileges as 

freedoms of speech are considered to belong primarily to 

the member and only indirectly to the House itself. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] The collective of privileges of the Senate 

and of the House of Commons are the power to punish for 

contempt (or its penal jurisdiction) [Mr. Speaker, as it says 

in brackets], the right to regulate its own constitution, the 

right to regulate its own internal affairs free from 

interference. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are important concepts of our 

parliamentary democracy. They‟re important to the 

fundamentals of our Legislative Assembly. And Mr. Speaker, 

we are speaking today and dealing with a very serious motion 

before the House. Now, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn‟t be doing that 

if we had simply lived by the rules of this Assembly and, when 

opportunity presented itself, if the minister would have taken 

that opportunity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having said that, Mr. Speaker, having said 

that, when that opportunity was there it wasn‟t taken, and so it 

is important that we take the time to discuss and debate this 

issue so the people of the province of Saskatchewan understand 

that in 28 years we have not had a debate like this before the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the last time we had such a debate, 28 years 

ago, not a single one of us was elected to this Assembly. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can try to distract from this 

very important issue, but, Mr. Speaker, it is a very, very 

important issue. There is no issue more important to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan than our parliamentary rights, 

Mr. Speaker, and the integrity of this Chamber. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite can continue to make 

comments from their seats as that very member did a few 

minutes ago, challenging whether or not I would be re-elected 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, intimidation 

isn‟t going to work. Mr. Speaker, they‟re trying to commit the 

very types of problem for the reason we‟re in this debate, Mr. 

Speaker — a lack of respect for this Assembly, a lack of respect 

for this Chamber, and a lack of respect for our rules. 

 

If a member of this Assembly is trying to in any way influence 

or interfere in my ability to do my job, or of any member of this 

Assembly, then, Mr. Speaker, it‟s inappropriate. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it is about a respect for the rules of our Assembly, and 

it‟s about a respect for the integrity of this House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we are talking about this issue, it is 

important that we consider the significance of the issue before 

us and the importance of the Chamber in which we have the 

privilege and opportunity to represent the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are each elected to 

represent the people of our constituency and by extension the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In doing so, Mr. Speaker, we are acting on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan, and when a member of the opposition asks an 

oral question or for that matter a written question of the 

government, the expectation should be to get an honest answer, 

Mr. Speaker. And if you don‟t get that answer, Mr. Speaker, 

then the people of the province of Saskatchewan should be 

concerned about why. And in this case, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t 

get that answer. In fact the answer we got was found to be 

untrue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are here today for the first time in 28 years 

talking about an issue of privilege. Because not only was the 

answer given not truthful, but it was repeated many times. And 

when there were significant and several opportunities to correct 

the error, Mr. Speaker, they weren‟t taken, Mr. Speaker. And 

that goes to the very intent of the issue before us. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s very serious. It‟s very, very serious. 

 

And I expect, Mr. Speaker, that the government will use its 

majority to try to bully at some point or try to push our vote 

through a situation they know is wrong too. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that goes to the very character then of the government in power, 

and goes to the very character of the members individually. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re all held accountable for our actions at 

election time. We‟re all held accountable for our actions, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, inevitably we all have a 

responsibility to our constituents and to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite can comment from their seats 

and they can make comments, Mr. Speaker, but there were 

numerous opportunities to correct this error, Mr. Speaker. The 

issue before us raises serious questions about the judgment of 

the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker. But even more so it raises 

serious questions about the judgment of the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it raises those questions of judgment for these reasons, Mr. 

Speaker. There were opportunities to correct the error and they 

chose not to, and that goes to the judgment of the leader of the 

government, Mr. Speaker. It goes to the judgment of the leader 

because the leader has final responsibility and accountability for 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5349 

his government, Mr. Speaker. In our parliamentary democracy 

we elect a leader for a reason, because the final responsibility 

and the final accountability rests with the leader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Despite the fact that the Information and Privacy Commissioner 

had clearly refuted the claim that he was consulted on this very 

regulation, Mr. Speaker — and we all received the letter and we 

raised it in this House to give the government the opportunity to 

do the right thing, Mr. Speaker — the Premier stood in this 

Assembly in question period, defended his Minister of Health, 

and repeated the minister‟s false claims. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the leader of the government, the Premier could 

have corrected this situation, Mr. Speaker, and he also chose not 

to. Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker. Just moments before the 

solemn debate commenced — and I do, Mr. Speaker, want to 

reiterate the importance of this debate — the Premier was on his 

feet and was not only defending his Minister of Health, but was 

repeating his minister‟s claims that consultation had occurred. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a testament to the Premier‟s lack of 

judgment. 

 

The Premier could have corrected this situation. He could have 

had his minister correct the situation. The Premier knew about it 

because, just moments before this, the Premier defended the 

action and repeated the claim. Mr. Speaker, that clearly shows a 

lack of judgment, a lack of judgment that should not be and 

ought not to be expected from a Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evidence could not have been clearer, and the 

evidence was provided yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And I, I know 

that that evidence had to have been reviewed, Mr. Speaker. 

Because no government . . . And I give the members opposite 

better, more credit than that. They would have reviewed this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they obviously chose not to take the path of 

admission and admitting they made a mistake and correcting it. 

The Information and Privacy Commissioner, an independent 

officer of this Assembly, clearly refuted the claim and provided 

the facts to the contrary. Why did the Premier not show better 

judgment? Why did the Premier not show leadership, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know. But it goes to the very issue at heart. 

Instead of demonstrating judgment and leadership, the Premier 

once again got angry and defensive. Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

could have addressed the situation appropriately and we 

wouldn‟t be in this debate. And instead he got angry and 

defensive, showed a lack of judgment, Mr. Speaker — a clear 

lack of judgment and I would argue a disrespect for the integrity 

of this Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because the higher, Mr. Speaker, because the higher the office 

you hold in this Assembly, the greater the accountability and 

the greater the responsibility. Mr. Speaker, the higher the office 

that any one of us holds, representing the people of 

Saskatchewan, the greater the responsibility and the greater the 

accountability. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn‟t show the judgment that 

should be expected of the Premier. Mr. Speaker, he could have 

corrected this situation and he could‟ve dealt with it. Instead of 

listening to the Information and Privacy Commissioner, Mr. 

Speaker, an independent officer of this Assembly, the Premier 

stood during question period and repeated the minister‟s false 

claims that consultation had occurred. It is a shocking lack of 

judgment on behalf of the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion says “that, until such time as the 

committee reports, the Minister of Health shall be removed 

from his position as minister.” And I‟d like to explain why to 

the members of this Assembly and to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan. The Speaker has ruled for the first time in 

many, many years that there is a prima facie case of privilege 

— Mr. Speaker, the first time in 28 years this issue‟s been 

debated before the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as I indicated earlier, I don‟t think any of us enjoy this. I 

don‟t think anybody can enjoy dealing with such a serious 

issue, Mr. Speaker, dealing with the integrity of our House, of 

our Chamber, Mr. Speaker. This Chamber has to be bigger than 

any one of us and bigger than all of us, Mr. Speaker. And our 

responsibility to the people of the province of Saskatchewan has 

to be bigger than any one of us or bigger than all of us 

combined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this means you have found evidence that the 

minister may have misled the Assembly. It is a principal 

requirement of ministers that they be able to stand in their place 

and answer for their ministries, Mr. Speaker. It is crucial that 

ministers‟ answers be credible to members of the Assembly 

who are questioning the government on behalf of the people. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s absolutely important that the answers provided 

by ministers on behalf of their ministries, on behalf of the 

government, be credible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we‟re in a debate because, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a situation where that wasn‟t so. This minister has been 

found, prima facie, to have possibly given an unreliable, 

incorrect answer. Mr. Speaker, he had the opportunity to correct 

the record. We have an independent officer of the Legislative 

Assembly who refuted the information provided to this 

Assembly by the minister, and the minister could have stood 

and done the appropriate thing. 

 

Members would be derelict in their duties as members if they 

continued to question this minister on behalf of the people as 

though his answers were credible. Mr. Speaker, we can no 

longer ask questions of this minister as if his answers are 

credible. We can‟t. So how can an opposition effectively do 

their job in one of the most crucial portfolios any minister can 

have on behalf of a government? 

 

The issue that Saskatchewan people care about most, health 

care, it is the issue that the people of Saskatchewan care about 

most. And, Mr. Speaker, it is the issue in which most questions 

are arguably asked of any government. It is the most important 

portfolio that a government in Saskatchewan has. Now there 

will be those who would argue that there are more important 

portfolios, Mr. Speaker, but I argue, I make my comment for 

the reason that it is the issue that the people of Saskatchewan 

care most about, so it should be the issue that we in this 

Assembly care most about. 



5350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Medicare as we know it in this country was debated and came 

to life in this Chamber. Our predecessors are the ones who 

debated and brought forward modern medicare that then went 

on to become an icon of Canada, Mr. Speaker, and something 

that the people of this province I think are very, very proud of. 

It all started down in Health Region No. 1 in southwest 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which I grew up in as a boy. And I 

can tell you many, many people still cherish the fact from 

southwest Saskatchewan that medicare and the inception and 

concept of medicare came from their health region, Mr. 

Speaker. And people in this province are very proud that 

medicare was brought forward, debated, and made a reality in 

this very Chamber, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for the opposition not to be able to take the 

responses of the Minister of Health as being credible is very, 

very important. Mr. Speaker, they would also be prejudging the 

outcome of the committee‟s deliberations if they were to do so. 

Mr. Speaker, if this motion, as it should, goes to committee, an 

appropriate investigation is done and the findings returned to 

this Assembly. 

 

In the meantime, how can the opposition and the public take the 

answers of the Minister of Health as credible? This would be 

signalling to the committee that they consider the minister‟s 

answers to be reliable, when this is the very point of 

deliberation of the committee and must be decided and reported 

back to the House. Mr. Speaker, once again there are members 

pretending to cry and making noises from the government side 

of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member just to direct 

his comments to the Chair and make his comments according to 

the motion that he‟s presenting. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

speaking to the motion before us and the very reasons why. 

That in the motion it says that until such time as the committee 

reports, the Minister of Health shall be removed from his 

position as a minister. I‟m trying to explain to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and to my colleagues in this 

Assembly why, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s fairly simple. We have 

before us a prima facie case of privilege being found by the 

Speaker for debate. That means that there‟s been enough 

evidence for the Speaker to have determined that the minister 

may have misled this House. Mr. Speaker, for those very 

reasons, the issue should be referred to the Committee on 

Privileges for investigation and examination. 

 

It is a principle requirement of ministers, Mr. Speaker, as you 

would well know, that they‟d be able to stand in this Assembly 

and answer for their ministries on behalf of the government, 

Mr. Speaker. But it‟s absolutely crucial that we also be able to 

believe that the answers be credible to the members of this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and to members of the opposition who 

are questioning ministers on behalf of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know there‟s . . . the minister‟s been 

found prima facie to have possibly given an unreliable answer 

and, I think, with some fairly substantial supporting 

documentation. We would all be derelict in our duties if we 

continued to question the Minister of Health on behalf of the 

people as though his answers were credible until after a 

thorough investigation had been done. Mr. Speaker, that‟d be 

prejudging the outcome of the investigation and the 

deliberations in the committee, and it would also be signalling, 

Mr. Speaker, that it doesn‟t matter what the outcomes and 

findings of the committee were because we‟d already would be 

taking the minister‟s answers as being reliable. So that would be 

contrary to the very important nature of the issue before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and why, why do we have this issue before us, Mr. 

Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, we have this issue before us for a 

number of reasons, most significantly that, Mr. Speaker, in the 

asking of a written question — or, pardon me, an oral question, 

Mr. Speaker — we received an answer and, Mr. Speaker, a very 

specific answer; very specific in that it said, and to us, Mr. 

Speaker, and I‟d like to just once again, Mr. Speaker, indicate 

why, Mr. Speaker, that the information before us was so clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on April 12th, 2010, and this is recorded on page 

4704 of Hansard, and I‟m going to quote, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health said, and I quote, “But it‟s important also to 

know, Mr. Speaker, that the Privacy Commissioner was 

consulted formally four different times on this very regulation, 

Mr. Speaker,” making specific reference to the regulation that 

was put in place.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, very specific, it wasn‟t general in nature, Mr. 

Speaker. There is no confusion as to what was being spoken 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

He said the very regulation that he brought forward, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very, very clear, 

very clear, and the response from the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

On April 12, 2010 the Minister of Health made reference 

to the Legislative Assembly [and I‟m quoting from the 

Privacy Commissioner‟s letter] to the Office of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner in the course of 

discussing the new Health Information Protection 

Amendment Regulations, 2010. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very clear in this letter in fact that he 

wasn‟t speaking to the very same regulation. And the minister‟s 

language was specific. It‟s the very same regulation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to now spend some time talking about 

the issue before us in a broader sense, Mr. Speaker, and why 

this should be a concern to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an issue of privilege before this Assembly is an 

issue of importance to the province of Saskatchewan for 

numerous reasons. And I‟d like to take the time to talk in some 

detail about the concerns that it raises for us as members of the 

opposition, and then should be a broader concern for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to take the answers provided by any 

member of the Executive Council as being truthful, Mr. 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5351 

Speaker, and as being reliable, Mr. Speaker. And when we can‟t 

do that, Mr. Speaker, then it brings into question the integrity of 

this Assembly and the integrity of the information provided to 

us to do our jobs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when that integrity‟s questioned, we have a 

responsibility to challenge it, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn‟t be 

doing our jobs as members of this Assembly if we knew that a 

member of the Assembly was not providing reliable 

information, if we didn‟t challenge it and we didn‟t deal with it. 

 

And the people of the province of Saskatchewan should feel 

concerned that this issue has to be raised, as do I think all 

members of this Assembly. I think we‟d all prefer we weren‟t 

dealing with this today and we were doing the business of the 

Assembly. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal with this very 

important issue. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal with it because the 

importance and the integrity of our Chamber has to be the most 

important issue to us. And, Mr. Speaker, in responding to and 

speaking to the issue of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I have earlier 

talked about the importance of what privilege is. And, Mr. 

Speaker, privilege is the collection, the collective of those rights 

and immunities and powers that are put upon us as members of 

the Legislative Assembly to act in the interest of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. And when we don‟t do that, Mr. 

Speaker, when we don‟t do that, then, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very, 

very serious. 

 

And there is a reason that we haven‟t debated an issue of 

privilege in this Assembly for more than 28 years because the 

members of this Assembly take this issue very seriously. Mr. 

Speaker, the members of this Assembly take the issue very, 

very seriously so we haven‟t had to deal with this issue for 28 

years. And it‟s unfortunate that today we are dealing with this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely important that the people of 

Saskatchewan have confidence in their government, they have 

confidence in their Legislative Assembly, and they have 

confidence in the members of this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when we have abused that collection of rights, privileges, 

powers, and immunities, Mr. Speaker, then we need to be held 

accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what‟s most disturbing about this particular issue 

is the fact that there were many opportunities over the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟ve been listening very 

carefully to the member, and the member has referred to the 

serious nature of the motion, but over the past period of time the 

member has, on numerous occasions, basically reiterated the 

same argument. And it would seem that, based on the principles 

of debate in this Assembly, if this motion is indeed serious, that 

the member would state very clearly the reasons why the 

motion was brought forward and not have to stand and 

continually be repetitive. 

 

And I would ask the member to move directly, and directly to 

the motion as the motion‟s fairly limited. It states the fact that 

we ask the Standing Committee on Privileges to examine the 

statements and/or move . . . ask the Standing Committee on 

Privileges to examine the point of privilege. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I was just 

moving to a new issue of debate, Mr. Speaker, a new set of 

information, Mr. Speaker, that I think is absolutely important be 

discussed in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, debates in the House of Commons. And I want to 

quote from that debate, Mr. Speaker. March 18th, 1903, page 

132 and 133, and I quote: 

 

The members of cabinet are above everything else, 

responsible to the House of Commons, not as individuals 

alone, but collectively as well. This responsibility has 

been key to the control of the executive power in Canada 

and in Britain. The powers of the crown have remained 

for the most part intact, or have been increased, but the 

exercise of those powers has come under the cabinet and 

this body, in turn, under the general scrutiny of 

parliament. This is the central fact of parliamentary 

democracy, for it is this practice which keeps the system 

both efficient and constantly amenable to popular control. 

The minister at the head of every department is 

responsible everything that is done within the department, 

and inasmuch as he will expect praise or assume blame 

for all the acts of his subordinates, he must have the final 

word on any important decision that is taken. 

 

The book goes on to quote R. L. Borden who, when leader of 

the opposition, aptly described the ideal situation as follows: 

 

A minister of the crown is responsible, under the system in 

Great Britain, for the minutest details of the administration 

of his department. He is politically responsible, but he 

does not know anything at all about them. When anything 

goes wrong in his department, he is responsible therefore 

to parliament. If he comes to parliament and [he] points 

out that he entrusted the duty to an official in the ordinary 

course and in good faith, and that the official had been 

selected for his capacity, ability and integrity, and that the 

moment the man went wrong the minister investigated the 

matter to the full and punished the man, either by 

degradation or dismissal, the minister has done his duty to 

the public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even if the minister had believed that the 

information, if he had been provided information by his 

department, was in fact, Mr. Speaker, accurate, he still holds the 

accountability. And when challenged by an independent officer, 

he should have responded to correct the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That opportunity presented itself several times. The opportunity 

was not, Mr. Speaker, acted upon. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to quote 

from page 638 from July 9th, 1982, from the last time that we 

stood in this Assembly to talk about the issue of privilege. It 

says, and I quote: 

 

A question of privilege, on the other hand, is a question 

partly of fact and partly of law — the law of contempt of 

parliament — and is a matter for the House [of Commons] 

to determine. The decision of the House on a question of 



5352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

privilege, like every other matter which the House has to 

decide, can be elicited only by a question put from the 

Chair by the Speaker and resolved either in the affirmative 

or in the negative, and this question is necessarily founded 

on a motion made by a member. 

 

It follows that though the Speaker can rule on a question 

of order, he cannot rule on a question of privilege. His 

function, when a question of privilege is raised, is limited 

to deciding whether the matter is of such a character as to 

entitle the motion, which the member who has raised the 

question desires, to move to priority over [other] orders 

. . . [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the situation we have before us, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have before me a series of 

letters, or pardon me, I have the letter from the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s very clear that 

the Information and Privacy Commissioner reviewed his 

records in detail and that there were only three consultations in 

office and none, none by the minister before us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in previous cases in this House and across the 

Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker, the issue of privilege has been 

debated, has been examined. And, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent 

upon us to not take this lightly, to move this forward and to 

examine it in detail, Mr. Speaker, and to return to this Assembly 

with a recommendation. Mr. Speaker, we have a Committee on 

Privileges, as does each Legislative Assembly in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, and the House of Commons, and that committee is 

tasked with the job of dealing with issues of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I fully realize the seriousness of 

the issue we are dealing with and bringing this type of issue to 

the House is one that I wish we weren‟t doing, but we are. And, 

Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years, members of this 

Assembly have conducted their issues with the duty of . . . with 

the appropriate level of respect and concern, Mr. Speaker. And 

as a result, we have had very few instances to deal with such a 

matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a few minutes at this time 

talking about the issue before us, Mr. Speaker, and I‟d like to 

deal with it from a perspective of clarity. Mr. Speaker, in my 

statements yesterday, I was very, very clear. I believe I was 

very clear anyway, Mr. Speaker. So I‟d like to take a minute to 

just re-examine that issue before the House, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that in fact it is clearly understood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Information and Privacy Commissioner 

indicates that on April 13th — and he‟s very precise — at 2:47 

p.m., he requested from Saskatchewan Health a copy of the 

regulation. And at that point, he saw it for the first time. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister said very clearly that, on April the 12th, 

that the Information and Privacy Commissioner had been 

consulted on four occasions on that very, very regulation — and 

the word very was used and it was used to be very precise, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the evidence shows that, very clearly, 

the Information and Privacy Commissioner, on April the 13th, 

2010, 2:47 p.m. — which is again very precise and very precise 

for a reason, Mr. Speaker — saying: 

I have not received any draft documentation with respect 

to the type of contract that Saskatchewan Health will be 

introducing pursuant to . . . the Regulation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s clear. I think it‟s clear that the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner said he‟d not seen it. 

And he‟s very precise, even to the time at which he requested it. 

I need more information. That‟s the same information. It‟s the 

same information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and without that information, the . . . Mr. Speaker, 

I think the information‟s clear. I think that it would be 

somewhat inappropriate for us to challenge the fact that the 

information before us is clear. It‟s very, very clear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall I rose in this House about statements 

made by another member of the Executive Council. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it had to do with statements made in this Assembly 

and then statements made to a media reporter, Mr. Speaker. 

And in that case, Mr. Speaker, I raised my point. We had the 

discussion, Mr. Speaker. I put the statement on the record. It 

was at that point the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

. . . 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — To ask leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Here to 

witness a historic debate and in the east gallery . . . This is a 

debate that happens once every 20 years, 28 years. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m going straight to the introduction, Mr. Speaker, as 

per your request. 

 

A very good friend of mine who came down for the occasion in 

the east gallery is Fred Kress. Fred who . . . Actually I‟ve met 

Fred‟s parents, Dan and Doreen in 1985 before I met Fred. And 

we became friends and they became supporters and then along 

came Fred, who, as I got to know him, I recognized significant 

talent, Mr. Speaker. And I had the opportunity to hire him to be 

my constituency assistant in about 1992. And he served for 

about four years until he got a better job, at which time I 

reluctantly let him go. And then, Mr. Speaker, I was able to hire 

Fred again when I was appointed a minister of the Crown, and 

he stayed there and worked for executive government for some 

time after that. 

 

So he‟s got a long-standing interest in politics, and in fact came 

back to serve with me — after he was let go when the 

government changed — and is working as my constituency 

assistant now. And indeed, indeed, indeed, Mr. Speaker . . . 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5353 

An Hon. Member: — Just wait he‟s getting to that. 

 

Mr. Trew: — We‟re getting to the best part of the story, 

indeed, of the introduction. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to go 

directly to introduction. We‟re almost getting into another 

speech and that certainly is not necessarily considered 

appropriate. I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Oh thank you, Mr. Speaker. My very good 

friend, Fred, who also worked for the minister from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow when she was the minister of Education . . . He‟s got 

a long interest in politics that extends to when he was 14 and 

first worked in his first election. And he‟s hoping to have and I 

expect will have an even longer history, because he is one of 

five excellent candidates for nomination in the constituency of 

Regina Coronation Park for the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan. I ask, Mr. Speaker, through you, I ask for all 

members to welcome my friend, Fred Kress, to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Prior to the 

introduction, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about raising a very 

similar issue last fall, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. And I do 

this, Mr. Speaker, to talk about and to demonstrate, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are ways to deal with this problem prior to 

dealing with the motion before the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 4th, 2009, the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing made statements to the House, then 

went and made contrary statements to the media. Mr. Speaker, 

the evidence presented clearly of what the reporters had 

recorded and had seen, Mr. Speaker. We had before us what 

was obviously a situation that was going to result in this debate. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister did the appropriate thing. 

 

And I respect the actions that minister took. And I may not 

always agree with that minister, but forever there will be a 

respect that he put, he put this Assembly, its members, its rules, 

and its integrity ahead of himself and ahead of perhaps his 

government in some ways, Mr. Speaker, because when you do 

that you never know what the outcome‟s going to be. But the 

action, Mr. Speaker, was the appropriate action. And I will 

forever respect that action, Mr. Speaker, and I will forever 

respect the fact that in doing so he put this Chamber, this 

House, and its members ahead of himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s what‟s asked of each and every one 

of us in a debate such as this. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to at 

all times, in the debate in this House, Mr. Speaker, remember 

that we are here representing the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But most importantly, as I indicated a few minutes ago in the 

quoting from Parliamentary Privilege, a minister is responsible 

for the actions of his department and the people who work for 

him. But, Mr. Speaker, when a minister takes that responsibility 

and accountability and he stands up and does the right thing, 

I‟m going to in this House say, thank you. And I think the 

people of Saskatchewan should say thank you. And, Mr. 

Speaker, for that I will always respect the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is contrary to the situation we face today. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we face a debate. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take a couple of minutes and talk about the standards in 

which, and why the answers of ministers to this Assembly are 

so important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan make their decisions, 

their choices. They move forward with business decisions or 

decide not to move forward. They take opportunities or choose 

not to take opportunities, Mr. Speaker, based on the answers 

that they hear from ministers of the Crown. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the public, bankers, businessmen, farmers, the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan need to be able to rely on the 

answers provided by ministers in this Assembly. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, they make their choices, and they make decisions that 

affect them, their families, and the people of Saskatchewan 

based on the answers provided by ministers of the Crown. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s absolutely important, absolutely important 

that the answers provided, provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan prove this Assembly and oral questions are 

accurate. And . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, an individual seated in your gallery. She‟s no 

stranger to these chambers. Mr. Speaker, I‟m speaking of 

course of Leane Goldsmith. She‟s looking great. She‟s a, you 

know, devout Rider prider — got her jacket on; looking good. 

 

I should say that Leane, I‟m very happy to say, has come to 

work with me in the constituency office of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. She knows her way around Centre very 

well and Elphinstone to boot. She had done work with the 

previous member for the Legislative Assembly for Regina 

Centre, Joanne Crofford. I know she did tremendous work 

there. She‟d worked in the building in different capacities, 

finishing off as the chief of staff to the then minister of Justice, 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 



5354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

In addition to all this political savvy, Mr. Speaker, she‟s a 

painter. She‟s leaving a very successful painting business to 

come work with me back in the political fray. She‟s a mechanic, 

and she‟s a social worker. So I don‟t know if psychotherapist 

could be worked into there as well, Mr. Speaker, but, you know, 

you couldn‟t imagine a more diverse and interesting skill set to 

bring to bear. 

 

Anyway, I‟d ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

Leane Goldsmith to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to introduce a guest, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. Leave has not 

been granted. I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, as I was speaking prior to the 

introduction of guests, that the public of Saskatchewan need to 

be able to rely on the answers provided in question period to 

make important decisions. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to be 

able to give a number of examples here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the Agriculture critic was to ask the Minister of Agriculture 

whether or not the farm fuel subsidy would remain in effect for 

this crop year, Mr. Speaker, and there was any question of that 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the answer provided may well make a 

significant difference in the decisions made by those producers 

in the utilization of their . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is the 

one presented by the member regarding the motion to resolve in 

Standing Committee on Privileges, and I ask the member to 

refer his comments to the motion that he is presenting. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to refer the issue that I was speaking to, why it is relevant to the 

motion, Mr. Speaker. Business people, Saskatchewan citizens, 

make decisions which may involve thousands, tens of 

thousands, or maybe even millions of dollars based on the 

answers and the word of the ministers of the Executive Council. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they have to be able to rely on that. If I was 

making a business decision and I had heard an answer from a 

minister that was contrary to that business decision, I may put it 

off and not make or not buy a business that I had the 

opportunity to do and lose significant money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You have to understand the cause and effect of your answer, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it is the way we conduct our 

public affairs . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

on his feet? 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Leave to introduce some labour people in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s been previously indicated . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Leave to introduce the labour leader in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This has . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Northeast on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: — Leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in previous cases on the issue of 

privilege, on the issue of oral questions, Mr. Speaker, this very 

issue has been raised . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce some labour 

groups, people. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Regina 

Rosemont on his feet? 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5355 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

Terry Parker of Saskatchewan Building Trades, who stands 

opposed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I asked the 

member why the member was on his feet, and he wasn‟t given 

the authority to introduce anything. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

speaking prior to the attempt to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker, 

that in previous rulings, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of the 

importance of having oral questions answered factually, Mr. 

Speaker, it is said, the way we conduct our affairs in the 

question period, is a very serious part of the way we govern 

ourselves, Mr. Speaker, and that the answers to written 

questions, Mr. Speaker, must, must be reliable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to talk, Mr. Speaker, 

of numerous examples, Mr. Speaker, in our parliamentary 

system, Mr. Speaker. And each talks about the importance of 

the reliability of the information provided by ministers of the 

Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on January 31st, 2002, in the House of Commons, 

Brian Pallister rose on a question of privilege and accused then 

Art Eggleton, the minister of National Defence, to be in 

contempt of the House, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in that 

particular case the issue before the House of Commons was, 

should the minister be held in contempt of the House because 

on two occasions the minister made contradictory statements in 

the House regarding precisely when he had been informed 

about the involvement of Canadian troops and taking prisoners 

in Afghanistan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m trying to give an indication to all members of 

this Assembly of the types of issues that have been found in the 

past in contempt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Monday, January 28th, 2002 Peter Goldring, 

the member from Edmonton Centre-East, Canadian Alliance 

member, raised a question of privilege stating that the former 

member from Saint-Michel, Alfonso Gagliano, had deliberately 

misled the House during his tenure as Minister of Public Works 

and Government Services. The member argued that in response 

to questions from other members in the House — same 

situation we have here, Mr. Speaker — in response to questions 

from other members in the House, the former minister‟s 

responses contradicted statements made by another member of 

the House, the Hon. Jon Grant, former chairman of Canada 

Lands corporation, Mr. Speaker. A very similar situation to 

what we face today, Mr. Speaker. We have a minister who in 

fact has provided an answer that‟s been contradicted, but in this 

case by an independent officer of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are important issues that we see before our 

Legislative Assembly today — very, very similar issues, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on the issue of parliamentary privilege, 

in order to assess a claim of privilege, Mr. Speaker, the Speaker 

first hears a description of the problem from the member raising 

the complaint. Then he or she, although they‟re not even 

obliged to, Mr. Speaker, may hear comments from the other 

members, as is the practice of Speaker Milliken in the House of 

Commons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have before me an extensive document from the Speaker, 

from the Speaker in the House of Commons of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, talking about the issue of privilege. Mr. Speaker, so 

after the initial airing of the issue which was brought before this 

House, except in the very clearest of cases the Speaker will take 

the matter under advisement and permit himself time to review.  

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that in deciding whether the 

matter is of such a character as to entitle the member who has 

raised the question to move a motion that will have priority 

debate over others, there are many, many, many things to be 

taken into consideration. Mr. Speaker, ultimately it is the House 

that decides whether a breach of privilege or a contempt has 

been committed and whether punishment should be imposed as 

well as what other form that punishment will take, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in order to do that, the members of this 

Assembly have to hold, they have to hold the integrity of this 

House to a high enough value or level, Mr. Speaker, that they 

allow an investigation of the facts, Mr. Speaker. They allow the 

Committee on Privileges, Mr. Speaker, to investigate the issue 

and report back to the House. Mr. Speaker, the members of this 

Assembly ought not to take that responsibility lightly. The 

members of this Assembly should take the responsibility of the 

integrity of this House very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on March the 14th, 2001, following the 

introduction of Bill C-15, Vic Toews, then the minister of 

Justice raised a question of privilege concerning the disclosure 

of information regarding a Bill in the House of Commons, Mr. 

Speaker, another situation on the issue of contempt that could 

be raised in our Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly need to take the issue 

of contempt very seriously. As you can see in numerous cases, 

Mr. Speaker, in numerous cases, Mr. Speaker, the Parliament of 

Canada has had to deal with the issue of privilege. Mr. Speaker, 

one of the reasons I‟m articulating this is to show the 

importance of this issue in this Assembly and that we haven‟t 

had the issue for 28 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on May 11th, 2001, Peter MacKay, Progressive 

Conservative member, rose on a question of privilege 

concerning a letter the Privacy Commissioner had written to the 

Information Commissioner. Mr. Speaker, it was argued that 

such was a breach of privilege, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

important that the rights of members be respected. And in 

many, many cases in the Parliament of Canada, there have been 

questions of privilege raised. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, in this Assembly we have 

seen very few, very few situations where the issue of privilege 

has been raised. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that any 

of us were elected at the time the last issue of privilege was 

raised in this Assembly. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I think that 28 

years . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How long? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Twenty-eight years in which the issue of 

privilege has not been raised in this House. And the last 



5356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

individual that was challenged with an issue of privilege was 

Colin Thatcher, Mr. Speaker. Colin Thatcher was before, Mr. 

Speaker, any of the members of this Assembly were here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on April 17, 2002, Ralph Goodale, the then 

government house leader, rose and stated, earlier in the evening 

a Member of Parliament, Keith Martin, had attempted to seize 

and to remove the ceremonial mace which is placed in honour 

in the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, and that was raised as an issue of 

privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, privilege is the combined rights — privileges and 

immunities — of the members of this Assembly. As I‟ve 

indicated in the last number of cases, Mr. Speaker, being raised 

in the House of Commons, Mr. Speaker, that those privileges, 

powers, rights, and immunities exist, Mr. Speaker. They must 

be respected by the members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

And not since Colin Thatcher in 1982, not since Colin Thatcher, 

and not since 1982 when Colin Thatcher and the arrogance of 

that government, Mr. Speaker, has an issue of privilege been 

debated in this House. Mr. Speaker, that is a record that I don‟t 

think that we should be very proud of. 

 

But for 28 years in this Assembly we‟ve not debated the issue 

of privilege, ever since Colin Thatcher in 1982. Mr. Speaker, 

not since Colin Thatcher in 1982 has this Assembly dealt with 

this issue. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Thatcher in 1982 misled this 

House and, Mr. Speaker, we‟re dealing with the same issue 

today. Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate, but I need to urge that, 

like the members on the issue of Colin Thatcher in 1982, the 

members of this Assembly take just as seriously the issue 

before us today. And, Mr. Speaker, each and every member of 

this Assembly needs to take the issue seriously. 

 

As I spoke of earlier, Mr. Speaker, people make decisions, 

choices which may affect them significantly, based on the 

answers and information provided by their government and by 

the ministers of the Crown. And the ministers of the Crown 

provide that information in many ways, but one of the ways 

they provide that information is in question period. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I have to — as does every member of this Assembly 

and should every member of the public — be able to rely on the 

information provided to us in written questions or in oral 

questions, Mr. Speaker, because we could make decisions that 

could affect our families, our loved ones, our businesses, and 

our future dramatically. 

 

For those reasons, we have to take this issue seriously. It‟s a 

very serious issue. And for 28 years, not since 1982 and Colin 

Thatcher have we had this issue in debate in the House. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we see today a similar situation, a similar 

arrogance, and a similar problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts are starkly clear. They are precise, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s indisputable, Mr. Speaker. It‟s indisputable 

what the answer the minister provided is, and it‟s indisputable 

the reply and the evidence provided by the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner. 

 

So the members of this Assembly have little or no choice. They 

have little or no choice, Mr. Speaker, with the facts that are 

presented but to move this forward to the commission on 

privileges, Mr. Speaker, to vote in favour of this motion, Mr. 

Speaker, and to let the Committee on Privileges, Mr. Speaker, 

examine this issue in detail and bring back the recommendation 

to the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it‟s even more important that 

the minister not, in the interim period represent the Executive 

Council and answer on behalf of his department of government 

because the members of this Assembly would not be able to 

take the information provided by that minister as reliable, Mr. 

Speaker. And to allow him to remain answering questions on 

behalf of his department or ministry, Mr. Speaker, in the interim 

would say that the outcome of the investigation meant nothing, 

Mr. Speaker, because it would be saying that the information 

that he provided was reliable, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s the very 

issue at question. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, not since 1982, not since Colin Thatcher 

have the members of this Assembly faced this decision and 

faced dealing with this issue before us today. 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5327 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5327 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5327 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5327 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5328 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5328 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5328 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5328 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5328 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5328 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5328 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5329 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5329 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5352 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5353 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5329 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5329 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5329 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5329 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5330 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5330 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5330 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5330 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5330 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5331 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5331 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5331 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Navy Day in Saskatchewan 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5331 

 Centennial Navy Day 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5332 

 Historical References 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5332 

 Trails of 1885 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5332 

 Committee Meeting 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5332 

 Children’s Hospital 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5333 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Personal Health Information 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5333 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5333 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5334 

 New West Partnership Trade Agreement 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5335 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5335 

 Spot Loss Hail 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5336 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5336 

 Midwifery Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5337 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5337 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5338 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Privilege 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5338 

 



 

PRIVILEGE 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5339 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5340 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5340 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


