




















































Hansard: March 30, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 39B  TUESDAY, MARCH 30, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4607 

 March 30, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Yates.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. It now being 7 

o’clock, we are going to resume debate on the budget motion 

and amendments. I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased tonight to enter into the debate in front of the House, 

the debate around the budget and, Mr. Speaker, a debate that 

has a motion by the government and an amendment by the 

members of the opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, I declare my bias 

in advance of my comments that, Mr. Speaker, my comments 

will not favour the budget but will show support for the 

amendment in front of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to be transparent. I think it is 

important, Mr. Speaker, to be accountable because that’s how 

you build trust, Mr. Speaker, amongst the people of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was first elected to this Chamber in 2003 and 

before I am finished my remarks tonight, I am going have a 

little look back to my first year in the Chamber. And, Mr. 

Speaker, because I’ve been here since 2003, I’ve also been here 

through the three budgets now of the Saskatchewan Party under 

the leadership of the Premier, the member from Swift Current. 

And I have a few comments to make also about the collective 

budget matters over the course of the last three years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But just before I begin those comments about the budget, just a 

second to say hello to my wife Cheryl who I know is watching 

tonight on the legislative channel and who, like me, is 

lamenting the fact that we’ve lost with this budget SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network], the Saskatchewan 

television network, Mr. Speaker. We are very sad, Mr. Speaker, 

for the loss of SCN and what it’s been able to provide the 

province. And it’s important, Mr. Speaker, the potential of what 

SCN and the people behind it have brought to our wonderful 

province. 

 

I also want to say thank you to the people of The Battlefords, 

the city of North Battleford, the town of Battleford, residents 

there who have supported me through two provincial elections. 

And who continue, Mr. Speaker, to support me as we review 

how activities, directions, policies, and practices of the current 

government, Mr. Speaker, are affecting the lives of the people 

who live within the boundaries of The Battlefords. So I thank 

them for their continued support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say a few things tonight about The 

Battlefords and about how this budget affects The Battlefords. 

I’m also going to speak a little bit about the budget in general. I 

do want to talk about how this budget affects our future because 

of debt and future spending considerations or expectations. And 

because we know, Mr. Speaker, that the public is very 

concerned about health care, the delivery of health care, I’m 

also going to say a few words about health care. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m also going to talk a little bit about the 

next couple of years. What should the public expect in the next 

two years, Mr. Speaker, through the next provincial election, 

and the commitment that I am making now and will continue to 

make to support the community of The Battlefords and people 

throughout Saskatchewan through the next election and into 

government, Mr. Speaker, after November the 7th, 2011. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let’s just have a quick look at where we’re at 

and this whole question about earning the trust of the 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. Trust comes by doing what 

you say you’re going to do, saying things that are consistent 

from one day to the next, giving people the straight goods, Mr. 

Speaker. Where are we at? What are we doing? And what does 

it mean to you? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first budget that the current government, the 

Sask Party government, brought in after the 2007 general 

election, Mr. Speaker, was entitled Ready for Growth. Ready 

for Growth, Mr. Speaker, and that budget did a number of 

things. But, Mr. Speaker, here we are three budgets later and a 

number of things that the communities are telling us is that this 

province still isn’t ready to deal with the growth that’s taking 

place here. And I’m going to refer to that in a couple of 

minutes, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about how school boards and 

health districts and municipalities are managing the growth 

that’s taking place in the province. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker . . . Remember I just said the budget 

after 2007 election was entitled Ready for Growth. It created 

expectations in the Saskatchewan public and, Mr. Speaker, 

those expectations three budgets later still haven’t been met. 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is called Balanced, Forward-looking, 

Responsible. The unfortunate thing, Mr. Speaker, is the more 

we look at it, the more we realize this budget is neither 

balanced, forward-looking, or responsible.  

 

And as a result, Mr. Speaker . . . and I’ll explain some of this in 

my remarks over the course of the next couple of hours, Mr. 

Speaker. No, maybe not that long. But, Mr. Speaker, I will 

outline how it is that, if you’re saying something to the public 

and you aren’t meeting up with the expectations of the public, it 

leads to a lack of trust in what it is that you continue to say. So 

the fact that we had these difficulties going back to the budget 

after the 2007 election, Mr. Speaker, gives us reason to doubt 

what’s taking place in this budget today. 

 

So let’s just do a quick review, Mr. Speaker, of how we got to 

where we are today. Remember, Mr. Speaker, this budget 

delivered on March 24th of this year, 2010, this budget shows 

that this government’s revenue projections for the year and 



4608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

what they’re based on. Spending this year, Mr. Speaker, is close 

to $10 billion. Okay, let’s keep that in mind. 

 

Now I was elected, Mr. Speaker, in 2003. The very first budget 

that I had to deal with in the province of Saskatchewan was 

delivered on March 31st, 2004. Mr. Speaker, this was a budget 

that focused on health care, education, and youth. If you go 

back and take a look at the documents surrounding that budget 

and the delivery of programs during the course of the year, you 

know that it focused on health care, education, and youth. 

 

The total revenue in 2004 for the 2004 budget, Mr. Speaker, the 

province of Saskatchewan, the New Democratic Party 

government of Lorne Calvert as premier, had a total to spend 

$6.5 billion, Mr. Speaker, and delivered a series of programs 

that met public expectations on health care, education, and 

youth. 

 

A year later, on March 23rd, ’05, Mr. Speaker, the government, 

the New Democratic Party government of the time, delivered 

record levels of funding to health and education. Record levels. 

Never before in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, in 

2005 delivered, up to that point, record levels of funding to 

health care and education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the media at the time were saying that this budget 

builds on the province’s strong economic momentum, Mr. 

Speaker, the momentum in the province. The economic boom 

that we were to see in 2008 and ’09, Mr. Speaker, was already 

being noticed by the media in the 2005 budget, Mr. Speaker. 

The debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] forecast at the time 

was 28 per cent compared to a high of 69 per cent in 1993. 

Saskatchewan government debt in 2005 saw paydown by the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] of $180 million, and it was at its 

lowest point in 14 years during that budget year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2005 the NDP government put in place 600 

new affordable housing units and, Mr. Speaker, new residency 

seats at the College of Medicine. Mr. Speaker, that 2005 budget 

was a forward-looking budget, preparing the province for 

growth and, Mr. Speaker, meeting the responsible needs of the 

province. How much revenue did the province have in 2005, 

Mr. Speaker, and ended the year with a surplus? Seven billion. 

Seven billion, Mr. Speaker. So ’04, 6.5 billion; ’05, 7 billion, 

continuing to meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In ’06 we delivered a budget, the NDP, April the 6th, 2006. 

This was a big budget for the province of Saskatchewan. There 

were tax cuts for businesses, more training opportunities for 

young people, a freeze on tuition fees, support for vulnerable 

citizens across the province, and another $102 million in debt 

was paid down, Mr. Speaker. How much revenue did the 

province of Saskatchewan take in in the 2006 budget year — 

$7.7 million, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A billion. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — A billion dollars, 7.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. The 

Government of Saskatchewan at that time was able to meet the 

needs of education, health care, municipalities, more funding 

for municipalities under revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. There 

was money put into the pool for education property tax relief. 

And the total revenue, 7.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the last budget before the ’07 election, March 22, 2007, a 

new program in health care, Mr. Speaker, a universal program 

— $15 senior drug plan in Saskatchewan — the first major 

program start, the first major health care program in the 

province’s history in many, many years, Mr. Speaker. There 

was record investment in provincial infrastructures, more than 

$500 billion at the time, and Mr. Speaker, tax cut. Tax cut, cut 

the PST [provincial sales tax] by 2 per cent in ’07. Mr. Speaker, 

how much revenue did the province take in in that year — $7.8 

billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what has happened in the Sask Party years, Mr. Speaker? 

First budget in ’08, 9.3 billion. March ’09, 10.6 billion. And this 

year, Mr. Speaker, March 2010, almost $10 billion. We’re 

looking at almost 30 billion in three years, Mr. Speaker, and 

very little advancement to the public eye of any of our 

programs. 

 

And this budget, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing jobs cut, layoff 

notices, programs cut, taxes increased, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

looking at revenues that have exceeded anything that the NDP 

ever had to work with, Mr. Speaker. There’s been growth in the 

province — started in 2005 — and, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

found this money in the pot. Not only did they have $30 billion 

to spend over three years but, Mr. Speaker, they found two and 

a half billion dollars in a paper bag at the beginning of their 

term. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just say, to set the stage, set the tone for the 

debate on the budget, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t about, this is not 

about whether or not you’re committed to something or care 

about something. It’s about what you tell the public and what 

you can deliver with what you’ve got to work with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the serious tone, you’ve got 1, 2, 3, 4 times 7 is 28 — 

almost, almost $30 billion in four years, Mr. Speaker, that the 

NDP had to work with. The Sask Party has had more than $30 

billion in three years. And, Mr. Speaker, as you’ll see in a few 

minutes, this budget continues to attack people and, Mr. 

Speaker, we are as far from being ready to grow, for growth as 

you could imagine in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the context in which I want to make 

some remarks. First, Mr. Speaker, with regards to . . . Well 

before I do The Battlefords, there’s one more context I think we 

need to put into place here, and that is the public is concerned 

about health care. So we’ve got to a look at what’s happening in 

health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s still record spending being done in health care, Mr. 

Speaker, but the health regions, despite the fact that the 

government has more money than ever to spend, Mr. Speaker, 

the health regions in fact are seeing freezes on their budget. The 

small amount of . . . the 2 per cent transfer this year, Mr. 

Speaker, is not meeting the needs of the health regions. Health 

care is important for Saskatchewan people, and we need to 

concentrate a lot of efforts to meet the needs of people through 

health care. 

 

[19:15] 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4609 

The other issue, Mr. Speaker, the public’s taking a look at, 

they’ve had a couple of years to view the Saskatchewan Party 

government. They saw mismanagement last year, and now as 

evidence is coming forward in the debate on this budget, more 

mismanagement is being detected, Mr. Speaker: not caring 

about health care; mismanaging the funds that are available to 

us; and the third issue that’s important to Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker, affordability. 

 

We’re seeing a government that doesn’t understand the needs of 

people who can’t deal with the growth that’s taking place 

around us, Mr. Speaker, because there’s no place to live. Their 

wages aren’t keeping up. Their pensions aren’t keeping up, Mr. 

Speaker. Those people on fixed incomes, seniors across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, they cannot, they cannot manage, Mr. 

Speaker, in a growing economy. And you have to judge this 

government on what it’s doing to help those who are the most 

vulnerable when there are so many things wrong around us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the context again. This government has more 

money than any government previously except the government 

of last year, Mr. Speaker. This year’s government has more 

money than ever to spend, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got more 

needs to deal with than ever, Mr. Speaker. So what are they 

saying in this budget? Well let’s have a quick look at this and 

how does this budget suit the needs of the people in The 

Battlefords who are trying to deal with growth — ready for 

growth in the business side, ready for growth from those who 

are the most vulnerable and not being able to manage all that 

well. 

 

Well here we go, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just take a look at The 

Battlefords and what that means to the people that I represent. 

Mr. Speaker, this is very important because those people don’t 

have a voice in this government unless it comes through me, 

Mr. Speaker, because obviously, from what we’re seeing here, 

is that whatever’s been told to members on the other side has 

not been listened to or has been considered unimportant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the most significant issue throughout The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, is the ongoing commitment to the 

Saskatchewan Hospital and to those who suffer from mental 

illness, Mr. Speaker. The community in Saskatchewan that is 

concerned about people who have mental health issues for 

whom the Saskatchewan Hospital and the services that it 

provides was designed, Mr. Speaker, they can’t understand how 

it is that this government that has more revenues than ever can’t 

deliver on this commitment for this facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister on several occasions . . . In fact he was in, the 

Minister of Health was in The Battlefords the other day, Mr. 

Speaker. After questions were raised in the House, he shows up 

in The Battlefords to say, our commitment is still there. The 

budget comes down, no reference whatsoever. None. No 

reference. So, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve got is in 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, on a revenue-based budget of $7.5 billion, New 

Democrats, Mr. Speaker, were finding money to pay for a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital.  

 

The election intervenes. The new government comes in. And 

with, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Minister 

of Health has made this argument before. Not a cent there, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m going to address that. I’ll address that for him, Mr. 

Speaker, and he can ask the Minister of Finance any time he 

wants because we’ve been through this, Mr. Speaker, in 

committee. And we’ve been through it in committee with the 

Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No government, Mr. Speaker, advances 100 per cent of a 

project to a health region before there’s planning done, before 

there’s any of those things done. Mr. Speaker, this government 

in 2007 left $2.5 billion in cash for that government to spend, 

Mr. Speaker. And they spent it, but didn’t meet any of the 

commitments, Mr. Speaker. The money was not advanced 

because that’s not the way the Provincial Auditor would want it. 

And the Minister of Health . . . It’s foolishness to throw money 

out the door when you have these other abilities of government 

to manage interest and debt with that funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the commitments were there. The money was in the bank; 

the minister committed to it. The next year he finds 2.5 billion 

in the bank and an extra $2 billion in revenue, and he still can’t 

build this hospital, Mr. Speaker. Now, the minister also said in 

the House, the Minister of Health said, that he recognized I was 

minister of Health for two years. He said he has done more for 

the Saskatchewan Hospital in his two years as minister than I 

did in my two years as minister. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Now I want the public to know they’re 

clapping and cheering for that statement, Mr. Speaker. Will 

they also cheer for this? In the two years that I was minister, 

Mr. Speaker, the site was chosen, all the preliminary studies 

were done, and the design was finished, Mr. Speaker, and two 

public meetings in the city of North Battleford to outline what 

the facility would look like when it was completed. The only 

thing that was next to be done, Mr. Speaker, was to finalize the 

design for the architect to complete the project for going to 

tender. 

 

And the Minister of Health opposite could not move that project 

to tender, Mr. Speaker. In two years I took that project to design 

phase, Mr. Speaker. In two years, in two years the minister 

opposite hasn’t done one thing, not one thing, Mr. Speaker. He 

talks about 600 or $450 million advanced to Prairie North for 

design. They haven’t reached an agreement in a full year on 

what to do with that money. That money has not been spent yet 

in a full year, Mr. Speaker, because this minister hasn’t cared 

enough about it to advance that project forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can turn this on its head. I did more in two 

years than the minister opposite has done in two and a half 

years on the Saskatchewan Hospital project. And to make 

matters worse, Mr. Speaker, the hospitals in the constituency of 

the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford . . . And I can’t see him 

putting pressure on the Minister of Health to get this thing done, 

Mr. Speaker. We are caring. We are concerned. And, Mr. 

Speaker, with the amount of money that this government had to 

work with, over all the money that previous NDP governments 

have had, surely to goodness they could have advanced this 

project one more step, Mr. Speaker, in the process. 

 

That’s just one thing, Mr. Speaker. There were businesses in 

The Battlefords who saw this progress that was being made. 

They went to the public meetings. They saw the diagrams of the 



4610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

modules that were being created by the designers, Mr. Speaker, 

and they started to invest in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. They 

started to dig holes in the ground and build new hotel rooms. 

Mr. Speaker, they bought restaurants. Mr. Speaker, they bought 

gas stations. Mr. Speaker, there were investments because this 

financial commitment by the province of Saskatchewan in the 

community of The Battlefords preparing it for continued 

growth, Mr. Speaker, it was there. The community was 

responding to this commitment by government. 

 

And now for three years, Mr. Speaker, and all the evidence is 

it’s going to be another year before we hear about it again — 

Mr. Speaker, election year — it’s going to be another year 

before we hear from it again. These business people have had 

their investments sitting there, Mr. Speaker, because this 

government was not prepared for the growth that that would 

bring for the community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s more, you know, there’s more, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that we have other commitments to people in the health 

care field in The Battlefords, and other commitments as 

government actually to the delivery of government services in 

The Battlefords. The Minister of Health knows because he’s 

toured it, the regional care centre, the long-term care facility in 

Battleford, Mr. Speaker, is also in need of considerable 

renovation or replacement, Mr. Speaker. The regional health 

authority has made the Saskatchewan Hospital the number one 

priority. Mr. Speaker, another priority when the money is 

released for Saskatchewan Hospital is to pursue that regional 

care centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the last four months, the Minister of Health is 

aware that the elevator in the regional care centre, four floors, 

Mr. Speaker, hasn’t been working. They’ve been carrying 

people in wheelchairs downstairs by hand, Mr. Speaker, for 

four months because this minister can’t find a way to make that 

elevator work. Now I realize he’s not a technician and he 

doesn’t have the right toolbox, Mr. Speaker, but he is 

responsible, he is responsible for the care of the people at 

regional care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are people, there are people who are missing 

doctors appointments in Saskatoon because they can’t get from 

the fourth floor to the main floor to go out the door, Mr. 

Speaker, This is abhorrent. It’s the sort of thing when you see a 

government with $10 billion to spend, $3 billion more than was 

there a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, and they can’t find a 

way to make this work. Commitment to people, patients first. 

Which patients, Mr. Speaker? Not the patients in Sask Hospital 

regional care in The Battlefords. 

 

And there’s another project the Minister of Justice would be 

interested in, Mr. Speaker, or the Minister of Corrections. The 

Battlefords correctional facility, Mr. Speaker, is another facility 

on the Sask Hospital grounds that has been reviewed by the 

departments for several years for replacement, Mr. Speaker. 

When are we going to see some action take place there? There’s 

an opportunity to put that capital together — regional care, Sask 

Hospital, Justice, the correctional facility. You’ve got two other 

correctional facilities on those grounds, Mr. Speaker. There’s an 

opportunity to talk about that and prepare that community as 

one of these service centres, Mr. Speaker. Is the government 

thinking about it? Not at all. Were we thinking about it two and 

a half years ago, Mr. Speaker? You bet we were. We were 

thinking about it. We were talking about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on top of that, Mr. Speaker, on top of that we were 

also talking about developing that area as a new psychiatric 

nurse training program, Mr. Speaker. That training program 

used to exist in The Battlefords. It was removed from The 

Battlefords for a time, Mr. Speaker. With a brand new hospital, 

it’s time to bring that program back to The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker, ready for growth. Talk about forward-looking and 

responsible, that’s the sort of thing that the government should 

be doing if they want to remain true to the context of the 

arguments being raised in their budget documents, 

forward-looking and responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order for a community to be ready for growth, it 

needs to have some place to house people who are coming into 

the community to work. Mr. Speaker, we have a horrible record 

of this government’s response to housing needs in The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. A commitment before 2007 for $3 

million worth of funds. Mr. Speaker, that money hasn’t even 

three years later been fully committed. In fact, Mr. Speaker, at 

this point, half the money has been committed. But what 

happened? The government bought some houses that were 

already built, didn’t contribute, Mr. Speaker, to new units, new 

facilities, new places that could be considered affordable 

housing in The Battlefords to meet the needs of people, young 

people with families who are moving into The Battlefords to 

take jobs that are being created there. Mr. Speaker, to be ready 

for growth you need to ensure that you’ve got a place to house 

these people. 

 

We have an immigrant nominee program in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re all proud of it. It started before the last 

election. The new government’s been carrying on with some 

things, Mr. Speaker. But we in The Battlefords embrace this 

concept of immigrants coming in to our community. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, about 10 per cent of the program found its way into 

The Battlefords. We have a larger immigrant population in The 

Battlefords now taking advantage of jobs in the northwest part 

of the province. Mr. Speaker, there’s no place for them to live. 

We’ve got support organizations and church groups trying 

desperately to find places for these people to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also developed training programs at the 

regional college, Mr. Speaker, to help First Nations people 

coming into the community to take advantage of jobs that are 

there. Mr. Speaker, those First Nations people are not coming in 

now to go to school because there’s no place to live. There’s 

just no support for the vulnerable people, low- and 

medium-income people, Mr. Speaker, or young people going to 

school. There’s no, no support, Mr. Speaker, for them to deal 

with this growing economy. 

 

So what does this budget do, Mr. Speaker? Just prior to this 

budget, let me say that we’ve had a number of important 

signing ceremonies in The Battlefords. The Aboriginal 

economic development program, Mr. Speaker, this government 

and previous governments who designed this program have had 

signing ceremonies. The regional college is a partner in the 

Aboriginal economic development program. The health region 

is a partner. The city of North Battleford is a partner. The First 

Nations high school there, Sakewew High School, is a partner. 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4611 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got, I think it is now 12 . . . a chamber of 

commerce, Mr. Speaker, the Battlefords Chamber of 

Commerce, a partner in Aboriginal economic development. 

This is important for The Battlefords with 10 First Nations 

communities surrounding the community of The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal economic development is very 

important, engaging Aboriginal people in our economy. And, 

Mr. Speaker, ensuring that we’re working with the Aboriginal 

people to do this right has always been important in The 

Battlefords. What does this budget do, Mr. Speaker? It tore up 

every one of those contracts signed by ministers of this 

government in the last couple of years, tore up every single 

contract under the Aboriginal economic development program. 

Mr. Speaker, tore it up, pulled the funding out and said, it’s not 

working. We’re not going with that. We’ll do something else. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Where’s the trust, Mr. Speaker? The trust that those people had 

signing those agreements and saying to this government, hey, 

this is a good idea. It’ll work in the community. We want to 

work with Aboriginal people, First Nations and Métis people, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we are building an economy that 

benefits everybody. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a critical piece to be 

able to work with the First Nations and Métis people in our 

community because in all, the populations are growing. 

 

So we’ve got an immigrant program, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

working. We’ve got an Aboriginal economic development 

program that’s nonexistent now, can’t be working. We’ve got a 

college program that can’t keep up because there’s no housing, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve got young people moving in; they’re 

moving out again because they’ve got no place to live. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got seniors on fixed incomes who are 

seeing their buildings, their apartment buildings being bought 

up by out-of-province landlords. And because they’re buying, 

those buildings are being purchased with leveraged money, Mr. 

Speaker, the rents have gone up extraordinarily — 40 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, in some of the buildings in The Battlefords. Those 

seniors on fixed incomes, number one, can’t afford to stay 

there. Number two, they’ve got no place to go because, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no other affordable accommodation. 

 

Growth, Mr. Speaker, we encourage growth. We want to see 

growth. We want to continue the growth in this province and 

throughout The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. We support the 

initiatives that are going to do that, but we also have to have the 

programs that ensure that everybody will, number one, benefit 

from that growth and, number two, will not be disadvantaged 

by that growth. Government has a role to play there and this 

government has failed in their actions, programs, policies, and 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. 

 

One of the other key things, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

came out with right after the election in 2007 — Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This was going to help us to 

manage the growth going forward. Enterprise Saskatchewan 

moved out into rural Saskatchewan and throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker. They got rid of the regional economic 

development authorities that were quite local — local people 

involved, local money moving in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the regional economic development programs 

were done away with, but enterprise regions were created. 

They’re larger. There wasn’t really any need to buy in. People 

have been struggling in rural Saskatchewan to actually figure 

out what this enterprise region is supposed to do, how it’s 

supposed to provide a benefit. 

 

But there’s been a lot of dedicated people in our communities, 

Mr. Speaker, who have dedicated themselves to making 

economic development on a regional basis work. And, Mr. 

Speaker, despite the fact that they have very little support from 

the province of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party government, 

they’ve been trying to make it work, Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Well what does this budget do, Mr. Speaker? Cuts the funding 

for those economic development regions, Mr. Speaker. Cuts the 

funding, so that there’s now people who didn’t know what they 

were supposed to be doing, who are doing things that are 

providing some benefit, and now they’re being told, oh we 

don’t have the money to help you continue to do the things that 

need doing. 

 

There’s disappointment. There’s frustration and, Mr. Speaker, 

the expectations that this government has created amongst the 

people who are going to deliver this at the local level, the 

expectations have been dashed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Actually there’s a lot of expectations that have been dashed. If 

you are a person with chronic back pain, Mr. Speaker, you 

expected your government to continue to support your 

chiropractic care. This has indeed, Mr. Speaker, been a program 

that is a copayment program, Mr. Speaker. Our health care, our 

health insurance program has always sought to improve on the 

number of services that are insured. This government in this 

budget has decided to actually remove an insured service as 

opposed to adding to the insured services. 

 

Throughout my time in government, Mr. Speaker, I saw a 

number of new insured services added to the mix. This is the 

first time, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen a service that was taken out of 

insurance, Mr. Speaker. So if you have chronic back pain or 

you’ve been seeing a chiropractor, Mr. Speaker, your 

expectations about government protecting your health services, 

your expectations have been dashed, Mr. Speaker. This 

government had a contract. It had a contract negotiated, and 

with this budget, Mr. Speaker, it tears up that contract and says, 

you’re on your own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipalities had a contract. They negotiated a 

deal with this government, the Sask Party government. 

Municipalities had a deal, Mr. Speaker, that said we recognize 

that with fluctuations in the economy for example, like maybe 

potash prices might not be what you think they are, Mr. 

Speaker, they put together a negotiated deal whereby something 

not affected by resource revenues — the PST — could be used 

as a formula, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the municipalities had 

stable funding. So, Mr. Speaker, the municipalities agreed, 

we’ll take a percentage of the PST. If the economy fluctuates 

somewhat and there’s a drop in retail sales and PST revenues 

drop, we’ll take a drop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the province was growing and the municipalities wanted a 

deal that said, with the province growing, we need to feel that 



4612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

the province’s revenues will grow with us. So they reached a 

deal: 1 per cent of the PST. Not a big deal to the government, 

Mr. Speaker, but a big deal to municipalities. They had the deal, 

Mr. Speaker. This budget dashes their expectation of having 

that deal completed. Mr. Speaker, they are now waiting another 

year for this government to decide what to do. Record, record 

revenues, Mr. Speaker — again, $10 billion in revenue, Mr. 

Speaker — and they had to cancel this deal. 

 

In my own city, in my own city of North Battleford, Mr. 

Speaker, night before last, city council met. They’ve determined 

they need about 4 per cent more revenue to balance their budget 

— $600,000 to be exact, Mr. Speaker. Because this government 

couldn’t keep its word, couldn’t be trusted to keep its word, Mr. 

Speaker, property taxes in The Battlefords are going to go up as 

they are, as we know, in Saskatoon, Regina, and elsewhere. 

 

So the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, there was a deal on Aboriginal 

economic development that this budget throws out. There was a 

deal on chiropractic services. This budget throws it out. There 

was a deal, Mr. Speaker, on municipal revenue sharing. This 

budget throws it out. What about school boards, Mr. Speaker? 

There’s been discussions over the years, Mr. Speaker, to try and 

build equity between the various school divisions and, more 

importantly, between the Catholic schools and the public school 

system. Mr. Speaker, this government has been in those 

negotiations and they made a promise, Mr. Speaker, that they 

would deal with this equity issue. Well, Mr. Speaker, their 

expectations — the school boards’ expectations — on this 

budget, again with record revenues, that it would be fixed. 

Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, this budget dashes their expectations. 

That equity issue is not being fixed. And more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, these school divisions are left with the uncertainty, the 

uncertainty of how are they going to get through their year with 

the revenues that have been allocated to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things we learned in question period 

this week is that teacher salaries currently being negotiated are 

not included in this budget. Not included in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And so either the teachers are not going to get a raise 

or a salary incremental increase, Mr. Speaker, or two, the deficit 

of this budget is going to increase before the end of the year. 

Those are the only two things that could happen. I think that 

because this government says this budget is balanced, but 

they’ve kept a lot of funding away from this budget — teachers’ 

salaries in particular — this budget really, Mr. Speaker, won’t 

be balanced by the end of the year. 

 

Telling the public . . . I see you standing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. The member 

from North Battleford has the floor. The other conversations are 

distracting. I’m finding it difficult to hear what he has to say. If 

you have conversations you’d like to carry on, I’d appreciate it 

if you’d go behind the bar. 

 

The member from North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So for all 

intents and purposes again, there was a deal in the making with 

the school boards, a pending deal with the teachers. The 

expectations are dashed, but by golly, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

bigger issue is that the promise to Saskatchewan people that this 

budget is balanced, and the public is now told the teachers’ 

potentially negotiated settlement isn’t included in the budget — 

well for all intents and purposes that means this budget really 

isn’t balanced. We know it’s not balanced on the summary 

financial statement, and we know that it’s not going to be 

balanced when all these issues are thrown into the mix. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again we’re down to the area of trust. Can the 

public of Saskatchewan, after reviewing all the items in this 

budget, trust this government to deliver in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people? The bottom line is, of course, no they 

can’t. 

 

Another matter, Mr. Speaker, we rely on government to support 

our municipalities in a number of ways and sometimes in ways 

that we wouldn’t even think about, Mr. Speaker. And 

sometimes the little things are really important to people. 

 

The last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, everybody in this 

province has had a concern about West Nile virus. Mr. Speaker, 

there have been people in North Battleford and other parts of 

the province who have found themselves in the intensive care 

unit of our hospitals. Mr. Speaker, near-death experiences with 

West Nile. Mr. Speaker, where does West Nile come from? It 

comes from mosquitoes. From the mosquito, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And who takes care of the mosquitoes in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, but our municipalities. Our municipalities do a 

spraying program. Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget, if you can 

believe it, at a time when West Nile is a concern to the public, 

this budget significantly reduces the mosquito control program 

in the province of Saskatchewan. The city of North Battleford 

has already said in a news release today that they will not be 

spraying as much this year as they have last year because 

they’re going to be short funds because the province has cut the 

mosquito control program. Indirectly, Mr. Speaker, to save a 

few thousand dollars in a $10 billion budget, the public could 

be more susceptible to West Nile disease. Mr. Speaker, this is 

another expectation that the public has, that the government is 

going to think of the things that are important and then not 

delivering on those things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is wearing down here. And 

while I still have quite a few more things to say, I want to 

indicate to the people in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, who may 

be watching here tonight, that there’s a number of issues that 

they need to pay attention to that go beyond The Battlefords. 

And while I won’t have time to go through lots of them, Mr. 

Speaker, I want the people in The Battlefords . . . members 

opposite are already aware of these, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve got to watch what’s happening to the debt and the deficit 

in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve got to watch what’s 

happening to the privatization of our Crowns and our health 

care system. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to listen carefully to the 

words that are used by ministers of the Crown and the way in 

which they describe what’s happening. The most recent 

example, Mr. Speaker, is the Finance minister speaking to the 

chamber of commerce in Saskatoon and saying, we’ve got to 

look at a harmonized sales tax and then coming outside, Mr. 

Speaker, and saying to the public, oh, no, I probably could be 

misinterpreted. Well if you read the comments that the minister 

made inside the meeting of the chamber of commerce, there’s 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4613 

no room for misinterpretation, Mr. Speaker. He realized, or he 

was told by the Premier, he realized that what he said to that 

group of people, where he felt comfortable, couldn’t be said to 

the public. And so he changed his tune, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to give the Minister of Finance credit, he didn’t say, I was 

misquoted or I misspoke myself. He said, I could be 

misinterpreted. Bottom line was, he said there’s room for a 

debate on the harmonized sales tax. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, let’s watch for a number of other things. 

The budget also says that, for example, when I talk about the 

Crowns, we’ve got to be careful what’s going on there. The 

budget, and I want to point this out on page 19, “. . . SaskPower 

intends to partner with the private sector to ensure the reliability 

and long-term security of the system.” Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome new power generation in this province. We’ve always 

supported SaskPower. They’ve got expertise that goes beyond 

anything that exists anywhere else in this country. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can’t be sending profits intended for 

redistribution in the province of Saskatchewan, we can’t be 

sending those dollars outside the province of Saskatchewan 

simply because the idea of partnering with the private sector is 

something the government members want to do. 

 

And on health care, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a chance to have 

surgeries done outside the hospitals for a number of years in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health has deferred 

for so long the surgical care centre that was planned for the city 

of Regina that could be duplicated in the city of Saskatoon. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Health has deferred this for so long 

that now he’s in a panic mode and he wants to privatize surgical 

stuff. He had the audacity, Mr. Speaker, to stand in the House 

here; he had the audacity to stand in the House and say that the 

public could care less about this process of privatizing the 

health care system. 

 

And then today, Mr. Speaker, he says, well I only meant the 

ambulance service, Mr. Speaker. They’re privatized already. 

But let’s keep in mind a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. If you’re 

getting in an ambulance, you aren’t going to a day surgery 

centre, Mr. Speaker. You’re not going to a day surgery centre. 

And number two, ambulance services were not universally 

insured. They weren’t a universal insured service, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve always been a copay. The minister is misleading the 

public, Mr. Speaker, the public, when he talks about he only 

was referring to ambulances when in fact he’s privatizing the 

surgical or the intrusive part of the health care system. And we 

have to be very careful, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the words of 

the ministers opposite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just given the time, I want to conclude by 

saying that, Mr. Speaker, this was an interesting budget in that 

it fails to deliver on the expectations of Saskatchewan people. It 

shows continued mismanagement of the provincial economy — 

a growing economy that we all support. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it fails to deal with the most vulnerable in 

our communities, Mr. Speaker. I could say a lot about housing 

across the province. The member from Saskatoon Centre started 

on that in his remarks earlier today. 

 

And I said, Mr. Speaker, this was an interesting budget. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it is even more interesting when you add it to the 

previous two budgets and you start to see the pattern 

developing, and that’s what I mean by saying I want to 

conclude with remarks about the future of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very positive outlook, that is New 

Democrats and the people of Saskatchewan, a very positive 

outlook for the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

so much opportunity and ability here. Mr. Speaker, we were 

able to ensure that health care, education, the vulnerable people 

in our communities, Mr. Speaker, were able to feel a part of our 

wonderful province when the revenues were six and a half 

billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. This government now has $10 

billion and nobody feels included. Nobody feels included. They 

feel that the government is turning their backs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what about the future? Mr. Speaker, this government will, 

based on the direction set by this budget, will mismanage their 

way through the next 12 months. We will be looking at Public 

Accounts a year from now with the government saying what 

went wrong. We know what’s going wrong, Mr. Speaker. Their 

spending projections are completely out of whack. Their 

priorities are completely out of whack. 

 

And next year, Mr. Speaker, they’ll come in with the last 

budget intended for an election, Mr. Speaker, and they’re going 

to try to rebuild expectations in Saskatchewan people. Those 

expectations, Mr. Speaker, have already been pushed down to 

the level whereby people are saying, can we support the New 

Democrats in the 2011 election? Mr. Speaker, you bet they can. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I was listening carefully 

to the member from The Battlefords as he made his presentation 

tonight, and I notice the use of the words, misleading the public. 

And according to Beauchesne’s, on page 146, “Misleading the 

public” has been ruled unparliamentary language. I would invite 

the member from The Battlefords to withdraw his comments. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, on your advice, I withdraw and 

apologize. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Our thanks to the 

member. The debate continues. I recognize the member from 

Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I really appreciate the opportunity to speak to 

this budget. I’ve sat many years on that side in opposition, and 

we went through budget after budget watching the NDP in 

government, and it’s amazing in a period of two and a half 

years how this province has swung around. 

 

We had the member for The Battlefords here a few minutes ago 

saying about all the wonderful things they did in health. He 

designed so many of the new hospitals in the province, but they 

forgot one thing — they forgot to build any of them, Mr. 

Speaker. Well our Health minister has changed that, turned that 

around, and there’s some good things happening in the health 

care system. And the member from The Battlefords should 



4614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

watch closely because he was the Minister of Health and did 

nothing for the North Battleford hospital, absolutely nothing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, so many good things happening in this 

province right now, and I think one of the best indications of 

that positive attitude out there is the population of this province 

is growing at a rate that we’ve probably never seen in the past, 

Mr. Speaker — over 30,000 new people in this province in the 

last two years. The last time there has been growth like that I 

believe was 1929, 1930. Now there’s probably a good reason 

for that, Mr. Speaker, because in the years between the majority 

of the time the NDP or the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation] were the government, and there was no way this 

province was going to grow under that government and under 

that leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we go and watch the things happening in 

Saskatchewan, we see that there’s more jobs now than there 

ever has been in the past, in the history of this province. We 

have so many reasons, Mr. Speaker, to be optimistic in this 

province right now and I want to talk about a number of those 

things. This province has so many resources and we’re so 

fortunate. 

 

We’ve gone through the recession, and in this province we’ve 

felt the recession, but nothing like other provinces have. We see 

budgets coming down with big deficits right now, Mr. Speaker. 

Ontario alone is envious of what’s happening here in 

Saskatchewan, when they used to be a leader in the country in 

Canada and we were at the back of the pack under the NDP. All 

of a sudden we’re at the front of the pack and, Mr. Speaker, this 

budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget, the last couple of 

budgets are preparing for growth and for the future, and I think 

that’s why we’re seeing this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have potash and diamonds, uranium, 

oil, gas, coal, and then we have a vibrant agriculture sector in 

this province that drives about 20 per cent of our economy. So 

many good things, Mr. Speaker, going for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a balanced budget this year, something 

that would also be the envy of every province in this country. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward and we come forth with a 

responsible budget, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to work 

in that direction. But at the same time we’ve cut spending about 

$121 million, Mr. Speaker, and I think that was a worthwhile 

exercise to go through this time. Dollars were tighter in this 

process and every one of us on this side of the House felt the 

belt-tightening situation and have dealt with it in a team effort 

with people of this province, and I think people expected far 

worse than this budget brought forward. And I think to a great 

degree people in this province are satisfied that we’re heading 

in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about infrastructure, highways and 

roads, because they’re near and dear to me. And I want to thank 

some of the ministers here, municipal government, highways — 

$632 million of infrastructure, 177 million for municipal 

projects, 302 million for roads and highway projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been some of the members of the 

opposition, I’ve heard them talking about the cuts to municipal 

funding. Well I want to give one example and I think it’s timely 

because a number of us have heard about the funding for 

Regina in the last couple of weeks, month, and I just want to 

remind people — members opposite and actually members on 

this side to bring it to their attention — that in the last budget 

for the NDP under ’07-08, the revenue sharing for the city of 

Regina was $16 million. Now I want to highlight the cut that 

we’ve done to revenue sharing for the city of Regina. It went 

from 16 million to 26 million. Some cut, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a $10 million increase just for the city of 

Regina. 

 

We have cities like Saskatoon and municipalities and smaller 

cities around the province who also have shared in the good 

fortune of the additional dollars that we’ve put in into municipal 

government, and it’s been a long time coming. They’ve been 

waiting a long time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been waiting 

16 years, from the downloading of the NDP to what they saw in 

the last two and a half years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also think I would be remiss to if I didn’t talk 

about the education tax. Well the member for The Battlefords 

wants to talk about the debt. Here’s a government that was there 

for 16 years, and do you know what, Mr. Speaker? The debt 

was exactly the same or higher when they left office as when 

they came to in 1991 — not one cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they used to have, when the NDP was in 

government, they had the rainy day fund. We’ve got the growth 

and stabilization fund. The difference, Mr. Speaker, is there was 

no money in the rainy day fund. So every time they were short 

of dollars and pulled money out of the rainy day fund, the debt 

went up, Mr. Speaker. We saw that on how many occasions? 

And they used that rainy day fund and raised the debt to try and 

balance their books, Mr. Speaker. We actually have money in 

our growth and security fund and it’ll be there for future, our 

kids and into the future, Mr. Speaker. And it’s dollars, I think, 

that are put away for times ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education tax on property, it’s something the 

previous government didn’t deal with for those 16 years. Mr. 

Speaker, it was something that farmers, property owners right 

across this province had asked us to deal with. They’d asked 

them and got nowhere. They’d had some band-aids put on and 

then ripped off. Mr. Speaker, we’ve dealt with that last year. 

The Minister of Education dealt with it last year. The member 

for Rosetown went around the province to see how we could 

work this out, and we’ve set the mill rate to 7.09 mills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter where I go out there; people 

would like better programs in agriculture, and we’re working to 

do that. But the one thing I think everybody is consistent out 

there about is they say thank you for the education tax relief on 

farm land because it was the most unfair tax there was. So, Mr. 

Speaker, when something like that happens and we’re leaving 

more dollars in the producer’s pocket, I think it’s very, very 

worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just talk a couple of minutes about health 

care and the job our Health minister is doing. Mr. Speaker, this 

is the largest Health budget in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the Health minister has dealt with a number 

of issues out there in this budget. Autism’s one, where there’s 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4615 

two and a half million dollars for a pilot, and I think that’s been 

needed for a long time. Isn’t going to solve all the problems out 

there, Mr. Speaker, but we need to start dealing with problems 

like that right across the province. 

 

But the minister has talked about addressing surgical wait 

times. He’s also talked about doctor recruitment, nurse 

recruitment. In fact, nurse recruitment, he’s done a tremendous 

job in that forefront. I think we’re, what, over 600 nurses that 

we’ve brought into this province, and adding. 

 

There’s something, Mr. Speaker, that goes back, I would say it 

goes back to 1991 and 1992 and I think many of the members 

here remember this. When the NDP opposite closed 52 

hospitals, chased nurses out of this province, chased doctors out 

of this province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

member from Moose Jaw is criticizing me for remembering 

back. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. I think for the full 16 

years they were in power they talked about Grant Devine and 

blamed him for all of their woes. And she’s criticizing me two 

years later for remembering some of the things they did when 

they were in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t stop at 52 hospitals. Does anybody 

remember that big hospital just out here in the southeast corner 

of the city? It was called the Plains. Now it was good for 

Regina but it was very, very good for southern Saskatchewan. 

You could see it miles back. You knew where you were going. 

You didn’t have to park about 20 blocks away to get to the 

hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did they do? They closed that hospital on top 

of the 52 others, but at the same time created the shortage of 

doctors and nurses in this province by chasing them out when 

they closed those hospitals. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

commend the Minister of Health for a number of good 

initiatives that he’s done in health care because my constituency 

is reliant on our health care just like every other constituency in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just speaking of health care, I just want to read 

you a couple of quotes that were in this morning’s Leader-Post. 

And I don’t often quote Murray Mandryk unless it’s something 

favourable about me I like to quote, but this is about the Health 

minister. And I think this is worth listening to, Mr. Speaker. 

Murray goes on to write a number of things here, but I get into 

some of the quotes. And I quote: 

 

With some 28,700 Saskatchewan people on the surgical 

waiting list (as of Dec. 31) including 4,300 who had 

waited longer than 12 months and 1,700 who’d waited 

longer than 18 months, we clearly need to do something 

differently. After all, it would be dumber to repeat the 

same things that haven’t worked in the past. 

 

I rest my case from the previous government. I go on to also 

quote Murray in this morning’s paper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A “surgical reference guide website for patients and 

physicians to help them choose the most appropriate 

specialist” is smarter. “Building electronic medical and 

health records” is smarter. “Expanding the Surgical 

Information System to maximize operating room time” is 

smarter. “Improving how operating time is allotted” is 

smarter . . . “Making better use of acute-care beds through 

timelier patient transitions to long-term beds” is smarter. 

 

Now I believe if Murray says it, it’s got to be smarter. I agree 

with Murray, Mr. Speaker. And I hope Murray’s up tonight and 

Murray’s listening because we need a favourable write-up on 

agriculture in the province, and I expect Murray to do that. 

 

[20:00] 

 

But Murray doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker, he even goes on. 

And I was so impressed, I was reading the second page of 

Murray’s article this morning. Murray goes on to say and I 

quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Remember that defeated NDP convention resolution a few 

years ago that would have required Saskatchewan doctors 

to ignore test results provided by out-of-province private 

MRIs — even [even, Mr. Speaker] if they indicated a 

brain tumour or cancer? That simply wasn’t smart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won’t talk anymore, I won’t talk anymore, Mr. 

Speaker, on health care. I rest my case. Murray and I are happy 

with where we’re going, and I think that’s the right direction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite might want to go to coffee right 

now because I’m sure they’re not interested in this. I’m going to 

talk a little ag here tonight. And I think, well I just have to look 

around at my colleagues on this side of the House, and I think 

we represent every rural riding in this province and then a little 

more. But, Mr. Speaker, agriculture was ignored for so many 

years in this province, it was high time, I think, that there was a 

government change. We started to work with producers, 

whether you’re on the grain side or the cattle side out there, in 

designing programs but paying more attention to agriculture 

when we come to budgeting. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as everybody knows, last year was the 

highest budget in the history of the province of Saskatchewan 

for agriculture. Mr. Speaker, this budget this year — due to less 

costs for AgriStability, lower grain prices, and then the cost for 

crop insurance drops accordingly — has dropped somewhat, but 

still the third highest budget in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are paying attention to rural Saskatchewan and 

to farmers right across this province. AgriStability program, Mr. 

Speaker, $125 million for AgriStability. Crop insurance, $127 

million, Mr. Speaker. These are the second or third highest 

budget in the history of the province of Saskatchewan for 

programming, Mr. Speaker. AgriInvest, $32 million. Mr. 

Speaker, that brings it to a total of $283 million for farm 

programming for producers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that shows we’re paying attention. Have 

we solved all the problems out there? Not for a minute. I’d be 

the last to say that. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re working to improve 

on programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the farm, ranch, and water 

program a little bit. And I remember back, it was only two years 



4616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

ago that the Southwest had a drought right across the 

Southwest. Hadn’t had much rain for three or four years, and 

the members opposite totally ignored the Southwest. The Ag 

ministers wouldn’t go out there. They wouldn’t take a look at 

how bad it was. And, Mr. Speaker, when we come in as 

government and I was named Ag minister, I did go out there 

and tour. And I’ve never seen drought like that in my life. I’m 

from the east side and we have droughts there, but nothing 

compared to what the Southwest had. And they had absolutely 

no attention paid to them from the previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we brought in the farm, ranch, and water program. 

And again didn’t solve all their problems but, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re digging. I think we’re up to about 70 community wells. 

We’re working with RMs [rural municipality] and farmers out 

there right across the province, but the majority are in the 

Southwest. Those wells are going to be there for the next 30 or 

40 years, and we may go two or three or four droughts in that 

period of time. Those wells are going to be there to help with 

that problem. 

 

On-farm wells, there’s many, many on-farm wells being dug 

through that program, and many, many dugouts, Mr. Speaker, 

being dug. And the positive part, Mr. Speaker, two years ago, 

dugouts were dry out in the Southwest, and we’re hearing in a 

number of areas out there this year that some of the dugouts that 

have been dug and some of the dugouts that were there, are full 

to the brim. And that’s one of the best signs I can see for 

southwest Saskatchewan that we have seen for many years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in agriculture we’re also going to bring some 

efficiencies to extension services. I want to remind the members 

opposite and compare our budget to previous budgets. Our 

budgets, we’ve added, we added actually an office to 

Kindersley. We added one to Watrous. We added one to Moose 

Jaw, Mr. Speaker. So now we’re up to 10 extension offices in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  

 

Now that’s comparable to budgets past when the members 

opposite closed 22 rural service centres in one budget . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well there they go again, Mr. 

Speaker. The member for Moose Jaw, really hitting a nerve 

over there tonight because she doesn’t want us to remember 

what they did. All I’m doing is comparing ag budgets today to 

ag budgets of the past. Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t just the 22 rural 

service centres. One other budget they came in, they closed nine 

more. So you add them up, Mr. Speaker — 31 rural offices 

closed around rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

paying attention to the producers in this province and farmers 

and ranchers around the province. That to me is ignoring them. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. I’m having 

trouble hearing what the member is saying. I was particularly 

interested to see if there was more water programs for the 

Southwest. The member from Melville-Saltcoats has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well I want to thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Really, actually I don’t have any more water 

programs, but I have a coyote program. I have a coyote program 

that will work for the Southwest, Mr. Speaker. And why I 

mention that tonight, Mr. Speaker, is because I think it was the 

Leader of the Opposition said the coyote program is silly. Now 

I want to explain the program because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think there’s too many farmers and ranchers out there that are 

losing calves and lambs and sheep that thought that program 

was silly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year on an average, just the average take out 

in harvest, was just over 16,000 coyotes were taken out of this 

province. Right now with the coyote control program, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re getting upwards of 40,000 coyotes. And that’s a 

silly program? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. I know it’s 

something the NDP wouldn’t have done because again, you’d 

have to pay some attention to rural Saskatchewan to actually 

know there was a problem out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that again, it isn’t going to solve all the 

problems with wildlife. So we’ve gone one step further, Mr. 

Speaker, and we brought in the wildlife compensation program. 

About a week ago we announced this program. And I hope the 

Leader of the Opposition doesn’t think this is silly because I 

know every producer in this province that has trouble with 

wildlife is very appreciative of that this program was brought in 

place. 

 

Now if a producer out there, Mr. Speaker, loses a calf, a cow, or 

a sheep producer loses an animal, now we will pay for 100 per 

cent compensation for that animal. This is the first time in 

history there’s been a program like this put in place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

And the howls can come up from the other side, but I notice for 

16 years, that’s the loudest noise that has come out of the NDP 

when you’re talking about rural Saskatchewan and farmers, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on top of the 100 per cent compensation 

for deaths out there, we will also pay 80 per cent if an animal is 

injured and needs services of a vet. We’ll pay up to 80 per cent 

of the value of that animal for vet services, and I think that’ll be 

needed in a number of cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wildlife compensation program doesn’t really 

stop there either. We have a predation program where we 

actually doubled the funding for that and it really deals with the 

same problem, except the exception, it wasn’t working that well 

in the coyote situation. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can make fun 

of this, but I guess when you ignore agriculture in rural 

Saskatchewan for so long, it actually is a laughing matter. 

Because I think we saw over on this side of the House, by the 

representation that the members on this side of the House have, 

Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan in rural 

Saskatchewan know full well how much attention was paid by 

the NDP in the last 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not that I have anything against coyotes and 

gophers, but gophers are on the list for southwest Saskatchewan 

and the rest of the province too. Mr. Speaker, another problem 

that they had out there when I toured out there, and I couldn’t 

believe the damage that gophers were doing in southwest 

Saskatchewan, especially when the drought was on. So we 

brought the gopher rebate program in, Mr. Speaker, where now 

we’ll pay 50 per cent of the cost of bait for producers to deal 

with the problem. Again, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t solve all the 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4617 

problems, but I think it’ll help a little bit out there and help 

producers in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think, and I won’t go on here for long, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think one of the biggest differences between the 

members opposite . . . and I think we heard the member for 

Nutana when she was commenting on one of the Bills — The 

Agri-Food Act, I believe it was — and she was talking about the 

cattle association, the new Saskatchewan cattle association and 

she was saying, well all they are is just buddies of the Sask 

Party, and really we’re paying all that attention to them. 

 

I might tell her tonight, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

cattle association actually represents every producer in this 

province that pays a check-off. So if we’re paying attention to 

them, actually we’re paying attention to every livestock 

producer in this province. And again, Mr. Speaker, I think it 

highlights the fact that the members opposite do not understand 

rural Saskatchewan, but even more importantly, do not 

understand agriculture and ignore it and find it easy to ignore. 

 

But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that when the members 

opposite get up to discuss a Bill like this, they would probably 

be smart to do a little research and just find out what 

agriculture’s about and find out, actually check with the 

organizations like the cattle organization before they get up and 

criticize them and say they’re nothing but buddies of the Sask 

Party. I will tell her one thing — they’re probably now, after 

she spoke, very good supporters of the Sask Party if they 

weren’t before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d love to go on tonight, but I know a number 

of my colleagues want to get up and speak. I know the member 

for Kelvington’s going to get up, the member for Canora-Pelly, 

so many good things to say over here, Mr. Speaker. So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be voting against the 

amendment, and I will be supporting this budget and proud to 

do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve spent the last couple of days listening to speeches 

that my colleagues were giving in the House and also kind of 

planning the things that were important and I felt I wanted to 

point out. But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture and his 

comments, I just have to add a few things. 

 

You know, the minister talked about what a wonderful job he’s 

done in Agriculture but forgot . . . and did a very quick run over 

the fact that they’re removing just about $93.5 million out of 

the income stabilization program. And the reason? He said, well 

commodity prices are lower, and he just kind of skimmed over 

it. 

 

Well the livestock industry is having trouble. Pork industry’s 

pretty well gone in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s a struggle 

and has been for a while, and the minister’s so busy patting 

himself on the back saying, what a wonderful job I’ve done. So, 

Mr. Speaker, he needs to look in the mirror and maybe have a 

look at some of these programs a little more closely before he 

starts taking an awful lot of credit. And in fact he was having 

such a hard time with this budget, and he knows how bad it is, 

in many cases, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t even talk about the 

budget. He talked about 16 years ago. 

 

Well, you know, whatever happened 16 years ago, he’s in 

government. Do you know what? He’s in government almost 

three years and what has he done? Not much, Mr. Speaker, not 

much. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, do you know I’m very pleased, I’m very 

pleased to have an opportunity to stand up and add my 

comments about the budget that was just tabled in the House. 

But first, Mr. Speaker, before we get into that, I truly want to 

pass along a thank you to my staff in the Moose Jaw office. 

They have been with me for a number of years. They hold down 

the fort and address the concerns of not only the Moose Jaw 

Wakamow constituency, but others. When constituents come 

into our office, we try and help them as much as we can, 

whether they live directly in the constituency or not. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say to my staff, Stacey and 

Charlene, thank you very much for the work that you do on a 

day-to-day basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many of the previous comments that have 

been made have talked about whether this budget is balanced or 

whether it isn’t, how big the deficit’s going to be. And I mean 

we know by the government’s own documents that we’re 

running at about a $622 million deficit in this budget. And the 

questions have also been asked about, what’s the debt? How 

much is the debt going to grow in this, just in this year alone? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the government’s own 

documents — not mine, not the member for Regina Dewdney’s 

— but they’re the government’s budget documents, and they’re 

quite clear. Even though they put out a press release, and in 

every one of their speeches they stand up and they say, the 

budget’s balanced, it’s a balanced budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to look at their own documents. And it says right in the 

summary financial, it says there will be a summary deficit of 

$622.7. Oops, I forgot the million, Mr. Speaker. It’s kind of big 

figures, but it’s millions, $622.7 million deficit. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the government’s own 

documents — province of Saskatchewan, that’s the one. 

Doesn’t have the wheat sheaf on it anymore, Mr. Speaker; it has 

the coat of arms. You’ll be well aware of these documents, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’ve changed from the wheat sheaf. That 

was another thing they said they weren’t going to do, was get 

rid of the wheat sheaf and go to the coat of arms but, lo and 

behold, it’s everywhere. We know it’s been done by stealth like 

many other things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the summary statement of 

debt and it gradually increases — well not gradually, it 

increases substantially over this next year — when we look at 

2009 summary debt for the province of Saskatchewan of 

7,946.3 billion, and when we look at the estimated summary 

deficit for 2011, we’re up to $9.1 billion. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

guess that’s what the documents say, but if the government says 

it’s balanced and debt isn’t going up, who am I to argue with 



4618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

their own documents, Mr. Speaker? But, Mr. Speaker, we will 

leave that . . . well I have one more comment before we leave it. 

 

The Minister of Health, and on a number of issues over the past 

couple of weeks, has got up and said, well every other province 

does it, all nine plus two provinces. I think that was Sask Party 

math. He kind of got it screwed up one question period. He said 

all nine plus two provinces, but there’s only ten. But we’ll give 

him credit. Maybe he was having stress that day. You know, 

you never know. 

 

But anyway he said, well other provinces do this. Other 

provinces do that. Well, Mr. Speaker, just a word of advice to 

the Minister of Finance. Other provinces use summary financial 

statements. So maybe instead of playing this cat-and-mouse 

game and the government playing fast and loose with the 

numbers in this bit of a shell game, why don’t they just go to a 

summary financial system? That’s the way the reporting’s done. 

Citizens of this province would see an overall financial 

statement that’s clear and accountable, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

one thing this government ran on, but I think that’s one of the 

promises that they’ve kind of forgotten. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll leave the whole debate about whether it’s 

balanced or not, and whether the debt of this province is 

growing. And there is a couple of things that I do want to touch 

on because I feel it’s very important. And I think one of the 

things that struck me first and foremost was the lack of 

openness and accountability in this budget. And that’s very 

concerning, and many taxpayers in this province also feel that 

it’s a huge concern. And it’s a total lack of openness and 

accountability by this government. 

 

And what we’ve seen is really burying numbers and spinning 

numbers to their own advantage, and not being upfront in 

discussing the impacts of this budget with the citizens. And it’s 

impacts that citizens of this province will feel, may not be right 

away, but I know that before the end of this session we will 

hear many, many, many complaints and concerns expressed 

from citizens as they begin to feel these kind of knee-jerk 

piecemeal cuts that have been made in this budget with very 

little thought to what the repercussions will be. Very little 

thought to the overall picture and, Mr. Speaker, detrimental to 

Saskatchewan families. And that’s the concern. It’s a big 

concern. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we won’t get into the whole debate on the 

debt. I will say to people, look at the government’s own 

documents and you make up your own mind — the summary 

financial sheet for one, and also the backgrounder. For anyone 

that has a computer at home, you can go on to the government 

website. You can check on the backgrounder documents if they 

haven’t pulled them down yet. And it says quite clearly the 

revenue for this year is 9.95 billion and the expenses are 10.12 

billion. Revenue, 9.9; expenses, 10.1. Mr. Speaker, in my 

books, that’s a deficit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will move on, and we will start to look at 

some of the other issues that are in this budget. And I made a 

quick comment just about how shaky this budget truly is and 

the part about burying numbers. And what’s soon going to be a 

very huge problem for this government, and it’s some very big 

items and big issues that this government, this Sask Party 

government, has totally ignored in this budget. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn’t issues that I just think they should have paid 

more attention to, maybe put a little more money towards or 

changed a program, these are items that they actually ignored 

like they didn’t exist and didn’t put in the budget at all. 

 

So I guess the big question is, is so where’s the money come 

from for bargaining with 25,000 health care workers that have 

been without a contract for two years? Where’s the money 

come for bargaining with health sciences, health care 

professionals that provide some very important services right 

across this province? Or doctors, through the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association]? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen an increase of 3 per cent to the 

Department of Health, with 5 per cent going to the health 

districts but, Mr. Speaker, absolutely nothing accounted for in 

the budget. And if we just look towards the last few months, I 

know that the health district in Saskatoon is running a deficit. 

They’re running a deficit and yet they’re expected to hold their 

costs. They are running a deficit, expected to hold their costs, 

but yet there are negotiations and more costs coming. They are 

running a deficit. They’re expected to hold their costs. There’s 

negotiations on the way, but yet their day-to-day operating costs 

are going up. So, Mr. Speaker, in anyone’s book, that doesn’t 

work. 

 

And we heard from the head of the Saskatoon Regional Health 

Authority, and she said quite clearly that they were going to 

have to make $24 million in cuts to stay viable in this next year. 

Well you can’t tell me that $24 million cut out of one health 

region that’s a provincial health region or provincial facility in 

the health region, that that isn’t going to be felt by citizens right 

across this province. Mr. Speaker, it just doesn’t cut it. And this 

government has just ignored the fact that these issues are there. 

They have not accommodated them. But yet they send out press 

releases saying, well aren’t we doing wonderful. Our budget is 

balanced, and look at the great job we’ve done. But yet they’re 

just pushing all their costs out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue that they have ignored big time is 

Saskatchewan teachers are going into contract negotiations. 

And I believe the minister may have said the other day that 

negotiations had already begun, but there’s absolutely nothing 

in the budget, Mr. Speaker. Nothing. There’s no line item. 

There’s absolutely nothing to accommodate what changes may 

be made. 

 

Well, and then when the minister was asked about it in question 

period the other day, he said, well when it’s negotiated, we’ll 

take care of it. Well how does that work? Isn’t your budget 

supposed to account for the expenses of the province for the 

coming year? Well obviously it’s just the expenses that the Sask 

Party wants to include in the budget, not all of their actual 

expected expenses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and then the minister is out in the rotunda, and 

I’m told that he says, well why would they actually put this in 

the budget as a line item when this contract may not even be 

settled this year? Why would you account for something that 

might not even come about? Well now I don’t know how long 

the Minister of Education’s been around, Mr. Speaker, but 

normally when you go into . . . I think he’s been around a long 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4619 

time, quite a long time. You’ve been around here longer than 

many of us. But he should know that just because the contract 

isn’t negotiated in that year, there are still costs that will 

accumulate to that contract. There are still costs that are 

incurred by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And these are employees that the government has and they have 

a responsibility. An employee comes to work for the 

Government of Saskatchewan and, really, puts their services for 

hire. The government, as the employer, is expected to pay fairly 

for those services. So just because you don’t negotiate a 

contract, it doesn’t mean there isn’t any expenses for that year. 

They’ll come, Mr. Speaker. They’ll come. And you can’t just 

ignore them in the budget, figure you’ll look after them 

somewhere down the line if there’s a contract settled. You still 

have to account for them. 

 

Now I guess, Mr. Speaker, maybe I’m being a little bit 

enthusiastic about this. Maybe I shouldn’t be assuming that 

there will be increases when it comes to collective agreements. 

Maybe I shouldn’t even be taking that view, and maybe that’s 

what the Sask Party did. They say, well we’re going to hold 

them to zero, no increments, no benefit changes — nothing. 

That could be their strategy. I don’t know. Maybe I’m just 

being a little overenthusiastic. 

 

But obviously the Sask Party felt that increases were in store 

last year for their own political staff. So I don’t think it’s out of 

line for me to expect front-line working people in this province 

that provide the services — whether it’s looking after our 

children or our parents or grandparents in health care, or 

whether it’s teaching our children and our young adults in 

post-secondary or training across this province — I don’t think 

I’m being out of line when I would say there should be 

expectations of some increases in this area, that let these 

important people in the productivity of Saskatchewan, the 

productivity and operation of Saskatchewan . . . If the Sask 

Party’s political staff deserve a raise in their increments on a 

regular basis, well, Mr. Speaker, then they really should sit 

down and do some honest-to-goodness negotiations with these 

folks, and they should account for it in the budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we look at various health care negotiations 

that are out there, various negotiations that are yet to come or in 

the early stages with teachers, and all of these costs have been 

ignored in the budget tabled by the Minister of Finance. So if 

we’re looking at a $622 million deficit already, add these costs 

in. Add a portion of these costs in and tell me what the deficit’s 

going to be mid-term. Mr. Speaker, we could be in for a bit of a 

shock . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I think it’s going to 

be considerably higher than what the government documents 

say. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say again these aren’t fluff. 

These aren’t optional expenses. These are obligations and 

responsibilities of the Government of Saskatchewan. So it’s not 

like you can just ignore it and it will go away, because that 

won’t happen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can get back on the whole debate about, 

or non-debate about deficit budgets or balanced budgets. But I 

know one thing for sure. This Sask Party government has stood 

a number of times and talked about what a tough budget this 

has been. What a tough budget, and they’ve had to make some 

tough changes. Well whoop-de-do, Mr. Speaker. I mean, you 

look at in the last NDP budget in ’07-08, we had total revenue 

into the province of $7.7 billion. Last year, in ’09-10, this Sask 

Party government had a budget almost $3 billion higher. It was 

$10.6 billion. 

 

So the Minister of Ag stands up and says we’ve been able to do 

this, and we’ve been able to do that. We could have a debate 

about how well he’s done it and the difficulties in the 

agricultural sector right now. The Minister of Environment 

stands up last night and gives us a whole list of all the things 

they have done. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, they should darn 

well be doing them. They were spending billions of dollars. 

What did they think they were going to do? Just throw it out the 

window? I mean that was 3 billion of taxpayers’ dollars that 

they spent last year. Well actually more than that because they 

ended up with a billion dollar deficit last year plus the money 

that they stripped out of the Crowns. 

 

So to sit here and say we’ve done a wonderful job, much better 

than any previous government . . . Well you’ve had 

substantially higher revenues than any previous government, 

and if you had used them wisely, we wouldn’t be in the 

situation we are now. 

 

So anyway, Mr. Speaker, they put out a press release. Oh, 

they’ve trimmed their spending. They have just sweated over 

this budget, Treasury Board, and have trimmed their spending, 

$123 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, 100 of that came out of the 

Department of Agriculture, so 23 million is pretty small 

pickings when you’re looking at a $10 billion budget. And they 

just said, well they really worked, you know, and they trimmed 

back their spending. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, their whole problem has been overspending, 

and all you have to do is go back to the comments by Eric 

Howe, the economics professor at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] who said last fall, “These guys don’t have a 

revenue problem.” And they don’t. It was a nice handy tool to 

hang it on potash, blame it all on potash. But they had historic 

revenues to deal with in this province, and they still couldn’t do 

it because they can’t control their spending. 

 

[20:30] 

 

They spend, spend, spend on everything. There is no long-term 

vision. There is no, there is no rhyme or reason to some of the 

spending that goes on, Mr. Speaker. But so here they are. They 

went all out, and they tried to cut back their spending while they 

managed a measly 123 million out of a 10-plus billion dollar 

budget, Mr. Speaker. And it wasn’t even a good attempt 

because we still have a deficit this year, Mr. Speaker, and the 

haphazard cuts that were made in this budget were not well 

thought out. They were not well thought out at all. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so they got their $123 million cut, and they 

talk about what a wonderful job they have done. But I tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, there are many across the province who are going 

to pay and pay big time for the spending of this government, for 

the out-of-control spending of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen over the last couple of weeks how this 

government went through the façade or the charade, I guess, of 

bargaining with the chiropractors even so far as to having a 



4620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

press release drawn up on the agreement and then wouldn’t sign 

it and wouldn’t send out the press release. And then as we 

waited till budget time, here they ripped up the budget that they 

had negotiated. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess we’re maybe more used to it because 

we’ve dealt with this government maybe a little more closely in 

the Assembly, but it’s typical of the way they have done things. 

Victoria Park Capital, don’t want to negotiate, don’t like the 

way they operate, so we table legislation to kill their agreement. 

Health care workers, well we don’t want to go through a tough 

session of bargaining with health care workers because we may 

not be able to get everything the way they want. So the first 

things they table was Bill 5 and 6. And we all know the 

problems over that and the comments that have come back from 

the ILO [International Labour Organization] and the United 

Nations. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, here we are with chiropractors. And people 

told this government over and over again, and the chiropractors 

made the point that if you take away support for people and the 

chiropractic visits, they will just revert to going to the health 

system. They will go to the doctors and clinics. They will go to 

the emergency ward. They will go to the hospital. And all 

you’re doing is off-loading from the support that was given by 

this province to chiropractic visits. That $10 million went into 

the government’s pockets so they could say, well, we saved 

that. But that money is just off-loaded onto the health system, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s not going to save anything. It’s just bury the 

cost and hide it; we’ve saved $10 million. Well it doesn’t work 

that way. They have just shifted the cost and they’ve loaded it 

over onto a different side. 

 

And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we heard the Minister of Health 

stand up, and he talked about private clinics doing day surgeries 

— and this after two and a half years. Now this, the Minister of 

Health was a critic for Health for probably four years. He had 

all the answers then. He’s been the minister for two and a half 

years and he’s been pretty quiet, hasn’t really done too much. 

And this is the best he can do? He’s going to contract out 

surgeries to private clinics. Four years in opposition, two, just 

about three years in government, and that’s his big solution? 

That’s the best he can do? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so that’s fine. If he hadn’t canned the 

surgical care centres a year and a half ago, we could have had 

this money invested in the health care system in the province of 

Saskatchewan, built infrastructure that could be maintained into 

the future, and provide service to Saskatchewan residents. But 

no, they had to kill the idea. Now he’s scrambling to try and 

figure out how he’s going to deal with this backlog. Mr. 

Speaker, if he hadn’t have cancelled the surgical care centres, 

we wouldn’t be going through this whole debate today. 

 

But anyway he decided not to invest in the medical system, the 

publicly owned system here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

He’s made this knee-jerk reaction of wow, we’ve got to run off 

and we’ve got to privatize these surgeries, send them out to 

private clinics. And he takes the easy way out. Heaven forbid 

he’d have to do some work and actually put some thought into 

this, do something a little unusual that wasn’t being done in 

some other province but anyway . . . Hope is eternal, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll just keep our fingers crossed and hope maybe he 

does some reading or something. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this minister doesn’t seem to care about 

long-term solutions or benefits for the residents of 

Saskatchewan. And here too we need to ask, okay, the minister 

says this is our big plan. Two and a half years he’s been the 

minister, this is our big plan: we’re going to contract out the day 

surgeries. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s see. He’s put in place I think a 3 per 

cent increase for the Department of Health. Health regions, 

some of them are running a deficit. They have to hold the line 

on their costs because they’re less than status quo on their 

budget and the money that’s been allotted to them. There’s 

going to be reductions in health regions. We’ve seen this 

government put up the cost of electricity and power. Rates have 

gone up. Property tax, all the regular operating costs have all 

continued to climb. And the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Contract with doctors. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Oh right, the doctors’ contract is still out there, 

health sciences, health care providers, all 25,000 of them. And 

the minister says, well the big solution is we’re going to 

contract out these day surgeries to private clinics. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, where’s the support service that goes with 

these day surgeries? Where’s the physio that’s required? When 

you’re doing scoping, there’s still care. Who deals with these 

patients if there’s an infection or if there’s problems? I don’t see 

any corresponding increase to services in the health care 

system, Mr. Speaker. Or is he saying to them too, suck up your 

deficit. Suck up the costs you’re going to incur for any type of 

negotiations and suck up any cost you’re going to incur caring 

for the services that need to be provided to a patient that’s been 

to a private clinic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one example of how short-sighted this 

government is. They don’t look at the big picture. It’s just 

knee-jerk reactions, and there is no comprehensive holistic plan 

to follow through with. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to be the ones to pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, well it is frustrating, Mr. Speaker, to hear. You 

know, I keep seeing . . . I have this press release laying on my 

desk and it says balanced budget, you know, aren’t we doing 

wonderful. Well their books are balanced on the backs of the 

health districts, Mr. Speaker; that’s how they’re balanced. 

Because they couldn’t make the tough decisions and balance 

their own budget, they’ve off-loaded it onto the health districts. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one other area or just one of many other 

areas where they have off-loaded some of these difficult 

decisions and moved them off the government balance sheet . . . 

you don’t have to look any farther than the municipalities. And 

you know, the minister can write as many letters to the editor as 

he likes, but it’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. It’s because of this 

government breaking their promise and not following through 

on the promised revenue-sharing formula that . . . Now you 

know, they . . . Well, you know, the minister thinks it’s kind of 

funny, and she’s tired of maybe hearing it. Well do you know 

what? The work that went into this process to put together a 

formula that this government decided on . . . PST was what it 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4621 

should be attached to because PST doesn’t fluctuate. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the PST didn’t fluctuate. It’s on a gradual incline. 

 

But this government decided they didn’t like it. Because they 

had overspent last year, are overspending again this year, they 

couldn’t follow through on their promise. It’s got nothing to do 

with PST. It’s got nothing to do with the needs of the 

municipalities. It has to do with this government, pure and 

simple, spending too much money and not knowing how to 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what’s going to happen? They off-load onto the 

municipalities, and the municipalities, struggling to meet the 

demands of citizens, will have to increase property tax to 

citizens in their communities. Now and over the next month, 

over the next month we will see . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well you know, the minister says, well 64 per cent and, Mr. 

Speaker, do you know what? They didn’t even have the 

decency and the respect for the municipalities to move to the 

new year of PST. You know, I thought maybe what they would 

do is give 90 per cent of 1 per cent of the new number. No, they 

left it at 90 per cent of the old number. They couldn’t even cut 

them a break, give them some slack even though they had 

treated them so poorly, broke their promise, told the them in the 

media, Mr. Speaker, which was rather underhanded. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Premier had to apologize. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Yes, and the Premier’s got to go apologize. 

He’s sorry. But it was planned that way because the minister 

said after, those were all planned leaks of the budget. They were 

just floating balloons. So I mean, well so I mean, how sincere 

was the apology, Mr. Speaker? How sincere was the apology? It 

wasn’t. So, Mr. Speaker, who pays for this government’s 

mismanagement and lack of fiscal budgeting? It’ll be the 

taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, that’s who it’ll be. It’ll be the 

taxpayers. 

 

And also we’re seeing the off-loading onto the school divisions. 

There’s been a minimal increase to funding to school boards. 

And, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is go through some 

newspaper articles, look at the comments that various people 

have made. This government made a promise of stable funding 

to school boards. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s gone. Minister says 

oh gee, it’s going to take me longer. He toasts the old style of 

funding because he doesn’t like it, but with nothing in place. 

That’s not particularly good planning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we see another broken promise, and school boards are 

left wondering what’s going to happen them, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, who pays when it’s the school boards? Well it’s 

families and it’s children. That’s who pays for this 

government’s financial mismanagement and broken promises is 

children. That’s who pays. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I guess we’re going to have to wait and see 

what the actual deficit will be because I truly don’t believe that 

it will end up at 622 million. And I think debt will even go 

higher. They have taken pretty well every cent they can out of 

the Crown corporations. There is nothing left to take, so now 

they may actually have to start making some tough decisions. 

 

But I hope they don’t do it the same as this budget with these 

knee-jerk reactions of little bits here, little bits there and 

thinking they have done such a wonderful job because I mean 

the final bill . . . Hey, last year, first quarter we knew this 

budget . . . well we knew the day it was tabled it was a disaster. 

By the first quarter, everybody in the province knew we were 

on the downhill slide. By mid-term, well it was all over but the 

music. I guess all over but writing the big cheque where we had 

to pay back the potash companies, Mr. Speaker. But it’s been a 

bad year, and I guess there’s not a lot of confidence out there as 

to what else could go wrong with the budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a couple things that I want to touch 

on before I take my seat. And what I always look at, Mr. 

Speaker, is how the budget affects my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s a couple areas that are quite problematic 

when we look at the whole issue of Moose Jaw and what this 

budget does for Moose Jaw. And, Mr. Speaker, when I first 

went through the document and it was a nice little document 

that was listed behind — I think it was hooked on to the press 

release — that talked about this wonderful balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And what I found in there was a million and a half 

dollars cut out of Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s 230 residents with disabilities that live in 

Valley View Centre. Many are high needs, and it’s a facility 

that gives great care to these folks. And we’ve had an ongoing 

debate about what should happen to Valley View Centre and if 

there should be a new facility built, something on a different 

scale because this facility has quite a few less residents in it 

than what it did when it was first opened. And probably at its 

highest point, there was about 1,500 residents. Well it’s 

considerably smaller than that. 

 

But these people, these residents are aging. They need more 

care. And, Mr. Speaker, what do we see just out of the blue? 

We see a budget that says, well we’re going to take a million 

and a half dollars out of there. So what that means, Mr. 

Speaker, is we are going to cut services and provide staffing, 

even less staffing for people who have, in many cases, no voice, 

no voice and no alternative but to accept the care that’s given. 

 

And I’m telling you, Mr. Speaker, for many of these staff this is 

difficult because there are relationships that are built with the 

residents at Valley View Centre. Many have known each other 

for years. They trust each other. And this is not an easy decision 

and it’s just difficult and it was quite a surprise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was also the line about . . . oh, I have 

to find it now, Mr. Speaker. I know I’ve got it in here 

somewhere. But there was the other line in here that talked 

about savings, this nice little document that says, savings, and 

just knocks the heck out of so many programs. It says, 

“$400,000 in savings through the elimination of funding for 

three Neighbourhood Development Organizations.” 

 

Well one of those was in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

called Connecting as Neighbours. And it’s a tough one to have 

cut, Mr. Speaker. I have to find my papers here; I’m sorry. But 

there’s . . . Both of these projects, whether it’s the money out of 

Valley View or whether it’s Connecting as Neighbours . . . 

When Connecting as Neighbours first was structured and 



4622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

opened up in Moose Jaw, it actually worked on developing 

housing, affordable housing for families in our community. And 

they were very successful at it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party government was 

elected, they turned around and they said, well no, we don’t 

want you to have anything to do with housing. There’s got to be 

something better you can do. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think they 

turned them into more of a community development 

organization and supported low-income families to be able to 

build better lives in our communities. So I don’t know why . . . 

At the bottom of the article, I have to say, under the former 

NDP government, Connecting as Neighbours, used to focus on 

housing co-operatives. But when the Sask Party was elected in 

2007 their focus was shifted to economic development. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was some question as how you could go 

from co-operative housing to economic development as a small, 

non-profit community organization. And that argument aside 

and that debate aside, why you would ignore housing when we 

knew — and we still know — that there are very low vacancy 

numbers right across the province? And Moose Jaw is no 

exception. Why would you take one of the community 

organizations out of the mix when you are able to provide or to 

work to provide options for families living in our community? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this organization, I hope they can survive. But 

when they are looking at a cut of more than 100,000 per year, 

the executive director . . . they have called an emergency 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, to be able to see because there was no 

warning, no consultation. Good heavens, if we had consultation 

with this government I think we’d all be speechless, Mr. 

Speaker. But the executive director is worried, doesn’t know if 

they’ll be able to survive. But we’ll see after their emergency 

meeting. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Valley View, the $1.5 million out of 

Valley View, the article says there will be a few people that no 

longer call Valley View their place of employment, and this is 

saving 1.5 million at the Moose Jaw Valley View Centre this 

year, and they’ll do it by becoming more efficient. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, what they’ve done so far, there’s no plan in place. 

They’re just starting to work through what employees will be 

gone at this point in time. 

 

And the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is a number of the 

employees and jobs that are being reduced are considered 

essential services. So I don’t know how you cut a job when . . . 

How can they be essential on one hand but dispensable and 

disposable on the other hand? Mr. Speaker, if you’re essential, 

aren’t you essential all the time? If the government’s spent too 

much money and can’t afford to hire you, are you not still 

essential? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is one thing that I do want to clear up. I 

know I’ve been on my feet for quite a while. But, Mr. Speaker, 

I was looking in my Moose Jaw newspaper and online today, 

and I heard the Minister of Health say this yesterday when he 

was talking about privatizing surgeries and using private clinics 

and going to a two-tier medical system. And what the minister 

said, and I quote: 

 

“There would be no queue jumping or paying out of 

pocket for these procedures,” said Health Minister Don 

McMorris. In fact, he said it’s the NDP that is responsible 

for private delivery. 

 

“They introduced x-rays and lab testing offered by private 

companies within the public system. We’re just expanding 

that.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t use the language I would like to on 

that quote because you would have to call me out of order and I 

know it. But, Mr. Speaker, I will say that is incorrect. It is a 

distortion of the truth, and the changes to the X-ray and the lab 

procedures were put in place by Mr. Devine. And if the 

Minister of Health does not know any better, then maybe he 

should sit down and read a little bit of history on the 

Department of Health and pay a little more attention to the work 

he’s doing and being truthful to the people out in the 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know I’m on the edge, but, Mr. Speaker, this is 

my community. These are people that I spend many hours 

representing. They are people who deserve the respect and the 

truth from the minister. And this needs to be clarified and it’s 

inappropriate to have a minister of the Crown distorting the 

facts and the information to citizens across the community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will do more with this to the media in Moose 

Jaw. I will address the people that are in my constituency, and I 

hope others do the same across the province because this seems 

to be a common comment coming out of the minister’s mouth. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s inappropriate for a minister of the 

Crown, I must say, to be distorting information and not being 

accurate and sincere when speaking to people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as we . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, if folks don’t like the 

information, well maybe they shouldn’t put it out there. Or if 

they don’t like the response to the information, then maybe they 

should be accurate when they put it out there and be more 

careful making sure that citizens of this province have accurate 

information and can rely on the information that comes from 

the minister. You know what? Playing politics in here is one 

thing, and we do a fair bit of it back and forth. And I will not 

apologize for any of that, or I will not make apologies to my 

constituents for that. But when we are dealing with the people 

of this province who elect us and expect us to give them 

straight-up information, we should. We need to have that kind 

of respect for citizens of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not happy with the effect of this budget on 

my community of Moose Jaw. I’m not happy with the 

comments that have been made in a number of areas, but, Mr. 

Speaker, I do encourage people, go on the website, have a look 

at the budget, have a look at the information that’s been put out 

there. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say when I look at all of this 

budget and how it’s referred to in the books, they say balanced, 

looking-forward, and responsible. Well in my opinion it’s not 

balanced and, Mr. Speaker, I encourage citizens to have a look 

and come to their own decision. And when we talk about 

looking forward, Mr. Speaker, last year the Premier stood in 

this House and said that, oh, no more next year country, this 

was the year for Saskatchewan. It was here, man. 

 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4623 

Well now we’re back to next year country because we’ve spent 

so much and didn’t pay attention to what we are doing, don’t 

know how to budget. Now we’re got our fingers crossed 

waiting for next year country. We got our fingers on next year 

country hoping we’ve got some money mid-term to pay the 

teachers’ salaries when the negotiations are done. We’ve got 

our fingers crossed hoping for next year country when we look 

at the school boards and the health districts, hoping they make 

the tough decisions and balance the spending that these folks 

went just crazy on last year. Now they can’t pay their bills and 

keep their promises to the people in this province, that the 

school divisions and health districts will have to make the tough 

decisions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they got their fingers crossed, and they’re 

really hoping that there is some extra money come mid-term so 

that they can cover off some of these expenses that they darn 

well know is coming and they ignored in the budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the last it says it’s responsible. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget is nowhere close to being responsible. In 

fact it’s irresponsible. And it’s just a continuation of last year 

when we saw irresponsible spending, reckless spending, and 

we’re paying for it, and the citizens of this province are 

continuing to pay for it this year and will for many years to 

come as the debt increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment, and I will not 

be supporting the budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed again an honour to rise in the 

Assembly and address the budget, our third budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m very proud to be part of the government and a 

cabinet that has moved forward, that has moved Saskatchewan 

forward in a direction that will ensure that we continue grow, 

that we continue to be prosperous, and that we continue to 

achieve great things not only in the province of Saskatchewan 

but within Canada as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being on a bit of a vacation 

in Vancouver during the Olympics, and I took the time, Mr. 

Speaker, to go over to the Saskatchewan pavilion. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was remarkable to listen to people right across the 

world, Mr. Speaker. I listened to people talk about the new 

Saskatchewan, about how great Saskatchewan was. They were 

interested in the development, Mr. Speaker. And in fact there 

were people that were in the Saskatchewan pavilion who were 

actually considering looking for jobs and looked at the website 

to see what opportunities were available, Mr. Speaker. And they 

were surprised. They were surprised at the tremendous potential 

of our province, so it was an exciting time. It was an exciting 

time I think for everyone who had planned the outcomes of a 

pavilion, not always known, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that on one rainy day in 

Vancouver during the Olympics, it was great to be in the 

Saskatchewan pavilion because next door to the Saskatchewan 

pavilion was the Quebec pavilion. A nice big space, nice big 

space, cost a lot of money. It was called the Cube, Mr. Speaker. 

But they forgot something, Mr. Speaker. They forgot to actually 

put a roof on the pavilion and, Mr. Speaker, on a rainy day you 

can imagine — well over 9,000 visitors to the Saskatchewan 

pavilion — not so many to the Quebec pavilion during a rainy 

day. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the Minister of 

Finance on this budget and all of the members of Treasury 

Board from our government side who worked diligently, who 

worked very hard to put together a budget that would address a 

number of concerns, would address the fact that the amount of 

revenue available to government had declined considerably and, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we were still going to meet certain 

goals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are three things that I think not only 

affected the provincial budget but also affected the budget for 

education. And, Mr. Speaker, the very first news release that 

I’m going to comment on is February the 11th of this year, 

when a news release indicated that 2009 marked the highest 

number of live births in the province in 17 years. Mr. Speaker, 

14,465 babies were born in Saskatchewan in 2009 — the first 

time ever over 14,000 people born in 17 years. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s going to be . . . That’s a great accomplishment, I 

guess, Mr. Speaker. I’ll begin by saying that to those families 

that have grown. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be a challenge. It’s 

going to be a challenge because as our province moves forward, 

we know there are going to be requirements for daycare 

facilities, Mr. Speaker. There’s going to be a requirement for 

pre-kindergarten programs. There’s going to be a requirement 

for much more as a result of that record-setting birth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then on March 25th we saw that Saskatchewan 

was a province growing at the fastest pace in nearly 80 years. 

Some members have already made mention of that, Mr. 

Speaker, the fact that in a two-year period in the province of 

Saskatchewan, these last two years, we have grown at a rate that 

hasn’t been matched for 80 years — also, Mr. Speaker, a 

tremendous accomplishment. I think that shows exactly what 

people see in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re getting 

immigrants coming from outside of Canada, but also we’re 

seeing Canadians who may have left Saskatchewan once before, 

when the NDP were good at driving people out of the province, 

and now they’re returning, Mr. Speaker. And we’re seeing that 

growth. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other numbers that has made a 

significant change is the total enrolments of schools in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in 2009 — and, Mr. 

Speaker, for those who may not understand what numbers are 

used by the Ministry of Education, of course they’re the 

statistical numbers of September 30th of the previous year — in 

September 30th of 2009, Mr. Speaker, there were 159,818 

students in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the first 

time that that number had indeed grown from the previous year, 

again, Mr. Speaker, in 17 years. Mr. Speaker, when the NDP 

took over in 1991, there was nearly 200,000 students in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and that number now has declined to 

159,818. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first growth that we’ve 

had in a long, long time. 



4624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many times in the province we’ve heard, 

Mr. Speaker, that school boards have been faced with problems; 

school closure is the result of enrolment declines and 

depopulation, Mr. Speaker. But you know, Mr. Speaker, now 

the province is turning, turning around, Mr. Speaker. And I do 

want to say that this is just a small increase, and I hope that it is 

a trend that is going to start us in the right direction. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn specifically to of course the 

Education budget because, Mr. Speaker, we made some very 

significant changes a year ago in our budget. So, Mr. Speaker, 

this was a continuation of, Mr. Speaker, this was a continuation 

of last year’s initiatives where we indicated that it was 

necessary to ensure that funding of education, a far greater 

source of funding to education came from the General Revenue 

Fund. And, Mr. Speaker, we made that change last year. We 

made the changes to the mill rates where we reduced the mill 

rates. And, Mr. Speaker, we also enhanced the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I think there’s a 

couple members have a dialogue going between them, and if 

they could take it behind the bar, it would be appreciated. I 

recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m not sure exactly what point of my comments I was at but, 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that last year we made a very 

significant change. Mr. Speaker, we also ensured that for the 

first time the funding of education by the General Revenue 

Fund of government changed from about 51 per cent to 63 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, a very significant change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we added $243 million to the budget for the 

29 school divisions. Mr. Speaker, that was to cover the loss of 

revenue from the tax side. But it was also, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that we addressed a concern that has been around for 

years, Mr. Speaker. The amount of dollars that boards of 

education were allocated through the old foundation operating 

grant, Mr. Speaker, was something that was referred to as 

recognized expenditures. And, Mr. Speaker, the problem that 

boards of education faced was that recognized expenditures 

were always smaller then actual expenditures. The board had to 

make that difference up by going to the taxpayer because 

governments in the past did not recognize that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that was a problem. 

 

So as a result of the change last year, Mr. Speaker, we added 

$243 million to the sum of money that was provided to boards 

of education so that we would correct that once and for all, Mr. 

Speaker. And now, Mr. Speaker, for this year we actually are 

using the actual budget of the previous year of each and every 

school division. 

 

Now I know the member, I believe it was the member for 

Moose Jaw Wakamow said, well you know we threw out the 

FOG [foundation operating grant] grant and we didn’t have 

anything to replace it with. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not quite 

accurate because we’re in fact using the last year’s FOG grant 

which was in place, set by the former government. And we took 

those expenditures, Mr. Speaker, and we added to them for the 

costs of the teachers’ salary increase last year, the cost of 

inflation, and we produced a budget that is for the school year 

’09-10, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also want to clarify, because many people don’t 

understand, that there is quite a difference between a taxation 

year, a government fiscal year, and a school division fiscal year. 

Of course the taxation year, we all know that. That’s January 1 

to December 31st. That’s the actual calendar year, maybe 

sometimes referred to in that respect. The other year, Mr. 

Speaker, is of course the government fiscal year, and the 

government fiscal year is April 1st. In a couple days, we’ll be 

beginning our new fiscal year, and it will last to March 31st of 

next year. 

 

School divisions follow a different fiscal year, and that fiscal 

year begins on September 1st to August the 31st. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the boards of education are currently within their fiscal 

year that will last till August 31st. And our budget this year 

allocates dollars for the new fiscal year for school divisions, 

which is going to start on September 1st of 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have done this year is we have taken last 

year’s budgets and we recognized three concerns. We 

recognized that there were some enrolment adjustments that 

needed to be taken into account. Last year we didn’t do that. We 

had just used the previous year’s budget, but there were some 

school divisions whose enrolments had declined significantly, 

and there were others whose enrolments had increased 

significantly. So there needed to be a balancing. There needed 

to be the assurance to boards of education that in fact the costs 

that were reflected at the board level were met. So that was one 

of the conditions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second condition was that we needed to account for grid 

recognition. And grid recognition, Mr. Speaker, means that in 

the teaching profession there are teachers who are at levels 

years 1 to 10, and then of course there’s another grid that comes 

into place at year 15. And in those 11 grids, Mr. Speaker, there 

are teachers in every school division, I’m assuming, that would 

be at probably at each and every grid level. 

 

But what we did, Mr. Speaker, is we took the actual teachers 

that were in each and every school division on January the 15th 

and we applied the grid to each teacher that would have an 

applicable increase if they stayed in the teaching profession 

effective September 1st, 2010. So we accounted for that, Mr. 

Speaker. And then we accounted for inflation on the rest of the 

costs to boards of education. Mr. Speaker, on a school division 

year. That means that those costs are about $18.6 million, a 

very significant amount of money. And that is the amount of 

dollars that have been allocated to the school boards for their 

fiscal year 2010-11. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, overall that is a significant amount of 

money. The dollars that will come from the school operating 

grant through government is of course 976.5 million. And the 

other sum of money that will produce that dollar figure for 

boards of education is 639.6 million, which comes from the 

taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. That means that for boards of education 

for the fiscal year ’10-11, they will have budgets that will total 

nearly $1.7 billion, the largest number ever for boards of 

education. And that’s the sum of money that will be allocated in 

those areas, Mr. Speaker. 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4625 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the changes that we had to make of 

course was that when we talked about education property tax 

rates, we indicated that we were going to follow a rebate 

program for four years, and then at the end of our term, we were 

going to put in place a long-term solution. Mr. Speaker, we 

made that change faster than the four-year term. We made that 

change last year, as I’ve indicated, when we changed to mill 

rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to clarify for everyone, who will not only see these 

remarks in Hansard but those who might be watching, is that 

across Saskatchewan the mill rate for agricultural land was set 

last year at 7.08 mills. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the same mill 

rate for agricultural land whether you’re in the southeast corner 

of the province, the northwest corner of the province, it doesn’t 

matter. Agricultural land will be treated the same way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also doing that for residential properties. So 

residential properties will have a mill rate of 10.08. They had 

that mill rate set last year in effect for the calendar year 2009. 

And that means that whether you have a residence in Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan or whether it’s in Moose Jaw, or whether it’s out 

in Loon Lake, Mr. Speaker, the mill rate assessed to your 

residential property will be 10.08. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

commercial mill rate is the same. There’s a tiered system, and 

the average of the tiered system for commercial mill rates is 

15.42. And, Mr. Speaker, we had indicated that we would 

follow through with another phase of reducing the taxes this 

year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I made this comment a number of months 

ago when I was asked the question by the media that said if 

there’s a balance that needs to be drawn and indeed there will 

not be significant — sufficient, not significant; I guess the word 

is sufficient — dollars for the education sector, will I as 

minister be supporting the continuation of the property tax 

reduction, or whether or not I would be looking at those dollars 

to be provided to education? And, Mr. Speaker, at that time I 

said if that was the end result, of course it would be to 

education. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, this year we are not 

continuing with the $53 million reduction of property taxes, but 

we are ensuring that boards of education are provided with 

sufficient dollars so that they can indeed continue with the 

programs that they have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of things that have 

fallen through in education. One of the second areas that I want 

to talk about is early learning and child care. Mr. Speaker, in the 

area of early learning and child care, we have made significant 

progress over these last few years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to indicate to everyone that in the short two and a half 

years that we have been in government, Mr. Speaker, we will 

have allocated $74 million to funding of child care in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is a 34 per cent 

increase by March of 2011. So, Mr. Speaker, tremendous 

growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have increased the number of child care 

spaces by 2,900 — 2,900 spaces, Mr. Speaker. That will bring 

our total to 11,650 spaces, Mr. Speaker, a huge increase from 

the time when the NDP left in 2007, late 2007 when they left. 

Our government has recognized that child care spaces are 

required, Mr. Speaker. 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing is that other 

people are recognizing this as well. Mr. Speaker, I received a 

letter, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter from the University of 

Saskatchewan Students’ Union Childcare Centre Chair. And the 

quote from this letter is this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We believe that the current Saskatchewan Government has 

made extremely admirable and progressive steps forward 

by integrating childcare and early learning in the 

Province’s Ministry of Education and, ultimately, through 

the provision of significant financial support for the 

refurbishment and development of childcare centres 

throughout Saskatchewan [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a comment from the University of Saskatchewan 

child care board that says as a province we’re moving forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a great pleasure serving as the 

Minister of Education responsible for child care because I’ve 

had the opportunity to be in so many places, Mr. Speaker, to 

announce new child care spaces. You know, Mr. Speaker, I had 

the pleasure just not so long ago being out at Little Souls 

Daycare. Little Souls Daycare here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, is a 

brand new facility where there are 60 spaces being provided. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a group that has taken over, in fact it 

was a church that had gone into receivership and the building 

wasn’t being used. And they purchased the building, and with 

donations and tremendous volunteer support, they’ve converted 

Little Souls Daycare into a great program. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other new announcements that we just 

did here a week and a half ago was at the YWCA [Young 

Women’s Christian Association]. Mr. Speaker, a brand new, a 

brand new daycare was announced with 90 spaces at the 

YWCA. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a really interesting project. 

They took over some space that had been a seniors’ centre that 

was no longer needed. And they’ve modified that seniors’ 

centre and they’ve turned it into a program where now they’re 

going to have 90 children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the announcements have been far and wide. I had 

the pleasure of being in the constituency of the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats last week out in the community of 

Churchbridge. Mr. Speaker, in Churchbridge there is currently a 

23-space daycare. And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting thing in 

Churchbridge is, as I said, Mr. Speaker . . . In Langenburg — 

I’m sorry, I did say Churchbridge — it’s actually Langenburg. 

Because I don’t want to get that wrong because, Mr. Speaker, 

one individual came up to me in Langenburg and said, you 

know, Mr. Minister, in Langenburg right now there are 19 

ladies who are expecting. They’re pregnant — 19, Mr. Speaker, 

and this was at this current moment. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s no 

wonder that they need an expansion to their daycare. 

 

But the way that community has addressed that, Mr. Speaker, is 

a great thing to see. They had a small daycare, an older daycare, 

a 23-space daycare. We’re adding 18 to make it a 41-space 

daycare, Mr. Speaker. And with donations, Mr. Speaker, 

donations coming from Mosaic, from an individual anonymous 

family donation, Mr. Speaker, of $50,000 will enable this 

community to build a facility that’s going to be valued over 



4626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

$800,000. And they’re moving forward, Mr. Speaker. Because 

we were there on Friday to do the sod turning, but already there 

was a basement dug, Mr. Speaker. That’s how energetic these 

people are, and they want to move forward because they know 

that that is something that they’re very, very proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we also have indicated in the budget is that 

we have allocated $2 million for additional child care spaces in 

this year. Mr. Speaker, there is a need. There is no question 

there is a need to address not only child care but also 

pre-kindergarten spaces. So, Mr. Speaker, $1 million will be the 

funds provided for 18 new pre-kindergarten programs across 

the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of need. We have identified 

many, many communities but, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be 

focusing probably in the two cities, the two larger cities of 

Regina and Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to 

be focusing in northern Saskatchewan to address some concerns 

with First Nations and Métis students because we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that to address the concerns in the area of the North, 

we believe that the sooner we can introduce an education 

program to young children, there will be tremendous benefits. 

So that’s where we’re going to focus those 18 pre-kindergarten 

programs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this additional $1 million now that is made 

available to early learning and child care for new spaces will 

mean that we’ll be adding 235 new spaces over the course of 

the fiscal year ’10-11. So, Mr. Speaker, again tremendous 

growth in the area of child care. There are many projects that 

are required. There are areas that need to continue to grow and, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re taking small steps, but we’re continuing to 

be aware that we must address those concerns of so many 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other areas that I am responsible for is 

of course the library system. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

continue ensuring that the single integrated library system, the 

one card, one library motto in the province of Saskatchewan is 

going to be continued with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to explain the SILS [single integrated 

library system] program to everyone so that they understand it. 

In Saskatchewan we have 306 libraries and, Mr. Speaker, what 

we are doing is implementing a system, and we have done that 

now in 4 of the 10 regions. The 306 libraries fit into 10 regions, 

and 4 of the regions have already moved forward with a single 

integrated library system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this means is that with my library card, I can 

go here to a library in Regina, and I can look at materials. And 

if it’s not available here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, let’s suppose 

it’s available in Yorkton. Then on my way home, Mr. Speaker, 

through to Yorkton, I could, using my card, ask the Yorkton 

library system to send the material that I want to my small 

library in Invermay, Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I could 

use that, I could pick that material up in Invermay. I could use 

it. I could bring it back here to Regina, and I can return it to the 

Regina Public Library. Mr. Speaker, this is going to be 

tremendous for everyone. It’s going to ensure that people right 

across all the province . . . And the other six regions will be 

fully implemented by the end of this fiscal year. 

And, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the opportunity to speak to 

the National Congress on Rural Education, to the delegates that 

were attending that conference in Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there were, I guess it was nine provinces in attendance. Prince 

Edward Island was not in attendance, but there were a total of 

nine provinces and two territories. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

were inquiries about how this system is working. Why is it 

going to be such a great benefit to all of Saskatchewan people? 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud as a government to ensure 

that we can continue moving this forward, and the dollars will 

be provided to ensure that SILS continues to be implemented in 

all 306 libraries. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of my favourite topics in education is of 

course dealing with capital, Mr. Speaker, because we know that 

capital, Mr. Speaker, in the area of capital we know that the 

former NDP government left a huge deficit. And as a result of 

that deficit, Mr. Speaker, we know that the environment that 

students are forced to work in, that teachers are forced to work 

in, that that is not conducive necessarily to a great education. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working very, very diligently and 

very quickly at addressing some of the concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the budget that we currently have before us is 

allocating an additional $17.2 million to the area of capital. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while that’s not a huge amount for this year, 

I do want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that since the fall of 2007, 

this total number that we have allocated to capital for school 

construction and renovation and repair is going to be well over 

$328 million. Mr. Speaker, that is unprecedented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the former government, the NDP, that 

would have been about 8 or 9 or 10 years of capital investment 

because they did not see education as a priority. They did not 

see this as an area that they needed to address even though, Mr. 

Speaker, over 70 per cent of our schools are built before 1969. 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a deficit. There is a huge deficit and 

we are moving forward with many, many projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at an announcement that I made last week with the 

Premier — no, I guess it was the week before — the Premier 

made an announcement where we announced that six additional 

projects are moving into what is called the detailed design 

stage. It means that we will have 28 major school capital 

projects under way right now. Mr. Speaker, that means that 

projects like the Nutana Collegiate and the E.D. Feehan High 

School in Saskatoon in both Saskatoon Public and St. Paul’s are 

under way and will get completed. That means that a project 

like the Porcupine Plain or the Oxbow School or the St. Anne 

School in Prince Albert or the Stobart Community School in 

Duck Lake, Mr. Speaker, these projects are all under way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the school at Maple Creek High School, or the 

school right here in Regina, the Arcola School that we 

announced with a sod turning ceremony just a few days ago. 

And Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to listen to the Chair of the 

Regina Public Board at the sod turning, and she made this 

comment to the parents and the students and everyone that was 

gathered there. And she said, Mr. Speaker, that the project at 

Arcola School was going to be the first construction of a new 

school in Regina in 10 years. Mr. Speaker, 10 years since the 

last new school was built by the Regina Public Board of 

Education in the city of Regina. 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4627 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many things that are happening out 

there regarding capital. We’re very, very proud of the fact that 

capital dollars are being spent. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

other projects that I think is — actually there’s a few projects 

that are of great interest to the province — but the one out at 

Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, the Humboldt Collegiate Institute is a 

project that is funded by both St. Paul’s Separate School 

Division out of Saskatoon and the Horizon School Division. 

These are two school divisions that jointly operate the 

Humboldt Collegiate, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a project there, 

Mr. Speaker, that involves not only a brand new high school, 

but will involve also a regional college component. There are 

going to be, because it’s of course, Mr. Speaker, going to be 

added on to the Humboldt community centre, it’s going to be a 

tremendous addition to Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, nearly a $20 

million addition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other projects also that we’re getting 

involved with which is different than what has been the past 

practice, Mr. Speaker, is the provincial funding of a school 

that’s going to be constructed or is being constructed — it’s 

under way already — at Turnor Lake. Mr. Speaker, Turnor 

Lake school is going to be a school that’s being built on reserve. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no school that is near, so 

we’re going to build a school on reserve. It’s coordinated by 

INAC [Indian and Northern Affairs Canada]. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to contribute, as a province, we’re going to 

contribute over $3.7 million to that project. 

 

So that will mean, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to mean that we’re 

going to have a first-rate school in northern Saskatchewan to 

address the concerns, not only of students that are on reserve, 

but those that are off reserve. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very 

proud to be involved with that project and I know that the 

Northern Lights school board is also very, very excited about 

the future of that project. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for a while now in this Assembly we’ve 

listened to the members opposite talk about different things. 

We’ve listened to them make remarks about capital. We’ve 

listened to remarks about daycare. We’ve listened to remarks 

about the funds that are provided by the ministry to both public 

and Catholic boards of education.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to clarify a couple of things 

because the people in the province need to understand. And, 

Mr. Speaker, to set the context for those comments, I’m going 

to quote from Hansard of March 23rd of this year. And, Mr. 

Speaker, these are the remarks of the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. And I quote: 

 

I asked the minister if he could provide me with an 

updated list of school capital and in fact, Mr. Speaker, he 

did not provide me the list for 2009. He provided me a list 

for 2008.” 

 

And there’s a number of comments because this was in 

response to a ministerial statement. 

 

Also further on, on page 4413, the member also said this: 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, may I ask the minister that when people 

submit written questions from the opposition, could the 

minister please provide the latest information in the 

ministry, and accurate information, so that we can all do 

our job on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting, isn’t it interesting that the 

member who asked those questions doesn’t even know what her 

own caucus is doing. And for the benefit of the member 

opposite and the House Leader opposite, I’m going to, I’m 

going to . . . I don’t have to table them because of course 

they’re government documents. They’re in the proceedings of 

this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 29th, ’09, the member for Regina 

Dewdney, the House Leader, asked question no. 150. And it 

says this, “To the Minister of Education: What was the order of 

priority for the capital lists for schools as of October 1, 2009?” 

 

[21:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, October 1, 2009, is the date that the member is 

asking for information. Mr. Speaker, the information of course 

is the list that was put together in the summer of 2009. That is 

the list, Mr. Speaker, that we provided to him. That is the list, 

Mr. Speaker, that is hidden away on the website of the Ministry 

of Education. It’s the list that still exists on that website today 

because, Mr. Speaker, the next list will be developed in the 

summer of 2010 and then it will be updated. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that was question 150. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

question 153. And I want to put this one on the record as well 

because this is the same member asking the question, and he 

says this, and again this is the member for Regina Dewdney and 

he says, “To the Minister of Education: What was the order of 

priority for the capital lists for schools as of January 1, 2000.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, January 1, 2000, that’s way back when, 

when the NDP were the government and they’re asking for the 

list of their government. So, Mr. Speaker, we provided them, 

after researching it, we provided them with the list of June 1999 

because that was the current list for that particular year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s take you to November the 16th, 2009. A 

question is again asked by the member for Regina Dewdney. 

It’s question no. 500. “To the Minister of Education: What was 

the order of priority for the capital lists for schools as of 

January 1, 2009?” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope I’ve helped the member for Regina 

Rosemont and others understand that when you ask a question 

that says, I want the capital list for schools as of January 1st, 

2009, that the most current list for January 1st, 2009 would be 

the list for summer of 2008. Right? Mr. Speaker, that’s, you 

know, common sense. So, Mr. Speaker, we provided the answer 

to the member that said, here’s the enclosed list for 2008, K to 

12 [kindergarten to grade 12], major capital projects. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t the half of it. Mr. Speaker, two days 

later, two days later the member for Saskatoon Nutana enters 

question no. 536. And it says, “To the Minister of Education: 

What was the order of priority for the capital lists for schools as 

of January 1, 2009?” Mr. Speaker, these are the identical 

questions. The member for Regina Dewdney asked the question 

500, said, “What was the order of priority for the capital lists 



4628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

for schools as of January 1, 2009?” The member for Saskatoon 

Nutana asked the question by the way, 36 questions later, two 

days later. She says, “What was the order of priority for the 

capital lists for schools as of January 1, 2009?” 

 

So we provided that list, Mr. Speaker. It was the list for 2008. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member stands in this House and she 

says, but I asked you a question and the question was, provide 

me with the information as of January 1st, 2009. And we did. 

And she read from that list, and she said, oh, but Mr. Minister, 

you tried to trick me. You tried to trick me. You read, you read 

the schools from the 2008 list, and those weren’t the schools 

that you announced in Saskatoon. The Premier announced 

schools from the list of 2009. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what she asked for. I can’t read her 

mind, even though it’s probably pretty easy to read. For a 

member who hasn’t . . . who’s been in this Assembly a lot 

longer than I have, who’s a former Minister of Education, and 

she doesn’t know that that list that is current today is on the 

website. She doesn’t know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So all of a sudden I’m supposed to have secretly produced a 

new list, the list that the member for Regina Rosemont had last 

year when he was the critic. Because he knew what that list 

was, and he was always asking me about projects in Regina, 

when we were going to move forward with Douglas Park and 

Arcola. But you know what? The member for Regina Dewdney 

forgot to give the answer to the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

And of course she couldn’t ask. She couldn’t ask her own 

colleague to provide her with the list, and heaven forbid going 

to the website to actually find out what the list is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when she makes the comments in this 

Assembly that suggests that the Minister of Education has not 

provided what she wanted, Mr. Speaker, it’s just not, not 

accurate. She asked for the list. We gave her the list. Member 

for Regina Dewdney asked for the list. We gave him the same 

list. You know, Mr. Speaker, there was a list asked for on 

October 1. We gave them that list. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if by chance they don’t have 

access to a computer and they’ve lost the copy that we sent 

them, we can give them the list. It’s the 2009 list that lists the 

projects under priority 2: project no. 1, St. Joseph School and 

Holy Trinity; project no. 2, Willowgrove in Saskatoon public; 

project no. 3, Willowgrove in Saskatoon Catholic; project no. 4, 

St. Thomas in Lloydminster. And, Mr. Speaker, I think you can 

see that this is the current list. This is the list that we follow. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that I still need 

to bring up, Mr. Speaker, because you know the day, in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, it was the day that I was in Saskatoon with the 

Premier announcing the projects, and the Minister of Health 

responded to some questions. But this is also from Hansard, on 

page 4322 of March 18, and it says this: the U of S — in 

parentheses, of course, the University of Saskatchewan — 

campus daycare, and by the way I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker, 

from Hansard, it says: “The U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] campus daycare doesn’t accept children until 

they’re two and a half.” Mr. Speaker, not true. Not true. The 

centre is licensed for six infants, that is, between the age of six 

weeks to 17 months, and 10 toddlers between the ages of 18 

months to two and a half. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana rose in 

this Assembly and asked, not asked but suggested that in fact a 

daycare didn’t have any children in it at all under that age. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not accurate. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

something that that member should apologize for because she 

cannot accuse somebody of making sure that the centre has 

indeed students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my final comment about the . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I know the member for The Battlefords would 

love to hear more about his, you know, his colleague, but we’ll 

restrict it to a letter that was sent from the . . . The letter was 

sent to me, dated February 11th, from the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. Mr. Speaker, the context of this letter is the 

member is asking for clarification on how teachers are hired in 

the Humboldt Collegiate Institute. 

 

And as I indicated, all members would know that the Humboldt 

Collegiate Institute is a collegiate that is operated by both the 

Horizon School Division and the St. Paul’s, in other words, a 

public and a Catholic board. And she asks questions about 

whether or not there’s a clause in the agreement as to who 

should be hired and who’s exempted. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

paragraph that is of great interest to teachers across the province 

is this paragraph, and I quote, word for word: 

 

I also have been told that teachers are being hired into 

positions to fulfill this requirement. I’m told that many of 

these teachers are unaccredited. I am told that we already 

have difficulty with our school achievement scores. People 

knowledgeable in their subject area, particularly in large 

centres, might assist our province in improving learning 

outcomes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just by that paragraph alone people may say, 

oh, what does that mean? You know, accredited. I want to 

indicate to people what accreditation means. Accredited 

teachers are teachers who can give their own final exam to 

grade 12 students. In other words they determine the mark for 

all grade 12 classes. They’re referred to as accredited. Mr. 

Speaker, there are four conditions that teachers need to achieve 

to become accredited. One of them, Mr. Speaker, is they must 

hold the Saskatchewan Professional A Certificate. Number two, 

they have to have a university standing with a major in that 

particular subject area. So what that means, Mr. Speaker, if 

you’re going to be accredited in mathematics, you have to have 

a major in math. If you’re going to be accredited in English, 

you have to have a major in English. The second thing, the third 

thing, Mr. Speaker, is that they have to attend an accreditation 

seminar which is held in the summer for teachers who are 

interested in becoming accredited. But, Mr. Speaker, the fourth 

and very critical piece of information is that you must have at 

least two years of teaching to become accredited. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now think about the paragraph that the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana wrote and she said our 

declining achievement scores are due to the fact that boards of 

education have hired unaccredited teachers. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

a slap in the face of every College of Education graduate. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, a College of Education graduate who has 

a major in mathematics and goes to a school to teach in year 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4629 

one and year two cannot be accredited. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

member has suggested, that member has suggested that the 

achievement level scores that are declining are due to the fact 

that boards of education have unaccredited teachers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s appalling. That’s appalling that a member 

who is, indicates that she’s a teacher, Mr. Speaker, she indicates 

she’s a teacher . . . She’s been a Minister of Education. She 

knows what the accreditation criteria are and she suggests that 

the achievement levels in our schools are due to the fact that 

boards of education hire unaccredited teachers. Mr. Speaker, 

isn’t that something? Isn’t that something, that the member 

opposite would believe that teachers who are not accredited 

should not teach grade 12? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, give me a break. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Because that’s what she says, Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite is saying give her a break. Give 

her a break. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s her letter. It’s her letter that 

says that the achievement levels are not good enough because 

there have been too many unaccredited teachers hired. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is something that the teachers of this 

province need to understand. They need to understand the 

position taken by that member and, in fact, that entire 

opposition regarding education. The fact that education isn’t a 

priority, never was. The fact, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t 

respect teachers. The fact that teachers who are unaccredited are 

contributing to lower achievement scores, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

what this opposition is putting forward, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, when the member from Nutana stands in this 

Assembly, she has to have her facts right, Mr. Speaker. She has 

to understand that there are people that look at those remarks. 

They look at those remarks and they bring them to our attention 

and say, did the member really mean this? Did she mean that 

we shouldn’t be hiring those teachers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many things that we could talk 

about today. Mr. Speaker, there are many, many things. But I 

know, Mr. Speaker, that there are other members that want to 

participate in this debate. Mr. Speaker, I hope that I have 

clarified a number of things for people in this province so they 

would understand how we’re moving forward with capital, how 

we’re moving forward with early learning and childcare, how 

we’re ensuring that there are enough funds for boards of 

education to provide adequate education. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

can tell you that I will not be supporting the amendment but 

will gladly be supporting the budget of this government. 

 

[21:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, you 

know I’ve witnessed a couple of things in this Assembly in the 

last week. I’ve witnessed the Premier last Wednesday in this 

question period totally out of control in front of 600 people and 

I must say, Mr. Speaker, I’ve never seen a Premier act like that, 

ever, on budget day. And then, Mr. Speaker, I just saw the 

Minister of Education . . . I dropped out of the House just to get 

a coffee and I looked at him on television and I think if people 

were watching they would be concerned that this was a man 

that was also out of control and about to have a heart attack, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education didn’t talk about 

the budget and I think I know why. I think I know why he 

didn’t talk about the budget, and that’s because the budget will 

create a number of problems for school divisions in the 

province. But before I begin to talk about schools I want to 

make this point. This 2010-11 budget is a dishonest budget put 

together by a bunch of incompetent men and women in the Sask 

Party. This is a dishonest budget just like last year’s. Just like 

last year’s. Last year the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Sask Party government, put into the revenue projections $1.9 

billion in potash. And, Mr. Speaker, the members of the 

opposition indicated to the people of Saskatchewan that putting 

all of your eggs in one potash basket — 20 per cent of the 

budget — was a serious problem. And it was, Mr. Speaker. So 

serious that they did not meet their revenue projection and, in 

fact, they have to pay the potash, repay the potash industry over 

$200 million in royalties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now can you imagine, can you imagine that this happened? 

This happened because of their fiscal incompetence, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t listen to the officials in 

Finance. No, they didn’t listen to the officials in Finance. They 

wanted to increase spending and they needed to figure out how 

to match the revenues with their increase in spending and so 

they plucked $1.9 billion in potash revenues out of the hat. 

 

And what did we see, Mr. Speaker. Well how did they “balance 

the 2009-10 budget?” Well they moved $755 million out of the 

Crowns, cash out of the Crowns, and they moved over $510 

million from the growth and fiscal stabilization fund, Mr. 

Speaker. They moved $1.3 billion in cash to deal with their 

fiscal incompetence. And, Mr. Speaker, that is indeed the truth. 

That is the truth and those are the facts. 

 

Now when this operation came to government in November of 

2007, what did they find? They found $1.2 billion in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund and $1.1 billion in CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. Now, Mr. Speaker, what is 

incredible on budget day during the lock-up for the MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], I asked the CIC 

officials how much money is left at CIC and here’s what they 

told us. This is it. CIC used to have over $1 billion. Here’s what 

they told us: $195 million for the children’s hospital and $40 

million for clean coal. Mr. Speaker, this group of men and 

women have wiped out all of the money over at CIC to deal 

with their spending spree, Mr. Speaker. And it speaks to their 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker, because the question is this. They 

had a deficit this past year, ’09-10. They are projecting a deficit 

this year, 2010-11, and they’re projecting a deficit in the 

following year, election year. So here we have a group of men 

and women, four-year term, and they will have had three out of 

four deficits. And they have cleaned out, they have cleaned out 

every nickel we left them, Mr. Speaker, and that speaks to their 

incompetence. 

 

Now this is a group of men and women that increase spending 

by 32 per cent. And Eric Howe who is an economist at the 

University of Saskatchewan, who also considers himself to be a 

Conservative, stated very eloquently that this is not a 



4630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

government that has a revenue problem — far be it from that, 

Mr. Speaker. This is a government that has a spending problem. 

And they’ve increased spending in this province over $2 billion 

since they came to government, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sorry, 

you cannot spend more on a long-term basis than you’re taking 

in. And if you do that, you increase the debt of the province, 

and that’s exactly what these men and women are doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a dishonest budget and it’s a 

budget that was put together and they’re quite proud of it. But I 

would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, this budget was put together 

by a group of incompetent people who have not listened to the 

officials in the Department of Finance or officials anywhere 

else, and they certainly aren’t listening to the people of 

Saskatchewan because . . . [inaudible] . . . that people don’t 

want to go back to the Grant Devine days where year after year 

after year deficit budgeting, deficit budgeting and long-term 

debt. 

 

Now they say we can’t go back. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is their 

third budget and it’s their second deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know, let me say this. They have deficit budgets at a 

time when we are experiencing record revenues, Mr. Speaker. 

They have deficit budgets. Now these folks like to brag about 

the statistics and how well the province is doing. I just want to 

say this: we have some charts that we’ve put together and I 

think they’re very interesting. The public needs to know this. 

 

In 2007, how many barrels a day of crude production took place 

in the province of Saskatchewan: 427,752,000. How many in 

2009: 423,387, Mr. Speaker — a reduction under the Sask 

Party. 

 

Now let’s talk about oil well completions — 2,182 in 2007. 

How many in 2009: 1,338 wells. 

 

Then let’s talk about natural gas production — 678,500,000 in 

2007. And how many in 2009: five hundred and eighty-five 

thousand, nine hundred . . . thousand, Mr. Speaker, a reduction. 

 

Gas well completions in Saskatchewan — this is interesting — 

2007: 1,217. How many in 2009: 330. 

 

Now let’s talk about land sales. Let’s talk about land sales — 

2007: 250.3 million. 2009: 118.2 million. 

 

Let’s talk about building permits — 2007: 5,332. How many in 

2009: 4,401, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let’s talk about apartment vacancies. This is something 

that my constituents are interested in. 2007, Regina, 1.7 per 

cent. Regina, October 2009, point six per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

And here’s an interesting one — Lloydminster, point three per 

cent in October 2007. What’s the vacancy rate in October of 

2009? 8.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let’s talk about the average rents. This is kind of 

important. Saskatoon, October 2007, $693 for a two-bedroom 

apartment. October 2009, $905. Who lives in apartments, Mr. 

Speaker? Mostly working people on service sector jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. And have they seen an increase in minimum wage that 

wasn’t scheduled by the NDP under this operation? Absolutely 

not. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about seniors waiting for housing. 

September 2009 in Saskatoon, 235 seniors are waiting for 

housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s talk about SaskPower rates. Oh, this is interesting. 

February 2007: $15.31. August 1st, 2010: $19.57. And don’t 

they have . . . Aren’t they proposing to increase power some 

more? I think that’s going to be coming. 

 

And then we have . . . This is very, very interesting. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the government that said that they were going to 

reduce waiting lists in the province. Now December ’07, there 

were 26,883 people sitting on a waiting list. Now you’d think it 

would have gone down because they’ve certainly promised that 

they were going to go down, and they’ve been in government 

for over two and a half years. What was it, December ’09? Now 

this is according to the surgery wait list initiative. I think I did 

find this on the computer, and it was 28,672. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s practically 2,000 more people on the waiting list since 

these men and women have been in office. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here is an interesting one. You know, they 

like to brag a lot about how they’re doing. And I remember, I 

think it was my colleague asked the Minister of Social Services 

to tell us how many people are sitting on the social assistance 

caseload. And apparently she wasn’t going to do it, but finally 

she told us. Well, Mr. Speaker, since they’ve come to 

government we’ve seen an increase of 1,700 cases, Mr. 

Speaker, 1,700 cases since this group of men and women came 

to office. There are more people on social assistance than there 

were when they came into office. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other . . . And they laugh. Well I don’t 

think if you’re someone who is experiencing unemployment, 

it’s not very funny to have to be involved with social assistance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s another interesting fact. In 2007 the 

average farm expense per farm was $142,288. What is it today? 

$166,539. Mr. Speaker, there has been a significant increase in 

the average farm expense in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I’ll say it again because I know there’s a lot of people that 

are interested in this because they represent a lot of farmers. 

Average farm expenses per farm was $142,288 in 2007; 2009, 

$166,539. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s over $24,000 increase with 

this group of men and women. And then of course the expenses 

on farm inputs in 2007: 4,904; in 2009, 5,879. Now that is per 

million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then this is an interesting one. In 2007 there were 1.349 million 

hogs in the province of Saskatchewan, and how many are there 

today? 780,000 hogs. Hog production in the province of 

Saskatchewan has been cut in half under this group of men and 

women, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, I know they like to think 

all’s well. But here’s what’s interesting, they like to think that 

there’s been just a miracle that’s happened in the province of 

Saskatchewan since they came to office. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at production of commodities, 

production has not changed. The miracle has been that in 2008 

the commodities that were sold in the province of Saskatchewan 

were at its pinnacle. And I think these group of men and women 

thought this was going to last forever and they could spend 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4631 

money like there was no tomorrow. And in fact that’s what they 

did. 

 

[22:00] 

 

When you come into office with $2.3 billion in cash, 

commodity prices in the stratosphere, I guess you think that you 

don’t have to drive Chevy Impalas anymore; you can drive Jeep 

Libertys, Mr. Speaker. I guess you think you don’t have to put 

up with Grant Devine’s old furniture in your cabinet office; you 

can go out and get new stuff. You don’t have to put up with the 

old carpets that Grant Devine put into this building; you can go 

out and get new stuff. Oh, you don’t have to put up with old 

drapes; you can go out and get new stuff. 

 

And that’s exactly what’s happened in the province of 

Saskatchewan. These men and women have spent money like 

there’s no tomorrow. And, Mr. Speaker, we have had a deficit 

last year, and they still cleaned out the Crowns and they still 

took money from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And they still 

had a deficit. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to do the same 

thing this year. 

 

Now what’s really a laugh, a joke, they say they decreased 

spending by $125 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t. Mr. 

Speaker, mid year they decided they better try and rein in some 

of this spending, so they stopped some of their projects. They 

pulled back some of the money. I think the nursing homes they 

pulled back. They pulled back some schools, you know, that 

sort of thing. And they said, oh we’ve got spending under 

control. But in fact if you look at this budget, over what they 

actually spent last year, they’re increasing spending. 

 

Now where this budget is dishonest, Mr. Speaker, is here. This 

is a group of men and women who have just told us that they’re 

going to increase health care spending by 5 per cent for the 

health regions, but they are estimating that health regions will 

run deficits. And in fact this fiscal year that’s just going to close 

out here in a couple of days, according to their forecast, those 

health regions have run $136.9 million in deficits this year. And 

they’re projecting they’re going to run another 76 million. 

 

Well I bet. I bet. Because here’s what they said last spring with 

the budget: they said those regional health authorities would 

have a surplus of 11.7 million. And what did they really have, 

according to their own budget book? A deficit of 136.9 million. 

And they’re projecting a further 76 million, and I suggest it’s 

going to be a lot higher than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you look at their own budget book, summary statement of 

surplus, they’re projecting a deficit of 677.5 million. Their 

forecast for last year, even though they took money out of CIC, 

755 million; even though they took money out of the fiscal 

stabilization fund, over 500 million; 1.3 billion they took out of 

our savings account, Mr. Speaker; they’re still going to have a 

deficit of close to a half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in two years, in two years, these group of men and women 

called the Sask Party have increased the debt by over $1 billion 

and they took out $1.3 billion in cash, Mr. Speaker. Now that is 

not competence, Mr. Speaker. That’s not competence. And I 

know they like to think they’re competent and I know that they 

think that they’ve been doing a very good job. But the reality in 

the province of Saskatchewan, we’ve gone from having $2.3 

billion in savings to now having over $1 billion in debt at a time 

when there are record revenues. 

 

And you cannot continue to spend money like there’s no 

tomorrow, like there’s no budgeting, just because you want to. 

You have to be fiscally responsible. And I say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, this group of men and women have not been 

fiscally responsible with this third budget. And next year 

they’re projecting another deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the thing that is most troubling is 

contained on page 25 of their budget summary. And for all of 

those citizens that are listening tonight, please go to page 25 

because this is the most, this is one of the more troubling 

aspects of their budget. And on page 25 at the top of the page, 

they say this. They say this: 

 

There has been a change in how the Province funds capital 

acquisition by Treasury Board Crown organizations. 

Rather than provide the TB Crown an upfront capital 

grant, the Province will fund (and expense) the capital as it 

is amortized by that TB Crown. This change effectively 

amortizes and expenses TB Crown capital acquisitions in 

the same manner that it amortizes its own capital assets. 

 

And that is a change. Now, Mr. Speaker, who are Treasury 

Board Crowns? What group of organizations have they put 

under Treasury Board Crowns? 

 

Now what the citizens of Saskatchewan should know is boards 

of education are now under Treasury Board organizations. Mr. 

Speaker, health regions are under Treasury Board organizations. 

And, Mr. Speaker, historically what we’ve done when we’ve 

funded a school, we had the money for the school. When we 

funded a health facility, we had the money for a health facility. 

And, Mr. . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Absolutely not. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, absolutely. Absolutely, absolutely. We 

did not amortize that over a period of years. We did not do that. 

And the Minister of Health, I know he likes to have his little 

rages. We witness them regularly. But in fact that’s how it 

happened. You might have phase one, phase two, phase three, 

phase four, but you funded it with a grant. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the worry is that they will announce this capital and the 

organizations will get finance that capital and the government 

will amortize it and pay a grant to those organizations over a 

25- or 30-year period. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to go 

back to those days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s an organization called the Global 

Transportation Hub Authority. This is their global 

transportation hub out here on the outskirts of Regina. This has 

the potential to have a very significant capital investment by the 

province of Saskatchewan. In the past what we would do is, we 

would finance that as the project was being built. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, on page 25, they’re going to change that. And that is a 

worry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is the government 

that’s very interested in a domed stadium. And there is the 



4632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

possibility that a Crown corporation could be created for the 

domed stadium. And how would you fund it? Well the 

organization could borrow the money and the government over 

30 years or 35 years could be amortized and pay for it. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, this is a very difficult problem because 

we don’t want to go back to the bad old days when we didn’t 

know in the province of Saskatchewan how much money was 

coming in and how much money was going out. And I would 

say to the people of Saskatchewan that this is a shell game. And 

it’s a game that we should worry about, Mr. Speaker, because 

they are changing the accounting rules, not at the beginning of a 

new cycle, but in the middle of their mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

And we find that unacceptable in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that our health regions apparently 

have received a 5 per cent increase. I represent one of the 

ridings in the city of Saskatoon. The health region in Saskatoon 

has indicated, and most people will know, that this is a 

provincial health region because a majority of the patients that 

go to that health region come from across the province. And our 

CEO [chief executive officer] Maura Davies has advised us that 

they’re going to have to find about $24 million in operating 

reductions, Mr. Speaker. And this is a health region that is 

running a deficit this year. 

 

They have notified . . . In the paper today, they’ve indicated that 

they are no longer going to have retired nurses who are on 

pension return to the health region to provide services. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that there are a number of nurses in the 

health region that I represent that are extremely worried that, 

while the minister is talking about 600 new nurses, there’s been 

a lot of the holes filled by nurses that have retired and come 

back on a casual basis. And they’re very, very concerned that 

they will not have enough nurses to do the work that needs to be 

done in the Regina Health Region, Mr. Speaker, or in the 

Saskatoon Health Region. 

 

The other area of concern in Saskatoon is what’s going to 

happen with our two school boards. And, Mr. Speaker, both the 

financial officers for our two school boards have indicated that 

this grant that the government is providing our two school 

boards amounts to about a 1.2 per cent increase. And they’ve 

indicated that — based on their contractual obligations, utilities, 

their service contracts, and so on and so forth — all of those 

bills that are constant exceed the 1.1 per cent increase that’s 

coming from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Garry Benning, the chief financial officer for the Saskatoon 

Public board said, based on the number that they’ve received, 

that there is a shortage. And, Mr. Speaker, I should tell the 

public that school boards in this past fiscal year used reserves in 

order to balance their budget. And that also shows up in their 

information. 

 

Last year school boards apparently had a surplus of about 107.8 

million, and this year they’re looking at 31.9 million. And I 

guess they’re expected to use their reserves to continue to deal 

with operating shortfalls from the province, Mr. Speaker. But 

Garry Benning has indicated that the increased grant from the 

province works out to about 1.16 per cent for the school year 

which is less than the increases that the school board in 

Saskatoon, the Saskatoon Public School Board is facing. And 

Don Lloyd who is the chief financial officer over at the Greater 

Saskatoon Catholic Schools says that they’re going to have to 

reduce expenditures to meet their budget as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the government, the Sask Party government can say that the 

one point — to give them some faith — 1.2 per cent increase is 

enough, but I can say to the public that the school officials are 

looking at reductions as a result of this government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s I think a bit troubling is that in the 

past, if governments got themselves in difficulty and had to 

reduce expenditures to schools, the grant coming from the 

province, school boards had some place to go. They no longer 

have that capacity because this government took away their 

ability to tax, and so now they are totally at the mercy of the 

provincial government. By law they’re not able to run deficits, 

and so in order to balance their budget, they’re going to have to 

get out the chopping knife and cut off some expenses to meet 

the money that’s coming from this government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s some other things in this budget that 

are very disturbing. Mr. Speaker, I find it very problematic that 

the Early Learning Centre here in Regina had more bad news, 

and a grant that they had received from the Ministry of 

Education through Community Solutions has been cut. That’s 

$57,000 a year grant that the Early Learning Centre received to 

provide preschool support for highly vulnerable preschool 

children and their families. As well, Mr. Speaker, other Regina 

agencies have received a cut to their funding. The McKenzie 

Infant Care Centre, the Circle Project, and Stepping Stones have 

also received cuts. 

 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, every community-based 

organization in the province who had access to the central 

vehicle agency used the vehicles to transport children or the 

women that they worked with. That is now cut. So for instance, 

Transition House in North Battleford, Saskatoon, Regina used 

to have access on a cost-recovery basis to CVAs [central 

vehicle agency] and they no longer do. And what those . . . Well 

you know they talk about Warman, but for the women who 

work with those vulnerable, abused women and their children 

every day, having access to a van to take those little kids to 

school or daycare, or to take those women to the police station, 

the hospital or to wherever they have to go, those vehicles are 

no longer available, thanks to the Sask Party government. 

 

[22:15] 

 

And I would have expected at the very least, Mr. Speaker, I 

would have expected at the very least that the women in the 

Sask Party caucus, the women in the Sask Party caucus would 

have stood up to the people, to the men in their caucus and said, 

you are not cutting the CVAs to the transition houses in this 

province because they need to have those vehicles to transport 

the little kids and the vulnerable women. But did they stand up 

and say no? They did not, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s 

shameful, Mr. Speaker, absolutely shameful, absolutely 

shameful. 

 

They stood in this House and they went on and on and on about 

women services when they were in opposition. But could they 

stand up, could they stand up and say no, you are not cutting 

those CVA vehicles to those transition houses, Interval House 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4633 

in my constituency? Absolutely not. They couldn’t do that, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’re saying, oh well we’ve given a 1 per cent 

increase. We’ve given them a 1 per cent increase, and they 

should be happy. But, Mr. Speaker, they can’t drive their own 

vehicles. They can’t drive their own vehicles, they’re going to 

have to find vehicles, and that is going to be more than 1 per 

cent. It’s going to be more than 1 per cent. 

 

So I find it absolutely shameful that the women over there did 

not stand up for Interval House, Transition House in North 

Battleford, Transition House in Moose Jaw, Transition House in 

Weyburn, Transition House in Regina. They did nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. Absolutely nothing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that I think that this 

government over here . . . it speaks to their meanness. It speaks 

to their meanness. It speaks to their meanness. There’s some 

groups they like, and there’s other groups they don’t like. We 

had neighbourhood community development organizations in 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon, and what did they 

do? They cut those organizations, Mr. Speaker. And why did 

they cut these organizations? That’s a very good question. They 

cut the Regina learning centre. I don’t know why. But there are 

all of these organizations that work with vulnerable people, help 

them to become independent, help them access housing, help 

people get into housing. And these people cut. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think when this budget sort of sifts it way 

down, when we get to the bottom of it, we’re going to find that 

it was death by a thousand cuts. That’s what we’re going to 

find. They cut transition houses and women having access to 

CVA vehicles. They cut a grant to the Early Learning Centre 

here in Regina — the Mackenzie infant centre here in Regina. 

They cut grants to the very groups that look after our most 

vulnerable children and most vulnerable women, Mr. Speaker, 

and we find that shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On top of that, I mean . . . And I asked this question on budget 

day. I asked, is there any government in Canada that has a 

deficit, across the country, that has given up its broadcast 

licence? And the answer from the officials was no. Now please 

tell me this. What kind of thinking went into cutting SCN and a 

government giving up a broadcast licence? What kind . . . Who 

was thinking over there because I can tell you that you’re not 

going to get that broadcast licence back. That’s what I can tell 

you. And why a government would give up a broadcast licence, 

when they’re so difficult to get, is beyond me, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

beyond me. Why would a government give up a broadcast 

licence that helps the film industry in this province, film and 

television industry, survive because they have access to SCN 

and support from SCN? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know on budget day or soon thereafter, 

there was a group put up on Facebook to save SCN and I think 

they have over 3,500 people in the province of Saskatchewan 

that have said, let’s save SCN. And I would really encourage 

the government to rethink this one. 

 

You know, you can go after lots of groups. You know, you 

might not like them for political reasons or whatever. You 

might not like the people that work there. You might not like 

the people that are on the board, or you might not like — I don’t 

know — the executive director. You might think they’re just 

not good people. But for heaven’s sakes, why would you give 

up a broadcast licence? Why would you do that because it 

makes no sense if you’re thinking logically and rationally which 

then . . . I guess it speaks to the competence, Mr. Speaker, 

because a competent group of men and women would not give 

up a broadcast licence in the province of Saskatchewan, and so I 

guess this speaks to their incompetence. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the Minister of Agriculture talk 

about the great things that have occurred in the province of 

Saskatchewan in agriculture. I do note, I do note and I 

remember his budget speech last year where he talked about 

close to half a billion dollars in the Ag budget. And he was 

pleased as punch, and he thought that this was the best thing 

since sliced bread. And I do note this year that the largest cut 

. . . Guess which budget it’s in? It’s in Agriculture. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I do note this. I do note this. I do note this 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh and Bob says I’m going to 

get myself in trouble. Bob says I’m going to get myself in 

trouble. No, I’m not. Oh pardon me, the member from Saltcoats 

says, I’m going to get myself in trouble. 

 

But you know, here’s what’s so interesting about the last NDP 

budget. How much did we put into AgriStability, CAIS 

[Canadian agricultural income stabilization]? One hundred and 

eighteen million bucks. And how much is the Sask Party putting 

in this year? One hundred and four million dollars. Oh why is 

that? What a surprise, Mr. Speaker, what a surprise. 

 

Oh and he says it’s because prices have gone down, prices have 

gone down. Oh. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how times 

change. It’s interesting how times change. Now that he’s been 

in government for a couple years, you look at the experience of 

the program and they’ve cut $97 million out of his budget 

because it wasn’t spent, Mr. Speaker. And if he was sitting on 

this side of the House, he would be railing away, and we would 

hear him all over the Legislative Assembly. But now that he’s 

sitting on those benches, he’s prepared to go with a 97 . . . He’s 

prepared to sort of keep his counsel — I guess I’ll say — his 

counsel and just suck it up because his budget took the biggest 

hit of all the ministries in government. His budget took the 

biggest hit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is very surprising because this is a 

minister that, he was the Ag critic for a very long time. He’s 

been their only Agriculture minister, and I would have thought 

he would have fought hard to keep his budget intact. But 

obviously, Mr. Speaker, he was overcome by all of his 

colleagues, and they needed that money desperately to move 

into some other area. And so now we have, now we have a 

budget that is very, very small relative to what that minister 

talked about last year. 

 

And you know I noticed that the minister, he talked about 

gophers and he talked about the coyote program and he talked 

about the well program, but he really didn’t talk about any new 

programs for Agriculture this year. And I think the minister 

knows that this is going to be a very tough year on the farm. 

Oh, I think it is. I think it’s going to be a tough year, and 

farmers are predicting it. 

 

Now he can say, no it’s not. He will say, no it’s not going to be 

a tough year. But it’s going to be a tough year. If you look at the 



4634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

price of commodities, things are down and things are down 

significantly. And farmers aren’t feeling all that optimistic 

about prices. And a lot of people are hanging on to what they 

had last year, hoping that the prices are going to go up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spent quite a bit of time on this budget, but 

I will say this. This is what I predict: I predict that health boards 

in the province of Saskatchewan are going to run some 

significant deficits this year because they cannot do what this 

government wants them to accomplish on a 5 per cent increase. 

I predict that. 

 

I predict that the Education budget is going to be much larger 

than what they put in this book, and so their deficit is going to 

be much larger because they haven’t included teachers’ salaries. 

 

I predict the health regions are going to spend more and have 

larger deficits because $100 million of this budget increase to 

the health regions is for nurses’ salaries. We were told that on 

budget day: $40 million apparently for the 600 new nurses, and 

another $60 million to implement their 40 per cent wage 

increase over four years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I predict significant deficits in our health 

regions. And the Education budget will be much higher than the 

minister is telling us today because they have not taken into 

account teachers’ salaries. And in fact the Minister of Education 

told those boards on budget day that LINC [local 

implementation and negotiation committee] agreements might 

be included as well in new funding that might be coming 

mid-year or later on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’m glad to see that the Minister of Education is back. And 

I just have one closing note, I have one closing note for the 

Minister of Education. You know, Minister, on budget day, you 

insulted a lot of people in your budget briefing when you took 

on the people from the Regina Catholic school board. They’ve 

never seen anything quite like it. And, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Regina Catholic school board came to this Assembly, that 

minister when he sat down, he stared up into that gallery and 

tried to intimidate those citizens. And I will say here, that this is 

unacceptable behaviour coming from a minister of the Crown to 

try and attempt to intimidate citizens that come to this 

Assembly with their issues, Mr. Speaker, as behaviour 

unbecoming of the Minister of Education in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  

 

And I hope next year, if he’s still the minister and when he 

meets with his stakeholders, that he will have the courtesy to 

treat those stakeholders with respect. Because it was not 

appreciated by the people who had to witness him reaming out 

the Regina Catholic school board in front of hundreds of 

people, not only at Queensbury Downs, but people who were 

watching through video conferencing across the province. And 

it was said to me that they had never seen anything like it, that 

if you have a pupil you want to discipline, you don’t discipline 

them in front of the whole crowd, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the minister can slap me around all he wants, but I would 

just ask him, slap me, but please don’t slap citizens in this 

province that are trying to have their voices heard in this 

Assembly . . . [inaudible] . . . elected representatives in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

say that the minister can go after me all he wants. I’m a big girl. 

I’ve got thick skin, but please don’t slap around the citizens of 

this province that come and want their voices heard through 

their elected members of their Assembly. 

 

And they can be offended all they want. They can phone out to, 

you know, whoever and say, you better not, you better not talk 

like that. You better not talk to the opposition. You better not 

come to the House because we’re going to be in power an 

awfully long time and . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4607 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4613 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4617 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4623 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4629 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


