




















































Hansard: April 20, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 20, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4913 

 April 20, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to inform members that Mr. Speaker will not 

be present today to open today‟s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s an honour to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly a family — and more family is 

coming in as we go, Mr. Speaker — a representative of the 

families that we honoured today earlier in the Legislative 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we honoured the Johnstone family of 

Martensville, the Kooger and Poirier families of Regina, and the 

Reimche family of Saskatoon. And I see the Reimches and the 

Koogers have joined us here in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, families for some time in our province and across 

the country have been working towards the adoption of children 

from Haiti and frankly of other places around the world. And 

then of course the 12th of January happened. The massive 

earthquake in Port-au-Prince, that literally shook that entire 

nation, occurred and in many cases expedited the process, but 

also caused much concern and worry on the parts of family 

members for whom matches had been made and the process 

was under way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had a chance today to honour those 

parents who have exhibited as close we can get to perfect love 

on this side of heaven by opening their families and their hearts 

to kids. And, Mr. Speaker, we also had the chance to recognize 

the federal government for their expeditious treatment of the 

adoption of children from Haiti, as well as officials from Social 

Services and the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

immigration branch of the Government of Saskatchewan — not 

the politicians, Mr. Speaker, but the officials who did an 

amazing job working with families to expedite the process. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we were able to honour a number of 

families and kids today, but I want to say that we are joined by, 

in terms of adoptees, we‟re joined by Gregory and Jackie 

Reimche, if they would give us a wave. The parents . . . They 

have adopted Mackenson and Wilson. They are 10 months, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and obviously at 10 months they‟re not 

prepared to wave just yet, but they might make some other 

sound that we would know that they were here. Also joining 

them is niece Grace, and she‟s just one year old. And there she 

is. She‟s being held up by her mom, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also joining us today are the Koogers. And we want to 

acknowledge Lovensky, who is 16 years old — his last name is 

Horace — and his sister Jennifer who‟s 15 years old. They‟ve 

both joined us as well today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if all members of the Assembly would 

help me to thank these parents, help thank the officials that 

made these adoptions possible in a timely way. Most 

importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if members of the 

Assembly will help me welcome these newest Saskatchewan 

citizens, these newest members of the Rider nation to their 

Legislative Assembly today. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Leader 

of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my pleasure to join with the 

Premier today to welcome the families here who have adopted 

children and the great job they‟re doing. 

 

And also to mention that, as the Premier mentioned, when the 

devastating earthquake occurred in Haiti, the tens of thousands, 

millions of Canadians who came forward and were involved. 

Some special people who adopted, but the many millions, tens 

of millions who donated money to that worthwhile cause. To 

our Governor General with the special ties to Haiti and for her 

involvement. I would want to join with the Premier and say 

how pleased we are to join with him in welcoming these 

families here today who represent many, many others from 

across the province. Welcome and I hope you enjoy your stay 

with us. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, sir. I‟d like to, to 

you and through you, Mr. Speaker, introduce to all members of 

the Assembly 41 grade 7 students from the Greystone Heights 

School along with their teachers, Ms. Lisa Kalesnikoff, Ms. 

Deanna Fast as well as chaperones Mr. Doug Maurer, Mr. Tony 

Mak, and Ms. June Morgan. I‟ll be meeting with the students, 

the teachers, and the chaperones later on after question period, 

Mr. Speaker, but I‟m wondering if all members of this 

Assembly would welcome these fine students to their 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

an important group seated in your gallery. In your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, is a group of the southeast Indian community from 

Saskatoon, a delegation from Saskatoon who came to the 

legislature today to observe the proceedings, a good number in 

the group. I would like to highlight Naveed Anwar, one 

individual — Naveed, if you could give a wave — who does a 

great amount of work in leadership within his own community 

in Saskatoon. 

 

Having lunch with the individuals, they shared to me that some 

of them have been to legislative assemblies in other 

jurisdictions. But for most of them, this is their first trip to the 

Saskatchewan legislature, so I would ask all members to give 

them a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Southeast. 

 



4914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

with the member from Greystone in welcoming the class from 

Greystone School. In that class and with that group are two 

people that have got some special relationship to me. One is my 

niece, Sarah Hogarth, who asked me today to introduce her as 

my favourite niece. I in fact have five nieces so I‟m not able to 

do that. But I can say, Mr. Speaker, that she is my youngest 

niece and lives the closest to me. 

 

Also in the back row is my favourite sister, June, my only sister. 

Thank you. And I‟d ask that all members welcome them. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Speaker‟s 

gallery today, we have Stacey Simms — give a wave, Stacey — 

and her husband, Philip, I think. No? Yes. And her parents. 

 

And we also have members of the families of Justin and Cheryl 

St. Louis who have come today to talk about kidney dialysis. 

 

And interestingly enough, Stacey just . . . You might have seen 

her just come into the gallery. She just finished doing her 

dialysis in our offices so she could come and watch the 

proceedings today. So welcome to you all to the legislature. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to join with the member opposite and welcome 

the people here, probably who are going to be listening to some 

questions around kidney transplant. I‟d like to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly, and thank you for being here. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the safety and 

conditions of their highway. This particular petition applies to 

Highway 123, which is the only highway to Cumberland House. 

It‟s the only highway in, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, the only 

highway out. And this petition goes on to state that this 

highway has so many potholes it requires considerable 

manoeuvring just so you don‟t get stuck in the mud. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing of 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 

Cumberland House. I so submit. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise to present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife 

habitat lands. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re all aware that The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of 

uplands and wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

the province in its natural state; and that there is concern with 

the government repealing this schedule, listing these designated 

lands within the Act. Now, Mr. Speaker, the prayer on the 

petition reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Elbow, 

Hanley, and Outlook. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition calling for protection for renters 

from unreasonable rent increases. And we know that many 

renters in Saskatchewan are facing a dangerous combination of 

rising rents and low vacancy rates in many communities, and in 

fact many have seen rent increases of $100, hundreds of dollars 

monthly. And this is hurting even smaller communities. And we 

know a majority of Canadians, now 80 per cent, live in 

provinces with protection, with rent controls. I‟d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: we would cause the government 

to consider enacting some form of rent control with a view 

to protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And I do so present on behalf of citizens signed here in Regina. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 135 with concerns of the people of 

Pelican Narrows. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4915 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August 27th, 2007. 

 

The petition is signed by the good people of Pelican Narrows. I 

so present. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition signed by individuals in the province 

concerned about the issue of tuition. And I call on the Sask 

Party government to have its actions match its rhetoric. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to addressing the burden placed 

by high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is being circulated because the 

Saskatchewan Party government specifically amended the 

retention program to exclude master‟s and Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] graduates in addition to graduates from outside the 

province of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Prince Albert. 

I so present. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition with 

respect to yet another issue regarding safe and affordable water 

in Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan. And these citizens 

have been ordered to upgrade their water system, with no 

assistance from the provincial government, amounting in 

monthly bills of upwards of $165 a month. And this has been 

going on for over a year, Mr. Speaker. The petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Rosthern and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that the members of the 

building trade unions have a proud craft history in our province 

and that the existing construction industry labour relations Act 

has been working just fine. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s also 

no secret that the existing building trades contracts support an 

apprenticeship system which provides training and a highly 

skilled workforce. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by residents of Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, and Swift Current. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition in support of maintaining quality health 

care services. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note that the 

Government of Saskatchewan must recognize the value of all 

health care providers by having a commitment to adequate 

funding and the installation of good faith in provincial 

collective bargaining process. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the government to commit to negotiating a fair 

and just collective bargaining agreement with health care 

workers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of 

Lloydminster, of Marshall, and of Waseca, Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government‟s disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 



4916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligations to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina and 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits tabled by this 

government, and they reference the two years of billions of 

dollars of debt growth under the Sask Party, contrary to the 

billboards that pretend something else, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, signed by concerned residents as it relates to 

financial mismanagement, are from Pilot Butte and Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased again 

to rise today to present a petition in support of the 

Saskatchewan film and television industry. This petition is 

signed by residents concerned that this government does not 

understand how film and TV producers build their financing for 

their projects and the critical role SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] plays in this process. I‟d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

La Ronge Ice Wolves Win Credit Union Cup 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

congratulate the La Ronge Ice Wolves on winning their first 

Credit Union SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] Cup 

last week against the Yorkton Terriers. 

 

The Ice Wolves skated to a victory with an overtime 3-2 win in 

Yorkton. The Wolves took a 2-nothing lead thanks to the 

goal-scoring ability of Liam Brennan. The hometown Terriers 

fought back and managed to bring themselves within one goal, 

as former Wolf, Adam Moar, beat Joel Danyluk and scored. 

Then with only 38 seconds left, Yorkton tied the game to send it 

to two overtime periods. But never giving up, the Wolves came 

out in the fourth period with a renewed energy. 

 

Brennan pulled through, scoring the game-winning hat trick 

goal. Congratulations to captain Dustin Stevenson who was 

named playoff MVP [most valuable player] and now has signed 

a contract with the Washington Capitals. I‟m sure he‟ll make us 

all proud in the NHL [National Hockey League] and will have a 

long, successful career ahead of him. 

 

Special congratulations must also go to the head coach and 

general manager, Bob Beatty, along with his team of highly 

qualified coaching staff. And we must not forget to thank 

Brandi Bell, director of marketing and promotions, for all of her 

hard work. A big thank you to all the volunteers. I ask all 

members to join me in congratulating the La Ronge Ice Wolves 

on becoming SJHL Credit Union Cup championships for 2010. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Haitian Children Welcomed 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Premier 

officially welcomed children from Haiti who were recently 

adopted by Saskatchewan families in the wake of a devastating 

earthquake, to their new home and province. At a special event 

at the provincial legislature today, the Premier thanked these 

adoptive families: the Johnstone family from Martensville, the 

Kooger family from Regina, the Poiriers from Regina, and the 

Reimche family from Saskatoon. The love and generosity that 

they have displayed by opening their hearts and homes to 

children from another part of the world is extraordinary. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it took a lot of hard work on the part of many 

people to make these adoptions possible. Charles Kooger of 

Regina said: 

 

We‟re truly grateful for the stellar assistance of Social 

Services staff in Saskatchewan. We were able to call our 

caseworker night or day to find out where things were at 

as we anxiously waited for our children to arrive. My wife 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4917 

and I are delighted that the people who helped so much 

with bringing our children home are able to meet them 

today and visit with the entire family. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I along with all of my colleagues wish 

to welcome all the newest residents from Haiti and wish them 

and their families all the best in the future. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Newcomers Contribute to Community 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, our provincial motto “from many 

peoples, strength” is a true reminder of what makes 

Saskatchewan such a strong and vibrant place. For generations, 

people from around the world have come to Saskatchewan to 

begin a new life with the hope of a brighter future. And 

thankfully, Mr. Speaker, just as my great-grandparents were 

successful in establishing roots here in Saskatchewan, more 

recent immigrants have been choosing Saskatchewan as their 

new home. 

 

Although the migration of people and the desire for a better life 

is the same across generations, the countries from which people 

arrive have changed. Among the groups with an increased 

presence in Saskatchewan are members of the Muslim faith. In 

my home city of Saskatoon alone, it is estimated that 5 to 6,000 

Muslims currently reside. 

 

While some members of this faith community are born and 

raised in Saskatchewan, many others have come over the past 

number of years from a wide variety of countries. These 

newcomers to Saskatchewan are contributing greatly to the 

social, economic, and cultural landscape. Through hard work, a 

commitment to family, and a dedication to their faith, members 

of the Muslim community are ensuring their role in our 

province will be a long-lasting one. 

 

But sadly, Mr. Speaker, many of these new arrivals are also 

learning that their future is in jeopardy due to the Sask Party‟s 

reckless mismanagement of our province‟s finances. An 

increased burden of debt and hurtful cuts to social programs are 

but some of the ways new immigrants are being asked to pay 

the price for the Sask Party government‟s failure to be good 

managers. 

 

I ask all members to join me in thanking new immigrants to our 

province for their contribution in making Saskatchewan an even 

better place to live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I had 

the pleasure of speaking at the Saskatchewan Weekly 

Newspaper Association annual convention over the weekend. In 

a day and age where newspaper readership is slowly being 

eroded by online and alternative media, weekly newspapers 

continue to thrive. 

 

The common misconception is that the weeklies are about bake 

sales and bonspiels. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing could 

be further from the truth. These publications provide the readers 

primarily with the news that matters most to them — local 

news. Their opinion pages focus on local happenings. They take 

matters of provincial and national importance and inform 

readers how these events impact their lives. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government recognizes the vital role 

that weeklies play in Saskatchewan. They are a key component 

of our cultural and social fabric. The publishers of these papers 

reflect the Saskatchewan spirit. They are hard-working and 

down to earth. 

 

They provide young journalists with the all-important first gig. 

Through experiencing first-hand the impact of the work they do 

at a very personal level, these young men and women learn 

valuable lessons about ethics and responsibility. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Pay Equity 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

April 20th
 
marks Equal Pay Day in Canada and this date 

symbolizes how far into 2010 women must work to earn what 

men earned in the 2009 calendar year. 

 

According to Statistics Canada, the annual gross income for 

women in Saskatchewan is only two-thirds that of men, and 

Aboriginal women make a further 30 per cent less than the 

provincial average for non-Aboriginal women. According to a 

study done by the chartered accountants in Saskatchewan, there 

is a quote that, “Saskatchewan [has] made large improvements 

in pay equity, going from one of the worst wage parity 

environments in 1999 to the most equitable in 2005 . . .” And 

that was under an NDP [New Democratic Party] government, 

Mr. Speaker. Yet in 2008 under the Saskatchewan Party, 

Saskatchewan had the second worst wage gap in the country. 

 

The government should lead by example in the fight to achieve 

pay equity by working to elect women to public office, 

appointing women to leadership positions, and putting their 

money where their mouth is, funding programs that work 

towards achieving pay equity such as the Status of Women 

office. Yet all we‟ve seen from this Sask Party government is a 

complete disregard for women‟s rights and insulting wage 

offers to health care workers, 80 per cent of whom are women. 

And figures provided by the government show that women 

working for the Saskatchewan Party are paid just 53 per cent of 

the median salary earned by men working for the same group. 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. I recognize the 

member for Yorkton. 

 

Encouragement for Bone Marrow Donations 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We all 



4918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

know that donating blood saves lives but so often we don‟t 

seem to find the time until someone near to us needs that gift of 

life, and we see the huge need and decide to do something about 

it. My own family was much like that but now, along with so 

many others, we try to donate regularly, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it‟s organ donation or — recently coming to my attention — 

being tested for the bone marrow registry which places you in 

the OneMatch worldwide registry. 

 

This was an initiative a group in Yorkton in support of Yorkton 

Terrier and local resident, 19-year-old Luke Boechler who is 

currently battling leukemia, took on. Luke is in need of a bone 

marrow transplant and in an effort to support Luke, search for a 

match, and bring awareness to the need, the group set up a 

registration day at the Gallagher Centre in Yorkton. An 

astonishing 329 people came out to register. 

 

Mr. Speaker, admittedly, live organ donation can make many 

fearful, but the gift of one‟s blood is almost of no risk and the 

minor discomfort and time needed to donate bone marrow is 

well worth the small sacrifice for that gift of life. I would 

encourage anyone with an interest or wanting more information 

to please contact Canadian Blood Services. My family has 

witnessed first-hand the supportive nature of my home of 

Yorkton and area, but I‟m always encouraged to see the heart of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Luke is a true hero with the attitude to prove it. 

And in his own words in regard to his disease, “You will not 

win because I will not lose.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Athabasca. 

 

The Government and the North 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Time 

and time again we have seen how this government leaves 

northern Saskatchewan behind. All across northern 

Saskatchewan roads are in desperate need of repair, and because 

of these dangerous conditions people are placed in life or death 

situations. And yet the Saskatchewan Party continues to neglect 

the repairs and upgrades that are desperately needed. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government has failed to address the 

affordable housing shortage in the North. While hundreds of 

people wait for a safe and affordable place to live, this 

government has offered nothing but empty, empty rhetoric and 

cheerleading. 

 

The Sask Party government has also ignored the health care 

needs of northerners. Despite the growing number of youth 

suicides, they have not improved mental health and addiction 

services. They continue to ignore and disrespect the health care 

situations for people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

At a time when the government is stripping millions of dollars 

out of our Crowns, the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing admitted yesterday that his government is putting 

thousands of people at risk because many areas of the province, 

including the North, do not have adequate cellphone coverage. 

Mr. Speaker, in an emergency situation the Sask Party can offer 

no guarantees that Saskatchewan people, especially those in the 

North, will be able to call 911. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a desperate attempt to balance a budget and 

cover up their own incompetence, it‟s time for this government 

to stop leaving northerners behind. Thank you. 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Status of Member 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Can 

he provide the date, time, and circumstances under which he 

first became aware of allegations that his legislative secretary 

for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing was using cocaine? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let‟s be very clear here. There 

is an allegation, or it is alleged in material, that that was the 

case in respect of that independent member. So let‟s be very, 

very careful about the words that we use in this Assembly, 

where members have the protection that isn‟t afforded them in 

terms of immunity outside this Assembly. 

 

On Friday last, shortly after lunchtime I believe, was around the 

time that I first heard of this information being presented by 

members of the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] to 

senior officials in my office. I was informed of the material. I 

contacted that afternoon the Attorney General for counsel in 

terms of the appropriate actions moving forward. 

 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the record will show, the 

member in question, now the independent member for 

Northwest, voluntarily resigned a position of caucus. And 

subsequently the government has turned over all of the 

information per the counsel of the Ministry of Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the CBC reported yesterday that 

after verifying facts within the package of information it 

received, it brought the entire 13 minutes of audio to a senior 

government official, “somebody who is a right-hand man to the 

Premier.” 

 

To the Premier: who informed the Premier of the allegations 

that his legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing was using cocaine, and when and where did he first 

hear the full audio? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

individual in question is my senior advisor, Reg Downs, who 

was provided this material from CBC reporters, both radio and 

television, on Friday and subsequent to that, on that same day at 

his earliest opportunity, contacted me, provided me with all of 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4919 

the information. And the government has taken the action it has 

taken. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the right steps have been taken in this 

respect because counsel was solicited from the Attorney 

General. As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, counsel was solicited 

from my deputy minister, a former deputy minister of Justice 

under the previous administration, and an able one I would say, 

obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then subsequently to that, 

the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Justice provided 

subsequent council to Mr. Downs and all of the material was 

turned over to the Regina Police Service for their further 

investigation. That is where the matter stands today. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix and the 

Leader-Post are reporting today that the Premier and his 

legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

had decided before Friday that he would not run again: 

 

But he said he had made the decision not to run again in 

the 2011 election in consultation with Wall before 

Friday‟s bombshell news, despite being renominated by 

the Saskatchewan Party in Saskatoon Northwest only on 

March 25. 

 

On March 30th, the Premier signed the individual‟s nomination 

papers. Those nomination papers were sent to the Chief 

Electoral Officer on April the 6th. To the Premier: what 

information did the Premier learn between April 6th and last 

Friday that caused him to talk to the legislative secretary about 

not running again? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I would remind the 

Opposition House Leader that according to rule 19(2), that 

questions of a topic related to a political party is not appropriate 

for usage in this House. I will allow the Premier or any other 

member of Executive Council to answer it if they so wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m happy to answer 

the question because no conversation took place. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to the decision of the hon. member to run 

or not run, no direct conversation took place between he and I 

until after the events were disclosed this weekend in a 

subsequent telephone conversation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 

I didn‟t believe it was my duty or right, frankly, to release to the 

media. That is the responsibility of the member in question, 

especially given the obvious stress that that member would have 

been under. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, up to Friday and even today without any 

formal notice, except for the fact that we‟ve suspended the 

nomination, as far as I had been informed directly by the 

member, he was the nominated candidate for the Saskatchewan 

Party in Saskatoon Northwest. And there was some talk, I 

know. He had discussed with some members about running 

again as short as weeks ago, with other officials about not 

running again. But the final decision, the resolve is represented 

in this nomination paper which I did sign and turned over to the 

Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier signed his legislative 

secretary‟s nomination papers on March 25th and then sent 

them to the Chief Electoral Officer on April the 6th. Now 

apparently there were discussions between the Premier and his 

legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

sometime between April 6th and last Friday when the alleged 

cocaine affair became public. According to the Premier‟s 

legislative secretary, the discussions he had with the Premier 

were about not running in the next election, despite having been 

recently nominated. 

 

To the Premier: what changed between April 6th and last 

Friday? Was he aware of any information that changed the 

standing of this legislative secretary? And was he trying to keep 

the truth from the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is no, to 

the question, to the premise of the question which is did a 

conversation take place between the member and myself in the 

time period that member has referenced as to his intention to 

run again. The answer is no. No such conversation took place, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

The first I heard unequivocally from the member about his 

interest in not seeking re-election for Northwest was Sunday 

evening, Sunday last. So let‟s be very, very clear about that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Let‟s also be clear that the nomination paper 

was signed by myself, submitted to the Electoral office. 

 

And while there was some discussion by Mr. LeClerc — by the 

member for Northwest, excuse me — about his interest in either 

pursuing or not pursuing his career, and he expressed different 

things to different members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only 

information, the resolve I had until Sunday was that he was the 

nominated candidate for the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

The conversation that that member is alleging, never happened, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. The answer is no. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Premier‟s scrum 

yesterday, he did not tell the media or the people of 

Saskatchewan that he had any discussions with the legislative 

secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing in advance 

of his scrum yesterday. He just admitted those conversations 

occurred on Sunday. In fact all the Premier said yesterday was, 

“I would expect it is reasonable to expect that Mr. LeClerc‟s 

nomination would be suspended.” He just admitted he had 

conversations on Sunday. 

 

To the Premier: if it was decided well before Monday that his 

legislative secretary would not run again, why did he mislead 

the media and the people of Saskatchewan yesterday? And if he 

knew about the potential cocaine affair before Friday, why did 

he wait to act? 

 



4920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the first I heard of the alleged 

information with respect to potential cocaine use was Friday 

last, and no such conversation existed prior to the events, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. No such conversation took place. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Police Investigation 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with regard to the 

suspicious missing laptop, the Premier said this yesterday, “The 

answer to this question is that the laptop . . . is said to have been 

lost by the member in question.” The Premier said the laptop 

was lost. 

 

Well today we learn that the Premier‟s legislative secretary for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing is saying he knows 

where the laptop is. The laptop is in Ontario. 

 

To the Premier: will he admit that he misinformed the House 

and the people of Saskatchewan on this point yesterday? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this matter is now before the Regina Police Service. I don‟t 

think it‟s productive for us to get into minutia of whatever 

statements took place on whatever date. We should, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we should do what the Regina Police Service intends 

to do. We should give them their co-operation, their support. 

That is the role of the police, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We should 

allow that process to take place. 

 

It is not productive to be in here doing what the members 

opposite are doing, Mr. Speaker. What they‟re engaging in is 

pure politics. And, Mr. Speaker, my suggestion to all of them is 

that we allow the police service to continue to do their work and 

give them our full and complete co-operation. If the members 

opposite have information in their possession, however they got 

it, I would urge them to forward that information to the Regina 

Police Service as well. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the truth is not minutia. 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the reason that the Premier said the laptop 

was lost yesterday is because that this is a story he wants to 

have out. Perhaps this is what he and his legislative secretary 

talked about when it became clear that these allegations were 

going to be made public. At first, the legislative secretary 

followed that story. He said he no longer had the laptop and that 

the hard drive could not be checked. But yesterday, the 

legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

went off message and presumably told the truth, that the laptop 

is in Ontario. 

 

To the Premier: now that the story has been shown to be false, 

will the police investigation include tracking down and testing 

the member‟s laptop for any evidence related to these serious 

allegations? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the matter is with the 

Regina Police Service. The Regina Police Service have the 

information that‟s there. If the members wish to ask the Regina 

Police Service to investigate something else or they have some 

additional information, that‟s the proper place to take it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite are doing is engaging 

in speculation and trying to jump to conclusions. The 

investigation properly belongs with the Regina Police Service. 

If the members opposite want to raise something with them or 

they feel they have some information that would be helpful to 

the Regina Police Service, they should go there and give that 

information to them. 

 

To engage in speculation is not productive, not helpful. And we 

would like to urge the members opposite to co-operate fully 

with the Regina Police Service, and if they have any other 

information in their possession, however they got it, they should 

turn that information over as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, with the Premier saying one thing 

and his legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing saying another, it‟s difficult to determine what is the 

truth here. What is obvious, however, is that the legislative 

secretary‟s laptop could contain evidence central to serious 

allegations.  

 

To the Premier: what steps has he or his Minister of Justice 

taken to ensure that this piece of evidence will be turned over to 

the proper authorities without it being destroyed or tampered 

with by this legislative secretary in the meantime? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, for the record, the 

individual, the member for Saskatoon Northwest, is no longer a 

legislative secretary, does not have that role at the present time. 

The member for Saskatoon Northwest has turned the matter 

over to the Regina Police Service. The Regina Police Service 

I‟m sure — and I have full confidence in them — will 

investigate all aspects of the matter. 

 

If the members opposite want something else investigated, or if 

they have further information, it‟s within their purview to pass 

that information along. Mr. Speaker, once again I restate: the 

matter is with the Regina Police Service. Co-operation should 

be given to them and, Mr. Speaker, it would be inappropriate 

for the members opposite to do anything else other than give 

their full co-operation to the Regina Police Service. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4921 

Applications for Immigration 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If this minister really 

thinks that immigration is a priority, he should back up his 

words with action. This minister could have increased staffing 

levels to address the wait times in the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program but instead, in this government‟s desperate 

attempt to cover their financial mismanagement, they axed 

nearly $200,000 from the immigration budget including 

$113,000 from salaries. To the minister: why is it fair that 

Saskatchewan families who want to sponsor relatives from 

overseas have to pay the price for the Sask Party‟s 

mismanagement? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for 

the opportunity to provide an update to the people of this 

province regarding immigration. Between 2001 and 2006 just 

8,000 people came to Saskatchewan from other countries. Mr. 

Speaker, just 8,000. At the same time Manitoba brought in 

about 30,000. What we‟ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is we‟ll be 

moving on about 10,000 newcomers into the province of 

Saskatchewan this very year alone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legacy, the legacy of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

does not focus on people coming in. It‟s a legacy of 35,000 

people leaving, leaving the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ve seen the province of Saskatchewan grow by 

30,000 people since the last election. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

stand on our record. We‟re building more diverse, dynamic, and 

cosmopolitan communities, while the others saw the reduction 

of Saskatchewan‟s population, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I think I struck a nerve over there. 

The member opposite is quite excited. But this is a serious 

issue. Mr. Speaker, applicants to the family members class of 

the immigrant nominee program are waiting nearly a full year 

for their applications to be processed here in Saskatchewan. 

And in some cases, those in the backlog have been waiting even 

longer. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party forcing Saskatchewan 

families, some of whom are in the gallery today, to wait more 

than a year before their highly educated family members can 

receive the green light from the Saskatchewan government? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for the opportunity to report that in fact since the 

‟07-08 year as we came into office, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been 

able to reduce — regarding the family class category — by two 

months the wait times. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s 

important to say there‟s obviously more work to do here. The 

average overall is about between five and six months. The 

family class category is taking a little longer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Is there more work to do? Yes, there is. But our track record is 

rock solid. More people are moving to Saskatchewan. In fact 

more people living in Saskatchewan than ever before, Mr. 

Speaker. It really speaks that the rebranding of Saskatchewan 

that our Premier and this government has undertaken, that is, 

Saskatchewan is a land of opportunity, which stands in stark 

contrast to the Saskatchewan that the members opposite ruled 

over. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Just before we proceed 

with question period, I‟d like to remind members that the 

decibel level is getting fairly high and we have guests who are 

here to hear the answer. They‟ve heard the question; I‟m sure 

they‟d like to hear the answer. Next question, member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it appears the minister missed the 

memo from the Premier that he was not to use the phrase „stark 

contrast.” Because the last time the Premier used “stark 

contrast,” it so clearly illustrated their complete inability to 

have any understanding of the provincial finances. Mr. Speaker, 

the typical Sask Party math, they spin and talk about numbers 

but their actions don‟t add up. The story does not hold water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of Saskatchewan‟s immigrant 

community are here today. Some of these people have family 

members who want to come to Saskatchewan. They have 

applied to the family members category of the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program. Despite satisfying all of the 

eligibility criteria, the Sask Party has rejected applications, 

denying families the chance to be reunited. But since there is no 

appeal process, these people have no avenue to hold this 

government to account. Mr. Speaker, since there is no appeal 

mechanism, what are families who are wrongly rejected by the 

immigrant nominee program supposed to do? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously I‟m open to 

meeting with any number of stakeholders or ensuring that our 

officials do. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in fact what we‟ve just done 

is rolled forward with a new portal so that we are the first 

province in the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first province 

to ensure that online applications are available. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the first province to move forward as well as an online 

tracking system so that individuals can ensure that they can 

track their status within the system.  

 

We‟re taking a leadership role. Our goal is to have the best 

immigration system within the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There‟s sure a long way to go, but we‟re making important 

strides, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Kidney Transplants 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Stacey Simms 



4922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

is in the gallery today. Stacey is a 28-year-old woman from 

Moose Jaw needing a kidney transplant. She has a donor, but 

she doesn‟t have a surgery date. Today at the legislature Stacey 

came to tell her story, dramatically demonstrating the dialysis 

that she goes through every day while she waits for a transplant. 

 

Last week the minister said he didn‟t show enough compassion 

to the Poochay family and he was sorry. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

can the minister find his compassion this week and immediately 

reinstate the kidney transplant program so Stacey Simms and 

Dion Poochay and others like them can get the transplants they 

so desperately need? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I, and I think probably most people of this 

Assembly, enjoy good health. I think sometimes we take far too 

granted how important good health is until we find challenges 

in our lives that takes that away, Mr. Speaker. And then we will 

look for every opportunity to get back to good health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people around the province face many challenges. 

The people in the gallery today, as was mentioned, have some 

issues with kidney transplant, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

and our sincere thoughts go out to that family. We want to make 

sure that all families in the province, if they are suffering from 

poor health, have the care that they so deserve within the 

province, Mr. Speaker. If that care is not available within the 

province, we‟ll work very had to make sure that care is acquired 

outside the province, Mr. Speaker. That is the case with the 

kidney transplant program. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The biggest 

challenge the people in Saskatchewan have today and the 

biggest issue they have is this government and their inability to 

do . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, today Justin St. 

Louis and his wife Cheryl talked about the life-changing 

morning in July 2009 when he received the call telling him he 

would get his transplant. They spoke of how their lives have 

changed, how Justin can now hold down a job, swim, play 

basketball. And they‟re even planning a family. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Stacey Simms and her husband Philip 

want that life-changing phone call. They want to move on with 

their lives and even have a family. Every day the program is 

closed is five more times Stacey has to do home dialysis to stay 

alive. It is one more day her life is on hold. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, why is the minister putting the life of Stacey Simms 

on hold? Why is he making Stacey and the other 105 people 

needing kidney transplants wait? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that any 

member on this side of the House wants to see that care given 

as timely as possible. We are working really on two fronts in 

this issue. We are working on a long-term solution to the kidney 

transplant program in Saskatoon that has been postponed, that 

has been cancelled for the last number of months. We are 

working for a long-term solution that will see it function well 

into the future and not reliant on one issue if a vascular surgeon 

is sick. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we are working with 

Edmonton to try and increase their capacity. But, Mr. Speaker, 

more than that, I‟ve instructed the Ministry of Health not only 

to look across into Alberta, but across Canada to see where we 

can find capacity so that our citizens will receive care. In fact if 

it‟s out of the country, Mr. Speaker, we‟d entertain that thought 

too, Mr. Speaker. We want to ensure that our citizens receive 

the timely care that they receive. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve just heard 

that one more patient will be accepted into Edmonton. As of 

today or yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we have five that are willing 

or able to receive treatment elsewhere. We‟re looking for those 

places. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don‟t think 

people want to shop around for their kidney transplants. It can 

be done in Saskatoon . . . [inaudible] . . . Tell us today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, can the minister tell us today, what‟s the stall? 

There are three nephrologists and three vascular surgeons ready 

to work — the same complement of health providers that were 

there when the program was up and successfully running. The 

waiting list is growing and people‟s lives are at stake. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, everything is in place now for the 

transplant program to start up again. We all know that nothing 

happens on that side of the House without the Premier‟s 

approval. So my question then is to the Premier: obviously the 

minister can‟t do the job and start the program right now, so 

will the Premier make it happen? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ with that 

member opposite on many, many different issues, and I‟ll beg 

to differ with her on this one. First of all, absolutely we want to 

have the transplant program up and running in this province. 

But what she said is that people wouldn‟t be willing to go out to 

Edmonton or to Winnipeg or to other areas of this country . . . 

[inaudible] . . . That‟s what she said. They don‟t want to shop 

around. They wouldn‟t want to shop around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Priority number one is to have it up and running in this 

province. But having that not in the situation right now, in the 

short term, Mr. Speaker, we are making sure that there are 

arrangements outside of Saskatchewan and even outside of 

Canada if that needs to be, Mr. Speaker, because patient care is 

priority number one for our government. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the truth of the matter is 

the program is ready to go in Saskatoon. It will cost less money 

to do it there. Families can go and support their members, their 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4923 

family members that are there having the kidney transplant. 

This is a ridiculous answer. And not putting words in my 

mouth, I never did say that we need to see people go . . . that 

people are not willing to go out of the province. What I said is, 

they don‟t need to. They need to have the program in 

Saskatoon. And my question then is to the minister: why not? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, perhaps that 

member thinks she knows more than the vascular surgeons in 

Saskatoon that says the program is not ready to go yet, Mr. 

Speaker. Perhaps that member knows more than the transplant 

nephrologist, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps that member knows more 

than the urologist. 

 

All three of those specialities are involved in the transplant 

program, Mr. Speaker. And they are saying that the way the 

program was run in the past is not the way that it can be run in 

the future. 

 

That‟s why we‟re working with the Health ministry, the 

Saskatoon Health Region, and the three professional . . . the 

specialities that make up a transplant program to ensure that we 

have a transplant program that is secure into the future, that 

isn‟t reliant on one physician going sick and the program 

failing, Mr. Speaker. That isn‟t the program we want to see. In 

the short time, we‟re guaranteeing and ensuring and working as 

hard as we possibly can that citizens of Saskatchewan will get 

their care elsewhere. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Minister 

of Policing and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I move that Bill No. 136, The Technical Safety 

Authority of Saskatchewan Act is now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It has been moved by 

the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety that Bill No. 136, The 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act be introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — When shall the Bill be 

read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Chair of 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 112, The Justices of the 

Peace Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — When shall this Bill be 

considered in Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on this Bill and that the Bill now be read a third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister may 

proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment 

Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 

sur les juges de paix 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It has been moved by 

the minister that Bill No. 112, The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Chair of 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 



4924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 113, The Justices of the 

Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 without 

amendment. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — When shall this Bill be 

considered in Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 113, The Justices of the Peace 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 without amendment and 

that the Bill be read now for a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — When will this Bill be 

considered in Committee of the Whole? 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I had just 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole and that we would now move to third reading. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Sorry. We‟re going to 

find the right language here yet. The minister has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 113, The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2009 without amendment. And is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — And is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Chair of 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2) and that the Bill now be read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister may 

proceed to move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It has been moved by 

the minister that Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment 

Act, 2009 (No. 2) now be read the third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Chair of 

the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

without amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

minister. 

 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4925 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole of Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It has been moved by 

the minister that Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the Chair of 

the Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 101, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we request leave 

to waive consideration of the whole on this Bill and this Bill be 

now read the third time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 101, the credit union amendment Act, 2009 

without amendment, and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The minister may 

proceed to move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It‟s been moved by the 

minister that Bill No. 101, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2) without amendment be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to 

table the answers to questions 1,497 through 1,501. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The Government Whip 

has requested that questions be tabled for 1,497 to 1,501. Is it 

agreed? I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I wish to order the answer to 

question 1,502. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The Government Whip 

has moved that the question 1,502 be ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I wish to table the answers to 

questions 1,503 through 1,529. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The Government Whip 

has tabled the answers to questions 1,503 to 1,529. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 



4926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 107 — The Weed 

Control Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to re-enter this 

debate after not having the opportunity yesterday to conclude 

all of my remarks. And, Mr. Speaker, of course it‟s always a 

pleasure to rise in this House and take part in the debates on the 

Bills that come before this House, particularly to do so on 

behalf of the fine people of Regina Northeast. It‟s an honour to 

do so. 

 

It‟s an honour to participate in the debate on this Bill, Bill 107, 

the Act respecting prohibited, noxious and nuisance weeds and 

to make consequential amendments to The Municipal Board 

Act. So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a Bill that‟s of course very relevant to 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan having a long, long history of 

agriculture and being known in the past as the breadbasket of 

the world, and agriculture at one time being the mainstay of our 

province. It perhaps isn‟t the mainstay it once used to be, but 

it‟s still a very, very important part of our province and of our 

economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it goes to say that the farmers in 

Saskatchewan are what I would call professional farmers. They 

take a great deal of pride in the work that they do. They take a 

great deal of pride in the product that they produce. And I think 

they take, it goes without saying that they take a great deal of 

pride in their land. And if you know a farmer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I‟m sure you do, you know that there is a 

relationship — I think a special relationship — between the 

farmer and his or her land. And they develop that relationship 

and they develop a great deal of respect for the land. 

 

There‟s a neighbour of mine. He used to be on the farm years 

ago when I farmed out there. He used to have a saying. He said, 

you know, you can fool your friends, you can even fool your 

family, but you can‟t fool the land. And I think that‟s very true, 

that if you take care of the land and you treat it with the respect 

it‟s due, it will certainly look after you and your family. And I 

think that many farmers subscribe to that theory. 

 

And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, the farmers do, I think, a 

tremendous job of looking after the land and attempting to clean 

the land up as far as weeds is concerned, to do so in many, 

many ways. Certainly in the past, cultivation was the 

mechanism or the tool best suited to control weeds. 

 

And in my grandfather‟s day and even in fact in my father‟s 

day, that was . . . There was an art. There was an art to the 

timing of the operations, whether it be the timing of cultivating 

or the timing of seeding. A lot of that had to do with the weed 

and the weeds that were being controlled or the attempt to 

control through cultivation and cultivation practices. 

 

And that is where the respect, I guess you‟d say, that the farmer 

gains for his land is so, so prominent, I guess you would say. It 

becomes obvious when farmers understand the process, 

understand their land, and know their land so well that they can 

control the weeds in many, many cases through cultivation and 

through proper practices and proper timing. 

 

And some of that is done today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you look at organic farming for example, where 

there is no commercial fertilizers used or no commercial weed 

spray used on the land, and I believe that time period is 

something like five years before the land is certified as organic, 

that it has to be free from pesticides and chemicals, and it has to 

be free from commercial fertilizers. And in order to do that, and 

yet maintain productivity and maintain the land in good, healthy 

condition — good, clean condition — it‟s done through a 

method of cultivation and a timing of cultivation and a timing 

of the work being done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s fair to look at the farmers as truly 

as professionals because it‟s a talent that is learned. It‟s a talent 

learned through experience, often handed down from generation 

to generation, often pointed out from father to son as to the need 

to pay attention to the land and to make good decisions as far as 

the care of that land is concerned. And I think, Mr. Speaker, this 

is certainly noticeable in our farming community today when 

we see that the shift in the farming mechanisms have gone away 

from cultivation and more towards a continuous cropping 

mechanism. 

 

I know up in the country where I‟m originally from, Mr. 

Speaker, there is basically, I think, virtually every farmer up 

there is well into the cycle of a continuous farming operations. 

So in order to control weeds now in that type of atmosphere, I 

think there‟s been a greater and greater dependency upon 

chemicals and the application of chemicals in a correct and 

timely manner to be able to ensure that the weed population is 

controlled. 

 

I have a farmer up there, and I wish I would have gotten his 

permission to use his name because I would have been proud to 

do so here. He‟s a very, very careful farmer. A very good 

farmer, but a very careful farmer and very meticulous about his 

work, very meticulous about care for his land. And truly, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that that individual has not only improved the 

land through making sure that the brush is all removed, and 

making sure that the potholes are drained so he has access to all 

of the acres, and not only making sure that the land is clear of 

obstacles such as stones and by digging them up and burying 

them and so on and so forth, but he‟s also very meticulous 

about the land and the care for that land and making sure it is as 

weed-free as possible. 

 

And he spends a lot of time, a lot of time concentrating his 

efforts on ensuring that that land stays free of weeds and clean 

as possible, to the point where I know that in the past he‟s had 

issues with the local municipality over the weeds that grow in 

the ditches and his desire to control those weeds because of his 

concern, and a real concern it is, of the dollars and cents that he 

spends each and every year and the time and the effort that he 

spends ensuring that his land is clean of weeds and yet has no 

control over the ditches that run along the borders of his land 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4927 

that can — I‟m not saying they do, Mr. Speaker — but can 

cause weed growth. And of course if weeds grow, they have a 

tendency to mature and seed out. And those seeds could make 

their way over onto his property and to his land that he‟s just 

spent thousands of dollars and lots of hours to ensure that it 

stays clear. And he‟s now fighting that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I really want to say that, as an individual, I 

think he does a wonderful job of looking after his land and does 

a wonderful job of ensuring that that land stays weed-free. And 

he does so more and more, probably through dependence on 

chemical. And I suppose in that vein, Mr. Speaker, there‟s been 

a lot of improvements in the science world in the last 20 years 

of agriculture, and agricultural science. 

 

At one time there was probably, pretty standard, two or three 

chemicals used to control virtually all the weeds, but today this 

has become, I think, more specific. I think maybe it‟s because 

of the emergence of weeds that are starting to, in some cases I 

think, are becoming resistant to a lot of the older chemicals, and 

that newer chemicals are required. But they‟re becoming more 

specific to control of certain weeds, Mr. Speaker, certain 

chemicals will control certain weeds. And I think again, once 

again, science has recognized a need for farmers to control 

more than perhaps one weed at a time. So it‟s developed the 

chemicals in many ways so that they have become friendly to 

each other, that as far as being tank mixable, they could be 

mixed together and one application will sometimes often 

control all the weeds or many of the weeds that present 

themselves to a farmer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it is essential that we recognize 

that great contribution that farmers make to our society. And 

they do so, Mr. Speaker, not helter-skelter; they do so with a 

plan, a very detailed plan. And often you will see them, Mr. 

Speaker, that those plans include the crop rotations, and they 

will include long-term planning. It‟s just not something done 

for one season, it‟s often one is reliant on the other. And the 

planning that goes into a crop rotation cycle within a farm 

operation, it‟s quite detailed. 

 

And I say again, the neighbour up there — that I would‟ve 

wished I would‟ve been able to use his name — he does a great 

job of that. And you can see just, if you watch his farming 

practices from year in and year out, you can see that he has a 

plan. He has a plan on the rotation of his crops throughout his 

fields. And I think by doing that, he not only maximizes the 

chemicals that he uses each and every day, but he also is able to 

use the crops in a manner which will assist him in controlling 

the weeds so that he has a good control on the weed population 

of his land. And, Mr. Speaker, I assure you it‟s a very clean 

farm, and he‟s very meticulous about ensuring that it stays that 

way. And he does a great job. And I know that on occasions 

when perhaps some of his neighbours haven‟t been quite so 

diligent on controlling their weeds, it has really been an irritant 

for him. 

 

And I think that that‟s not an uncommon thing throughout 

Saskatchewan. You‟ll find that often there will be some friction 

appear between neighbours out on the farm. And sometimes 

that friction is a result of one farmer believing that the other one 

isn‟t perhaps paying as much attention to the weed control and 

therefore of course stands the real risk of polluting his 

neighbour‟s land. So I think that‟s been an issue that has on 

occasions in the past been brought up. And I think in fact in 

some perhaps rare occasions even the RM [rural municipality] 

have had to get involved in order to ensure that good 

management of weeds. And weed production or growth, I guess 

you would say, is something that farmers pay attention to. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one would have to remember that in 

some instances, for example in hay production or hay crops or 

legume production, it‟s often a dehy process. And I know from 

my own personal experience that being involved in a dehy 

process, if it‟s done properly, there‟s less need for weed control 

because the alfalfa that is being grown for the dehy process will 

often be harvested well before the weeds get to a stage where 

they may seed out and pollute that field but also the neighbour‟s 

field. And that is sometimes, Mr. Speaker, a sore spot again 

between neighbours. 

 

Because you know, the neighbour who‟s doing an excellent job 

at keeping his cereal grains and oilseeds free of weeds and 

keeping his land free of weeds, and a neighbour next to him 

growing a dehy crop, and seeing those weeds there and seeing 

the potential of those weeds going to seed and having the 

potential of infesting, you know, his land with weeds, I can 

understand being quite nerve-racking. But in most cases, I think 

you‟d see that the dehy operation takes place in a timely fashion 

that doesn‟t allow the weeds to go to seed, that they are 

harvested with the hay crop or the dehy crop, and they are 

controlled that way. 

 

So there‟s different ways of controlling the weeds, Mr. Speaker, 

and I don‟t suppose there‟s any right or wrong way. It‟s just that 

there are different ways depending on the situation. 

 

But we certainly do need to ensure that we have a regimental 

process in place that will allow farmers the opportunity to be 

able to control their weeds and be able to ensure that the land 

stays free and clear. And I think there‟s a role there for the RMs 

to play too in recognizing that they too have a responsibility 

ensuring that the roadways are relatively free of obnoxious 

weeds at least — noxious weeds I should say, or nuisance 

weeds — that they have that role to play. 

 

Because after all, Mr. Speaker, part of the RM‟s responsibility, 

and I spent 10 years on municipal council and I know that part 

of the council‟s responsibility — whether it be the reeve or the 

individual council or the council as a whole — that part of the 

responsibility is to promote and enhance agricultural activities 

within the RM. And I would think that most, Mr. Speaker, I am 

sure that virtually all RMs take that very, very serious, take that 

role very seriously. And they do so to ensure that the 

agricultural industry within their RM continues to grow, 

continues to stay strong. And they do all they can to ensure 

what level of prosperity may be within the agricultural industry 

continues to grow and allow the farmers the opportunity to 

continue to do what they do best. And that‟s quite simply farm, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is why I think every RM, at least the RM I was in, we 

had a weed inspector. We would appoint the weed inspector 

each and every year. And I think there were many years that we 



4928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

didn‟t need him. We didn‟t need his services. We had him in 

place in case we did need his services, but many years we didn‟t 

need the services. 

 

There was the odd occasion, there was the odd occasion where 

we had to call on the weed inspector. And if my memory serves 

me correct, Mr. Speaker, it was back in the days of the, oh, mid- 

to late-‟80s when the agricultural economy was tough. It was a 

tough economy.  

 

And there was some instances where land had been turned back 

to a financial institution for debt settlement, and the financial 

institution now became the holder of the land, and in many 

cases were not able to rent that land out or make the turn of the 

land, whether you‟re renting it out or selling it, in a timely 

fashion. So they were left being the owner or the holder of the 

land for at least that one summer, and as a result of course there 

was a need to control the weeds. And of course the 

responsibility to that would be that of the owner or the holder of 

the land, and in this case would be the financial institution. 

 

So if my memory serves me correct, there was two or maybe 

three instances during that period of time that we had to call on 

the weed inspector to go out and do an inspection of a quarter of 

land because it had been turned back by the farmer and been 

turned back to the financial institution for debt settlement, and 

that the financial institution now became responsible for the 

controlling of the weeds. 

 

And the weeds were getting to the point where they were going 

to be a problem. They were getting to the point in maturity 

where if they weren‟t dealt with fairly quickly, that they could 

seed out and create a problem, not only for that land which the 

weeds had been growing on, but for the farm land in the area 

because of the ability of seeds to be spread through wind and so 

on and so forth. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it was on two or three occasions we 

had to call in the weed inspector from the RM who simply had 

to go out and do his job, which was to inspect the complaint, 

inspect the land to identify the degree of weeds, the type of 

weeds and the stage the weeds were at and the risk they ran for 

presenting a problem to neighbouring farmers in the area and 

then make his order. And he would do so. 

 

And quite frankly, I think you‟d find that most financial 

institutions reacted fairly quickly to that. They too wanted to 

ensure that they weren‟t a problem for anybody in the area. 

They also wanted to ensure that their land was maintained in a 

reasonable fashion so that it would be something, a product that 

they would be able to resale in the following season. 

 

So there was certainly a significant role for the weed inspector 

to play when called upon, and it is certainly good that we have 

that process put into place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And according to what I read in this Act, it looks like this 

particular Act is a piece of legislation that really needs to be, 

really needs to be run by or run in front of or presented to the 

appropriate stakeholders. And maybe it has been. We don‟t 

know that, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the government has gone out 

and talked to the farmers out there, the RMs who are going to 

be involved, to get their feedback on this particular legislation 

as far as how it affects them. 

 

And I‟m hoping the government has done a reasonable amount 

of consultation, although unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I really 

don‟t see any evidence of that either in the Bill itself or any of 

the supporting documentation that was provided to us by the 

government. But there‟s certainly a need for consultation. I 

think that‟s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, any time that a government 

proposes changes to an Act, that those changes need to be 

identified as positive changes and that those changes are a result 

of the consultation done by government with the stakeholders 

involved. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that this government has taken the 

time to consult with farmers across this great province of ours 

and consult with RMs across this great province of ours and 

take their feedback and use it in the manner in which it was 

intended to be used, and that is to enhance the Bill, to improve 

the Bill so that it has a positive effect on those people out there 

who find that changes to this Bill could affect them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this government has done 

that. Like I said, I see no evidence of it. But I will believe that 

they have taken the time to consult with the farmers across this 

great province of ours because after all, they‟re the ones on the 

front line. 

 

They‟re the ones that face the issue each and every day. They‟re 

the ones that have spent their life in a lot of cases fighting the 

weeds and controlling them, and I think they would have a great 

expertise and they would have a lot to offer the government and 

share with the government as far as effects on these changes 

may have on them. 

 

This legislation addresses a problem that‟s . . . A problem 

probably exists right across the province, and a solution to the 

problem is in one or two specific areas, and that is of course, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the authority lies within the RM, the 

local government out there. 

 

And I think often we take local government for granted. I 

believe that the local government plays a very, very big role and 

I think often, often it‟s overlooked in the whole scheme of 

things. Because the local government and the officials thereof, 

whether it be the RM or whether it be the reeve, or whether it be 

the RM administrator or whether it be the councillors or 

whether it be in this case the weed inspectors, these are 

hands-on people. 

 

These are the people who deal with the issues right upfront. 

These are the people who are your friends and your neighbours. 

And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, that makes it even tougher, it 

makes it even tougher for our local government person to do 

their job because, you know, they‟re talking to somebody that‟s 

their friend and neighbour. They‟re talking to somebody that 

they‟ve known perhaps all their life. 

 

In many cases they may be having to deal with somebody who 

is a bit older than them. And you know how it is in rural 

Saskatchewan. There‟s always that tremendous respect for 

people who are your senior, and who‟ve been around for a long 

time, and who have learned a lot of things from the university 

of hard knocks. 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4929 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, I think in a lot of ways we often 

overlook the job the local government does in this great 

province of ours. And I think we often maybe overlook the 

individuals who, within the local government, who deliver 

those services on a regular basis. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve indicated in the title of the Bill, the Act 

defines the three classes of noxious weeds. And it basically 

breaks the weed population in Saskatchewan here down into the 

prohibited weed category, noxious weed category, and of 

course the nuisance weed category. 

 

And that‟s important, Mr. Speaker, because I think if you spend 

any time with farmers — and I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 

certainly have, and you‟ve had your own personal experience at 

it — that the weed population is interesting. It‟s just not one 

chemical fits all. It‟s not one size fits all sort of thing, that there 

would be some weeds that would be affected by a certain 

chemical, perhaps even controlled by a certain chemical, and 

another one won‟t be affected at all. So this is why there has, 

science had played a very, very big role in developing 

chemicals that are more specific to certain weeds and to certain 

weed populations. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And they‟ve been able to also recognize that there is a 

tremendous cost involved on the application of these chemicals. 

It‟s a cost that, quite frankly, in the farming community is 

always suspect because as you know, Mr. Speaker, the margins 

in farming today are very, very narrow, and farmers have to do 

everything they can to cut their costs. And they do so while still 

maintaining an effective program, in this case an effective 

program to control the weeds on their land. 

 

So what has developed here, Mr. Speaker, is the chemical 

science, agricultural science has worked not only to identify and 

produce chemicals that will be very effective on weeds and 

individual weed families, but also the ability for those 

chemicals to be friendly to one another. And by that I mean, 

Mr. Speaker, being friendly so that they can be tank mixed so 

that the farmer can make one pass, one application and yet be 

able to handle numerous weeds and weed varieties that may be 

present in his or her land. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is I think an important aspect because 

once again it‟s the recognition of the need to cut the costs as 

much as possible while still performing the services, still 

delivering the goods, so to speak, to control the weeds, Mr. 

Speaker, so (a) the farmer can maximize the yields on his crop 

or her crop, but also to ensure that the weed population is 

controlled so it doesn‟t create a problem, not only that year, but 

into the future. So I think, Mr. Speaker, those are important 

points to bear in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act allows for some very aggressive steps to 

be taken against someone who is deemed to have a noxious 

weed and is not taking appropriate steps to look after that. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that‟s fair. 

 

I think as we travel Saskatchewan, if you talk to farmers and 

you look at the farming industry, we‟ll recognize that the vast 

majority of our farmers in Saskatchewan here are what I would 

call professionals. I really do. It‟s not only . . . It‟s not an easy 

job today to manage and to operate and manage a farm 

successfully. You have to be very skilful. I think you have to be 

talented to do so. And you also . . . Mr. Speaker, if you 

recognize any of those farms and farmers out there who fit in 

that category, who are very skilled at what they‟re doing and 

they are very successful at what they‟re doing, it‟s only because 

that they have a plan. They have a plan for their farm, Mr. 

Speaker. They don‟t just get up on an April morning, April the 

1st morning, April the 1st or April the 2nd say, well I wonder 

what I want to seed this year. Well that‟s not the case, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They have a sophisticated plan, a long-term plan as to the 

cropping rotation throughout their farm land. And often you‟ll 

find that cropping rotation kind of fits in hand and glove sort of 

thing with their chemical program and their fertilizing program 

so that they maximize, they maximize the inputs into their farm. 

And they do that by being able to capture the greatest yield 

possible, and they do so by controlling the weeds. And they do 

so by controlling the weeds in some cases very aggressively. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not just a one-farmer effort, it‟s really a 

community effort. And when that chain breaks down, that 

community chain breaks down and there‟s an individual who 

for whatever reason isn‟t doing a good job or appropriate job of 

looking after his weeds or in some cases perhaps land has gone 

back to a financial institution and they haven‟t, haven‟t been 

brought to their attention that they have to, you know, have to 

ensure that . . . It‟s an ongoing problem, then, Mr. Speaker. 

There needs to be the authority within the RM and within the 

weed inspector to be able to call these people to task, to bring it 

to their attention that they need to take action. And they need to 

take action in a timely fashion because, as weeds will do, they 

like to reproduce and they do so through growth and through 

maturity and by producing seeds. 

 

And often, Mr. Speaker, some of these seeds are transported by 

wind or in some cases by water, and they can infest land where 

a farmer has spent much of his time ensuring that his land is 

free and clear of weeds or at least has it well under control. And 

the last he needs, Mr. Speaker, or she may need, is an 

infestation from the outside. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a need to have that authority to be 

invested in someone, and of course that someone should be 

through the RMs because they‟re the front-line people out here 

and through the weed inspector so that they can take action 

whenever action is required. One of the problems, Mr. Speaker, 

is that I suppose that will always be a bit of a disagreement in 

the interpretation of what is a noxious weed. And certain 

producers may not believe that that weed is a noxious weed 

because it may be a weed that perhaps is in their pasture and it 

doesn‟t affect their situation, but there is a potential of that 

weed growing to maturity and going to seed and that the seeds 

being transported to agricultural land — farm land — and 

causing an infestation. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to say that the issue over weed 

and weed control is not a new one in Saskatchewan. I think it‟s 

one that‟s been around probably as long as Saskatchewan farm 

land has been put to the plow. But I think it‟s also one that has 

in many cases raised issues of concern and raised issues of 



4930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

disagreement, and unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the 

day on rare occasions, hard feelings. 

 

But for the most part I think you‟ll find that, through 

Saskatchewan, you‟ll find good co-operation between farmers, 

between neighbours. You find good co-operation within the RM 

and the RM officials to be able to recognize that yes, perhaps 

one driving by would say, well gee that field has got quite a few 

weeds in it and nobody‟s doing anything about it. But it just so 

happens it might be a hayfield that the farmer is intending to 

harvest well before the weeds go to seed or maybe a dehy field 

where alfalfa particularly is being grown for dehy and the 

alfalfa processing company will be along well before the weed 

plants go to seed and harvested to ensure that those weeds 

certainly do not reach maturity, do not create a problem for 

those who are in the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we need to make sure, though, that in this 

whole process that this government has done its job in the 

consultation aspect. And that‟s always a concern of mine, Mr. 

Speaker, because I believe that the role of government is to 

develop and change the Bills and develop Bills when required 

or change existing Bills to make them more responsive to the 

issues of the day. I think it‟s fair to say that as time goes on, 

issues will change and therefore Bills that have been around for 

a while may need to be revisited and changes be made in those 

Bills to make them more responsive to the reality of today, in 

this case, reality of agriculture. 

 

Those changes need to be made to ensure that the local 

government has the authority to enforce the weed Act, the 

prohibited or noxious or nuisance weed Act, to ensure that their 

ratepayers are not finding themselves under siege of an 

infestation of weeds that perhaps could have been prevented 

had the action taken place at an early enough juncture in the 

process. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we need to know that this 

government has gone out and done its consultation. Has it 

talked to the RMs? Has it talked to the farmers in across this 

great province of ours? Has it got that feedback? And has it 

taken that feedback and digested it and in turn developed the 

amendments or the changes to the Bill that‟s being proposed 

here? 

 

And if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to know how that 

consultation took place. Was there public meetings held in 

various communities across Saskatchewan? Or were there at 

least public meetings held in regions across Saskatchewan? Or 

was there some type of form of direct communications between 

the government and the individual producers out there? 

 

Was there any type of communications that took place between 

the government and the RMs? Was there a letter sent out or a 

questionnaire sent out or was there any type of communications 

like that between the government and the RMs to ensure that 

they got the feedback from the leadership? And that‟s who the 

RMs are in rural Saskatchewan. They‟re the leadership of the 

community. 

 

And they‟re the people who are elected by the locals, by local 

people and within their divisions and within the RM, to provide 

direction, to provide assistance, and to provide the leadership 

that they‟re looking for from local government on many issues. 

And this is simply just one of the issues, the need to be able to 

control the weeds in our RMs. Has that consultation taken 

place? Has the RMs been talked to? Perhaps some, maybe a 

larger consultation process at SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] when they had their 

convention. Was there any type of consultation with the RM 

leadership at that time? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are many questions I raise about this 

Bill. And often we think of things perhaps, you know, as 

government, perhaps think of things if they‟re acting on their 

own, but if they are doing it through a regimented consultation 

process then, Mr. Speaker, I think many of the issues would be 

identified. And they would certainly glean the knowledge of the 

changes to the Act or to this Act or to perhaps even other Acts 

that would be beneficial to the agricultural community, 

beneficial to the RMs, so that it would make it perhaps more 

responsive to the people who are being affected by this, by the 

changes to the Act, and of course that is the farmers themselves 

out there. 

 

But it‟s also, I think it‟s fair to say that the municipalities play a 

big role. Because at the end of the day, the leadership and rural 

Saskatchewan is the local government and that is done through 

the RM councils. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s fair to say that I would hope that 

this government has done its consultation process and has been 

able to gather the information that they are looking for, and that 

the individuals out there want to share, so that we can have the 

changes, the proposed changes to the Act that will benefit those 

people who are the stakeholders, those people who are affected 

— whether it be the farming community, whether it be the RM 

leadership, or whether it be the small communities in rural 

Saskatchewan who depend so much on the activities and the 

prosperity of the agricultural community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So many of the definitions of this Act aren‟t clear enough as to 

what is really the role or the responsibility of the RM. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is a bit of a concern to me. Because as I said 

already, certainly — and I know you would agree with me — is 

that the leadership in rural Saskatchewan and this rural 

municipality, and that their role has to be clearly defined so that 

they know what areas of jurisdiction they have, so they know 

what areas that they are expected to be responsible for, so they 

know what authority they have within that area, so that they can 

provide the best possible services to the people that they 

represent. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that needs to be made 

very, very clear and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that again this 

government has done its job and has done the consultation 

process. 

 

There needs to be, I think, those discussions carried out with the 

RM leadership to ensure that they have a clear idea, a clear 

understanding of what their role is and what their responsibility 

is as far as controlling the weeds in the right-of-ways of the 

RMs, as not all right-of-ways are grid roads, Mr. Speaker. 

Many right-of-ways are farm access roads. And in some cases 

just farm roads, what is known as farm roads, there‟s a 66-foot 

road allowed, a standard 66-foot road allowance that is access 

to farm land and that there‟s the issue of weed control along 

these access roads. 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4931 

Is it the responsibility of the landowner that‟s adjacent to that 

road? Is it his or her responsibility or the responsibility of the 

RM? Or has those issues been worked out and has that 

consultation taken place? Has that level of discussion taken 

place between government and government‟s officials and the 

RMs and the stakeholders out there? 

 

So those are just some of the questions that quickly popped to 

my mind, Mr. Speaker, when I‟m looking at this. And there‟s 

certainly a need for the consultation to take place and that the 

roles of each of the stakeholders involved is clearly defined so 

that there is no misunderstanding or misinterpretation, so that 

the stakeholders involved fully understand what their roles are, 

what their responsibilities are, what area of jurisdiction they 

may have so that they can act on it in a timely fashion. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s basically what people in 

rural Saskatchewan, farmers, as far as this issue is concerned, 

The Weed Control Act is concerned, what they‟re looking for is 

the clarity and a full understanding of what is their 

responsibility and what is their area of jurisdiction and what is it 

that they are supposed to be responsible for at the end of the day 

here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are certainly a number of questions 

that come to mind on this thing and, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that 

I could probably go on for a fair amount of time on this issue 

because I think it‟s an issue that there‟s a lot of questions. 

There‟s a lot of questions on this particular issue and I think 

that, I think it‟s one that has to be explored fully to ensure that 

this government has done its role and that we have the issue of 

responsibility clearly identified within this Act so that those 

individuals over there in rural Saskatchewan have an idea of 

what it is that they are responsible for. 

 

And if they are responsible for a certain area, then they need to 

know that and they need to know and have that understanding. 

So whether it‟s the RM council that make their decisions well in 

advance of an action being required, for example, that they can 

make sure that they have a weed control officer in place, but the 

weed control officer also educated, I guess you would say, or 

trained to knowing what his or her responsibility may be within 

the RM and within the desire to ensure that we maintain a good 

weed control program here in Saskatchewan so that we can 

maintain good, clean farm lands and have that access. 

 

And we need to ensure that we have that clearly defined within 

this Act. And I‟m not sure, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

has done that. I don‟t think that they‟ve done the consultations 

to the level, at least to my satisfaction, at least based on the stuff 

I‟ve been able to see so far, and that that consultation has taken 

place in a meaningful way so that we‟re able to make the 

amendments and make the changes to the Act where it will be 

totally beneficial to those people who are being affected, the 

stakeholders involved. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pretty well concluding my 

remarks here on this particular Bill, the Bill No. 107, An Act 

respecting Prohibited, Noxious and Nuisance Weeds and to 

make a consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that that will conclude my 

remarks on this particular Bill for this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s 

with pleasure I join in on Bill 105, The Weed Control Act and 

join in on the debate. And as my colleague spoke previously 

about The Weed Control Act, this Act I guess I want to go 

through. There‟s obviously a concern from out in the rural area 

in the farm community about weeds, and I think the RM has 

issues that they wanted to raise. 

 

And I‟m just sitting here listening to my colleague and talking 

about where this Bill came from and the process, how it got to 

the legislature, and concerns. And I‟m hoping that truly it went 

through a process. And the process for an Act like this, there‟s 

obviously concerns out there and noxious weed control is 

probably a huge issue to farmers. 

 

But you know, I want to talk a little bit and go back and forth. I 

would like to look at it from this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This is an Act but it goes to consulting people, consultation and 

different things. And it‟s interesting. Not only the rural areas 

want to make sure that they‟re, you know, they‟re consulted 

when an Act like this of legislation affects farms and the rural 

area, but northern people want to make sure, and Aboriginal 

people, First Nations, Métis want to be consulted. And you 

know, unfortunately the current government does not consult 

like it says it does. It truly needs to make sure that it‟s . . . any 

legislation that this government brings in. 

 

And it‟s a trust thing. People trust the government will do the 

right thing. But unfortunately we‟ve seen many times where the 

trust that people put into this government, they‟re now going 

and finding out that it‟s not so, and they‟re backtracking. A lot 

of times their backs are turned on . . . The government turns 

their back on them. And the people are feeling it all over and 

I‟m hearing it on a daily basis. 

 

But I was trying to just put the connection between this Bill 

107, The Weed Control Act and the duty to consult and all the 

other things that people want to be consulted when we pass 

legislation. So I want to be very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

make sure that I refer back to Bill 107 and some of the 

situations with the duty consult and making sure that 

stakeholders are informed. And how do they come up with this 

legislation? Did they make sure they go out to the farmers and 

did they speak to those farmers? Did they make . . . [inaudible] 

. . . did they talk to the RMs? You know, and what type of Act 

. . . And if you look at the weeds and what type of process will 

come into play, and you can just pass legislation to do 

whatever. But I want to make it very clear that people want to 

feel like they‟ve been heard, and I think the farmers will be 

impacted, the rural area. 

 

And I think my colleague talked about the weed inspectors, and 

that‟s interesting to talk about, their role and have they been 

consulted by this government as far as, you know, Bill 107, The 

Weed Control Act. So you know, I don‟t think they probably 

have been but it‟s interesting to watch. 

 

You see a government who wants to pass legislation. And 



4932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

sometimes, the debate is to make sure that the government is 

consulting with the community stakeholders, farmers, whoever. 

But it just goes to show you the neglect that this government 

has done with the duty to consult. And talking with, you know, 

stakeholders and talking with the RMs, I want to make sure that 

they did that. And I hope they have done that because if they 

haven‟t, I hope that the farmers in the rural area will come back 

and make it very clear that they‟re unhappy with the 

government‟s lack of consultation to the rural area. And we 

know that a lot of members opposite represent the rural area and 

hopefully this information is coming from those farm areas. 

 

So an Act like Bill 107, The Weed Control Act, you know, I 

think they‟re talking about certain areas and I think what a . . . 

You know, a farmer has land and he plants his crop and he 

makes sure that, you know, it‟s a weed control that he uses, 

whether it‟s a product that eliminates weeds, a product that he 

sprays on to make sure his crops are protected, and he does his 

job to protect his crop because that‟s his livelihood. And I want 

to make it very clear; it‟s his livelihood. He wants to make sure, 

you know, he wants to make sure that his crop is not going to be 

dealt . . . and lose money from weeds that are not even on his 

property, but coming in from and blowing in from some other, 

whether it‟s a ditch or another property. 

 

So . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, or some other individual, 

whether he‟s a cowboy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, or a 

farmer or a rancher. There‟s different people out there who 

grow crops and we know that. 

 

So I want to make it very clear. I want to go back to this duty to 

consult and the trust people put in our governments. And the 

people put trust into a government to make sure that, when they 

pass legislation, that they consult. And so many people are 

unhappy with this current government about the duty to consult 

and accommodate. They are not. And they don‟t feel like 

they‟re getting input. 

 

The government just makes legislation, decides what it wants. 

We‟ve seen that with other Bills that have come through this 

House. And you know, we‟ve tried to debate them and some of 

them have gone through. And we‟re doing our job here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to make sure that we debate the Bills. But Bills 

that need to go forward to help the province, I think we have 

co-operated as an official opposition. We have done our job, 

asked some good questions, and moved those on to committee. 

And there‟s a process that it goes through and I, you know, I‟m 

learning that process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure that we 

have a chance. 

 

The people want us to ask the tough questions to make sure 

legislation is something that is being brought here — the 

concerns of residents. And it‟s not just the constituents that we 

represent; it‟s the whole province. We have a right to represent 

the whole province. The rural area, northern area, the urban 

area, there‟s a lot of concerns. And people want to feel like their 

government is listening to them. But we can see that the Sask 

Party government is not listening and not consulting people 

when it comes. They just want to pass things, ram it down. And 

some people will call it bully, whatever. 

 

But going back to Bill 107, The Weed Control Act, you know, 

to control . . . and I want to go through that process. There‟s 

obviously been some concerns out there. It‟s gone on, you 

know. It‟s gone on and people are really concerned. So 

obviously it‟s a piece of legislation that the people want to . . . 

but I‟m sure that people want that legislation but they want to 

make sure it‟s right. It‟s going to do what they need. They want 

to be consulted. They want to be talked to. So you have to make 

sure you go out to the farmers and you‟ve got to talk to them. 

You‟ve got to make sure. 

 

The RMs and the weed inspectors, I mean, they‟ll play an 

important role. I mean, what kind of teeth are going to be into 

these Acts and what power will they have when they go to a 

farm and they say, hey, your land is causing problems with the 

other producers and they have a right to be protected. But you 

have to make sure you‟re consulting those people and you have 

to make very clear that they‟re feeling like they‟re being heard. 

Because so many times they‟re not being heard and that‟s 

unfortunate. 

 

And that‟s how so many Saskatchewan residents feel under this 

government, that they are not being consulted. They are not 

given a chance to bring their view forward. It‟s almost like the 

decision‟s made and you live with it. And if you balk, you 

know, look out if you balk. And that shouldn‟t be. People of our 

province should have a right to debate it and talk about it. And I 

mean, we‟re supposed to work together to make sure the best 

legislation we can for the Saskatchewan residents. And that‟s 

many places we can go. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re hearing so many complaints, 

day after day, people feeling like this government has left them 

behind. The trust, the trust issue is a big one. People want to 

trust. And when you tell them, oh you‟re going to do this and 

you‟re going to do that and you‟re going to do this and you‟re 

going to . . . and they trust you and they support you and vote 

for you, there‟s a trust there. 

 

They trust you will bring in legislation and you will consult 

them. But you know what? When you turn your back on those 

people and they lose the trust in you, trust me, those 

individuals, and I say that those individuals that put out the trust 

. . . And they trust a government will do the things that they 

need to have a better, a better opportunity at a living, at a job, at 

a home. And when they don‟t trust you any more because of 

what you‟ve said, and you turn your back on them, you will get 

a message. And I think the government is going to get a 

message from the people. There are people out there, very clear, 

that feel like their back‟s been turned on them by this 

government. The trust issue is very clear. 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s interesting to see. I‟ve 

talked to a number of people over the last while, and I‟ve said 

to them, I know you feel like they have turned their back on 

you. And you put trust into them, and you definitely feel 

betrayed. Yes, that‟s how they feel. They‟re feeling very upset, 

angry. They feel like their back‟s been turned on. But I remind 

them, you can send them a message in 2011. You don‟t have to 

support them any more. You can send them a message. Maybe 

it‟s time that they get that message. 

 

So going back to Bill 107 there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Weed 

Control Act, and I want to make it very clear, RMs must have 

the ability to deal with the weed control with farmers. They 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4933 

have to make sure that when they come and they have their 

inspectors and they go out to an area and they look at that, that 

is very clear they have certain powers. 

 

And I don‟t know. Does this Act give them the power that they 

can enforce on a farmer and on somebody who owns land who 

maybe not be farming? He might just be renting out his land. 

And he might say, oh I rent out the land. I don‟t have control 

over if there‟s weeds or not. I think they would have to be very 

clear. 

 

I‟m not sure that this legislation is very clear. And I think it has 

to maybe be made sure it‟s clear so that the RMs, the 

inspectors, and people that are renting land and people that are 

producing certain products on a land — and you know, it can be 

different things — I mean, whether it‟s wheat, it doesn‟t matter, 

barley. It doesn‟t matter what they‟re producing. But they have 

to feel like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that their land is being 

protected and that the RM and the weed inspectors, when they 

phone and put in a complaint and they see something . . . Their 

land‟s been clear of weeds and noxious weeds control. And 

that‟s very important that some people take a lot of pride. And I 

know that, in the rural area. 

 

My grandfather was a farmer. He took much pride in his land. 

He did an excellent job. He raised a lot of children — 13 to be 

exact — on that farm. And he was very proud. He worked hard. 

Early in the morning, up till late, but he wanted to make sure, 

you know, that his land was protected. When he planted a crop, 

he wanted to make sure . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

yes. Yes, so many things are out of control. I mean that‟s the 

other thing but we‟ll go back to the weeds, but that‟s 

government. 

 

But this Bill is going to have an opportunity for people, I think, 

to bring input, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they‟ve got to have that 

input into this. So I‟m not sure that this government has gone 

through the process to make sure it has consulted with all the 

people that it should consult with. And you know, just knowing 

their past history in the last two and a half years, they totally 

disrespect First Nations and Métis with the duty to consult and 

accommodate, and a lot of others. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So I can see the farmers and other people feeling the same way. 

They must truly think, well are these guys consulting us or not? 

And I hope that they‟re being heard. I really do. I hope this Bill 

will take into account their concerns. I really do. Because this 

government has totally turned their back on First Nations and 

Métis and northern people. 

 

But there‟s other areas where they‟ve cut programs and passed 

legislation that they haven‟t consulted. They haven‟t gone out 

and consulted. They just make the cuts and it doesn‟t matter. 

You accept what you got, and look out if you put up a balk. 

Look out if you want to put up a fight. Look out if you 

challenge them. Some people are really nervous and scared, and 

they shouldn‟t be scared of a government. 

 

Government‟s supposed to be there to protect all Saskatchewan 

residents. Whether they‟re new, whether they‟re young, the 

government has an opportunity, an obligation — so do we all 

— to hold this government accountable. And I know from this 

side, the official opposition and our leader will hold them 

accountable. That you can count on. 

 

You know, they‟re going to have problems out there with the 

RMs and, I know, enforcing some of the legislation we pass. 

But again, you know, they‟re hoping, the RMs are hoping they 

can put trust into a government, that that government will make 

sure that the legislation gives them the teeth they need. And it‟s, 

you know, it‟s important that they have the teeth that they need 

so that when they pass this legislation, they‟ve talked to them. 

It‟s important. 

 

You know, are these aggressive steps? You know, we don‟t 

know. Are they steps that are recommended and the steps that 

are coming into legislation and the powers to the inspectors, the 

weed inspectors, or to the RM? You know, these are some very 

aggressive steps. I don‟t know. Are they? I hope you went to 

the farmers, you‟ve talked. I hope you went to the RMs. I hope 

you‟ve talked to the inspectors. I hope anybody‟s who‟s out 

there in the community that would be impacted, stakeholders, 

that you would have talked to them. I hope that‟s happened. 

 

Because if that hasn‟t happened, that goes back to showing the 

trust again. People put trust into the government. And if the 

government‟s not going to go and consult and make sure the 

stakeholders and the people impacted are heard, then again it‟s 

unfortunate. And there‟s turning your back on the people again. 

I mean that, to me, I hope hasn‟t happened here. 

 

We‟ll hope that, you know . . . It‟s very clear that whatever 

conditions come out after the debate and if this passes 

legislation, there is time. There‟s time for people to make sure 

that they approach their MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and they talk about, here‟s what we need and here‟s 

what we don‟t need in regards to Bill 107, The Weed Control 

Act. 

 

So people still have an opportunity to talk to the official 

opposition and to their members and, you know, in their rural 

area to make sure that what legislation is passed here is clearly 

. . . Not only the government side and the members opposite 

hear it but the official opposition will hear it and make sure we 

hold them accountable. And sometimes the phone calls we get 

— and from the constituencies on the members opposite, they 

phone us. They talk to us. We see them, and they raise 

concerns. 

 

So it‟s not all a, you know, a view out there that it‟s 100 per 

cent acceptable what the current government is doing, because 

it is not. On some of the legislation that has been passed and 

some of the decisions that this government has made, it‟s not 

very clear. Some people are not 100 per cent happy with what 

has gone on. So there are concerns there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

you know. 

 

But I want to get back to the weed control. You know, this 

piece of legislation will ensure . . . And I want to make it very 

clear because this is so important. People take it so serious. You 

know, the duty consult, to make sure input is in there — I think 

it‟s huge. It just goes to show what we‟re hearing out in the 

province all over. People want to make sure. 

 



4934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

You know, now, addressing the problem, like I said earlier in 

some of my comments, we‟re not sure where this legislation 

came from, this Bill, Bill 107. Was it one of the members that 

brought it forward? Was it from the RMs? Was it from farmers? 

Was it something, housekeeping business, whatever? Like I‟m 

not sure where it came from, but I hope it‟ll address the 

problems. 

 

And does it go far enough, like far enough to deal with the 

problems? If it‟s been raised by the RM or by farmers, does it 

go far enough? Has the process gone through making sure that 

they‟ve consulted with the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Have 

they gone through with the farmers, with the RMs, with the 

weed inspectors? 

 

They have to make sure that this legislation is going to do 

enough to accomplish what they want. We know that passing 

legislation is very important. It‟s a tool. It‟s the law after it goes 

through a process. It will become the law. We have to make 

sure that we‟re making laws like this — and I look at it as a law 

— it‟s very clear. It has to be the right law and the right tool for 

the people using it, whether it‟s the weed inspectors, the RMs, 

to make sure that farmers comply. That when they have a 

problem with, you know, noxious weeds, that it‟s being dealt 

with properly, and that it doesn‟t allow them to move around 

and find a way to get around it and not. Because it is impacting 

on other farmers and other crops. And if that‟s happening, then 

you see. 

 

And like the member earlier said, my colleague, he talked about 

farmers who take a lot of pride. And they do an excellent job 

and they keep weed control on their farm to just about to zero. 

But they put a lot of work into it, a lot of pride. They put a lot of 

time. And we know that. Farmers are very important; we know 

that. 

 

And I hope the government will listen to them, and making sure 

that they‟re consulted and that action taken by this Bill will 

enable the inspectors, the RMs, to make sure that somebody is 

in compliance, that they‟re not going to be able to move around 

and get around it and say, well I found a loophole. So if you go 

and consult and you make sure you talk with the farmers, the 

RM, and the weed inspectors, you can come up with good 

legislation that has an opportunity to not allow people to 

manoeuvre around it. So I just want to make it very clear that‟s 

important. 

 

But I want to go back to the trust thing. Because I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, Bill 107, The Weed Control Act, and I just 

want to refer back as I guess an example, some of the Acts that 

have been passed by the previous government. You know, 

people trusted that this government would do the right thing and 

people are sadly disappointed out there — sadly disappointed. 

And we‟re seeing more and more of that coming back, day after 

day, people unhappy and impacted by decisions of this Sask 

Party government turning their back on them. 

 

And that‟s how they feel. It is. It‟s betrayal. They put the trust 

into this government and this government has turned their back 

on them, and that is appalling. And those individuals that 

supported them are now maybe figuring, hey, we trusted these 

guys. They gave us their word and now they turned their back 

on us. I think they‟re going to send that government a message 

in 2011. 

 

I think there‟s an option. They know our record as a past NDP 

government. They know the record. People are talking. I‟m 

hearing it. Was it perfect? No. We know that. Our leader makes 

it very clear. Was it perfect? No. Can we improve? Yes, we 

know we can. And I know under his leadership and our team, 

we will improve and the people can work with us and they can 

trust us. 

 

But unfortunately the track record of this Sask Party 

government is very clear to the people out there. 

 

But I want to go back to, I want to go back to this Bill 107, The 

Weed Control Act. There‟s a few things I may not have talked 

about and I want to make sure. Because I‟m going to go back 

and refer, because I like referring but I like coming back, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I know that we have to make sure. You know, 

Bill 107, The Weed Control Act is very important and I want to 

make sure I keep referring back to it, but I sometimes like to 

use examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like the trust thing and stuff 

like that, and the past record and where people have gone. 

 

But I want to go back to this. You know, if you look at this, like 

. . . And I want to make it very clear, because sometimes you 

know you pass legislation, I hope this Act doesn‟t create hard 

feelings amongst the farmers, neighbours who work together 

and usually work in good partnership and they help each other 

out. And you look at the farm communities. I know my 

grandfather, any neighbour around, around his farm — and I 

mean some of our neighbours were 10 miles away; he called 

them neighbours; they were further away — they would come 

together and they would help each other. And it‟s amazing to 

watch. They trusted each other and they could rely on each 

other in trust, not like that government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — CCF-NDP [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party] spirit. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Oh yes, yes, it was. My grandpa was very 

clear on that. You know, and it is an honour to be able to even 

talk about the experience my grandfather had and we had on the 

farm growing up, spending time with my grandfather and just 

the knowledge he had. 

 

And it is about trust. And it is about farming and how people 

got along. And they worked things out and they got together. 

 

I hope that this legislation doesn‟t cause, you know, hard 

feelings and rough times for the farmers because they‟re trying 

to make a living. And sometimes, you know, the farmers . . . 

With legislation like this, you got to make sure that you‟ve gone 

out and you consulted with all the farmers because some of the 

ones that will . . . we hope will all be in compliance under this 

Act and will not have issues. We hope they will get along and 

they can work out that this legislation protects them — all, all 

farmers and people that will be impacted. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s just a . . . it‟s an opportunity. And 

I hope at the end of the day when we‟re done and this Bill 

passes and it goes on and becomes law, that it is truly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, legislation that will work for the farmers, work 

for the weed inspectors, and work for the RMs so they can do 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4935 

the job and they can protect the producers that are doing an 

excellent job, the farmers out there producing crops. 

 

And some of them have very good crops. Some of them have 

years of experience and much pride and generations on the farm 

after generation. They just want to make sure that they can 

make a living and that their crops, you know, the money that 

they spend on weed control and the money that they look after 

their crops, and I mean, very clear that somebody else is in 

compliance and isn‟t causing them grief and hardship. And that 

shouldn‟t happen. It is the government‟s role. But we have to 

make sure the government . . . make sure that this legislation, 

you know, Bill 107, The Weed Control Act, is what is needed 

for the farm area, for the rural area, for the RM, and for the 

inspectors. 

 

But you know, I want to go back to an example and use this as 

an example. So many people out there honestly wanted to trust 

and they wanted something. And you know, they said, we want 

to trust. We want to trust. So you know, they supported the 

current government. And they said, you know, we‟re going to 

trust them and look at all the promises they‟re going to do. And 

I‟m telling you, people are telling me exactly this: we trusted 

them, and they have turned our backs, and we‟re going to send 

them a message very clear. 

 

I know they don‟t like hearing this stuff, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

— trust issue. They don‟t like it at all. But you know what? 

They need to hear it because I think they‟re going to get a 

message: don‟t be counting on yourself. When you pass 

legislation and people put trust into you, make sure you put 

trust into it. You know, the people want to make sure that when 

they give their word and their commitment, either way, that it‟s 

very clear that you can count on that. But the people that put 

that out, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . But they expect that as well 

from the government. 

 

And when people go out knocking on their doors saying, oh 

vote for our party; we‟re the one that‟s going to listen. We‟re 

connected with the people. We‟re going to do all these 

wonderful things. And you‟re knocking on their door asking for 

their support and you say, trust me. Okay, that‟s fine, and those 

people do. A lot of people did. They put their trust. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this group of residents 

are so concerned about the trust they put into the current 

government and the people that asked for their support — and 

they did; they trusted them — have turned their back on them. 

And they say they will send a message, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

that government, the Sask Party government, to those 

individuals that have turned their back on. 

 

But I want to go back to Bill 107, The Weed Control Act, 

because that‟s important. This legislation might have some 

serious implications for different farmers. I don‟t think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, everybody‟s going to enjoy and want to 

support this legislation. There‟s probably people out there that 

maybe have difficulties. We don‟t know their conditions of 

their farm. 

 

And if they‟re a small farmer, maybe they‟re struggling out 

there and they‟re trying all they can. And maybe their wife is 

working or they‟ve got a part-time job and they‟re trying to 

make ends meet on the farm. And you know, they might 

subsidize their income by going off and working because they 

can‟t make it just on farming. They‟re a small farmer. They‟re 

not like the big farmers who could afford a lot of different 

things. So maybe they‟re struggling and maybe they have a 

problem, some of the smaller farmers, with, you know, noxious 

weeds. 

 

But you know, sometimes we have to be willing to assist them 

and help them. And sometimes when you look at legislation like 

this, we‟re going to put compliance on them. I hope it doesn‟t 

affect the little farmers. And if it is, that there‟s support, that 

we‟ve talked to those. Like if we make you comply, are we 

going to come up with support so that you support the small 

farmer? Because we know that, you know, sometimes the small 

farmer, the little guy is left behind. And unfortunately, big 

business is big business. And sometimes the little guy . . . 

 

It‟s just like referring to the trappers. I look at the trappers and I 

look at the same legislation. You know, the little farmers. And 

then you have some of our trappers. Look at their industry — 

left behind by this government, totally disrespected and left 

behind. 

 

[15:45] 

 

That‟s appalling. Legislation, regulations that are impacting the 

trappers — same way. They put a lot of trust into the 

government, that you would consult them, you would talk with 

them, but you turned your back on them and you just turned 

your back on the trappers. You changed regulations and you 

don‟t even consult them. You affect their organizations and you 

don‟t consult them. You just do it. That‟s the same thing. It‟s 

appalling that this stuff goes on, and they‟re not consulted. First 

Nations, Métis, this list goes on. 

 

And I really think at the end of the day the public, the people 

out there, the voters, the people that elect us to represent them, 

will send a message to the Sask Party government saying, when 

we put the trust, we want to be consulted. And we come up with 

solutions for you as a government. We don‟t just complain. We 

want to come up with solutions. We want to work. And you 

don‟t work with them any more and you turn your back on 

them. The people will send you a message in 2011 and then 

maybe some other government will take over or party will form 

government, and they will do the business that needs to be done 

on behalf of the people. That I trust. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. It‟s a very 

interesting premise that the member is offering, but it‟s got 

nothing to do with weed control. I‟d appreciate it if he would 

address his comments to the Bill in front of us. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me be very clear. I 

want to tie it all in because I‟m using examples. I‟ve got to use 

examples to show this. So you know, I‟ll go back to Bill 107, 

The Weed Control Act. But I was using, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

examples like trust. I want to make it very clear the connection 

of consulting the farmers, the rural area; consulting trappers, 

First Nation. I‟m trying to use, you know, the comparison to 

make sure that I come across on this Bill and debate. 

 

So I want to go back to the trappers now and use that as an 



4936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The trappers feel like they want 

to be heard, consulted. First Nations feel the same way just like 

the farmers. While in this legislation that will impact the 

farmers, they want to make sure that they‟re consulted and 

things are shared. But we know this government, they don‟t 

want to talk with them. They don‟t want to share. So that‟s my 

concern. I hope the government is going to go through and truly 

consult with the stakeholders, the farmers, the weed inspectors, 

the rural, the RMs. 

 

So I want to make it very clear. That‟s important and people 

expect that. Just like I want to use an example, trappers, 

whether it‟s . . . want to be consulted. Anybody who‟s been 

impacted by regulations and Acts and Bills that affect them, 

they just want to be heard, a chance to share their views to the 

government. But the government, no it doesn‟t want . . . Sask 

Party government doesn‟t want to talk to anybody. It just wants 

to say, this is where it is. And sometimes I don‟t think they care 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh yes, that‟s a word that we 

heard today in the House. They want to rule. Well right now 

they‟re ruling, and it‟s not good what‟s going on out there. 

 

But I want to go back again to Bill 107, The Weed Control Act 

because I want to make sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to . . . 

that we‟re referring to but I use examples because it helps me to 

understand how my grandfather felt about it and the hard work 

he did. And, you know, he was very proud, very proud farmer, 

very proud Métis, a leader in the Métis community. He did the 

work that was asked of him. He worked with the farmers. He 

worked with the community, his neighbours to make sure. 

 

So when I talk about Bills like this come forward, I hope it‟s 

not going to create hard feelings for farmers out there that will 

be impacted. And, you know, it‟s very clear that that has to 

happen. 

 

But having said all that, you know, the comparison is a trust. 

People want to trust them. You know that trust thing is huge. 

You know they want to use comparisons and trust, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They trust that the legislation and the Bills that we 

pass here are debated and that we‟ve done our job. 

 

We want to make sure that members opposite understand and 

the government understands. The official opposition 

understands. We want to make sure that the people feel like 

they‟re being heard. That‟s what they want. They want to be 

consulted. And at the end, they want to make sure that the 

government‟s making an informed decision, not their decision, 

an informed decision. And that‟s crucial. 

 

Because when you have a group of people feeling like they‟re 

not heard and that they‟re feeling like they‟re not consulted, you 

know, they start to get frustrated and they wonder why and they 

start questioning things. This government has a lot of people 

questioning when they make their decisions on regulations, on 

Bills, on budget cuts, the way they went after the budget 

because of their incompetence, their mismanagement. And now 

who has to pay for it? The rest of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

But I want to show the connection. We see different legislations 

and Bills coming through here because of some of the problems 

that the current government has created. They‟ve created those 

problems very clearly. 

Now we have to go back to The Weed Control Act, 107. I hope 

that when we go through this process that people will come 

forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they will share their views 

— the farmers, the RM, the inspectors. I hope when this goes 

through, my colleagues, the official opposition, will make sure 

that they‟ve talked to the farmers, making sure how these Bills 

. . . 

 

And I think it‟s important to say, I‟ve seen my colleagues and 

the official opposition debate Bills. And I‟ve seen some of those 

Bills, and they‟ve been good legislation. And the people ask us 

as a legislative to do that, to debate those Bills, to make sure. 

But there‟s times when we‟ve co-operated with the current 

government because there‟s certain Bills that need to get 

through for a reason so that people can get the job done. 

 

And the official opposition under our leadership, Dwain 

Lingenfelter, has done that. And I have to commend that that 

process has happened. And that shows me that it‟s working. 

We‟re doing what we need to as an official opposition holding 

that government accountable. But also working with them when 

we need to make sure that legislation that needs to come 

forward is passed and is law. And I think that‟s important. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I will allow my 

colleagues to get in on this, I know some of them want to talk 

about this. But you know, at some times I think, well maybe I 

could go on and, you know, referring to things. But I think I‟ve 

talked about comparisons with trust and different organizations 

and I think at this time I‟m prepared to move to adjourn debate 

on Bill 107, The Weed Control Act. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Cumberland has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 107, 

The Weed Control Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 102 — The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to rise today to talk about The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993. This legislation fits within the framework 

that comes out of the Department of Justice, Ministry of Justice 

that basically is observing and looking at and reviewing the 

legislation in Saskatchewan to make sure that it follows in the 

tradition of that department, to ensure that it‟s appropriate for 

the economic development of the province. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, The Personal Property Security Act is a piece of 

legislation that I think all members in this House are supportive 

of. And basically we want to make sure that whenever this kind 

of legislation comes forward that it‟s being done and it‟s being 

amended or changed in an appropriate way. 

 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4937 

Now when the Minister of Justice was speaking to this 

legislation in his second readings speech, he laid out a number 

of the principles that were involved in this particular legislation. 

But I think it‟s quite interesting to see, in the year 2010, how far 

we‟ve come with this type of legislation. In 1993, there was 

new legislation brought forward which was a consolidation of 

the personal property legislation which was the creation of The 

Personal Property Security Act, and it basically worked through 

and set out a scheme. Many of us in Saskatchewan continue to 

acknowledge the role of Professor Ron Cumming in doing this 

kind of work because he has spent time and effort to think 

through all of the possible combinations of problems that arise 

and solutions that can be provided that may resolve some of 

those issues. 

 

And so what we have in this particular legislation is a further 

gloss on that particular work, and that‟s, I guess, giving it some 

praise. But also it raises the questions of what kinds of issues 

are being addressed and why are they being addressed at this 

time. 

 

And I think when you look at the legislation and you look at the 

comments from the minister, what you realize is that in 15, 20, 

25 years of development of this kind of legislation, much of our 

economy has changed. And it used to be that the provincial 

boundaries as it related to security legislation on movable 

property, which this legislation is about, primarily related to 

those items which would stay within the boundaries of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think this particular set of amendments recognizes the fact that 

people will be lending money to purchase some rather large 

movable objects, which may spend some part of their life in 

Saskatchewan, but they may also be in Texas. They may be in 

Alberta. They may be in Florida. They may be in Quebec. And 

so when you have those kinds of questions about how you can 

lend money for people in business to purchase certain items, 

then you need to make sure that your rules reflect that 

multi-jurisdiction issue. 

 

And so what we see in this particular legislation is the fact that 

they‟re setting out some of the rules that come from the 

Uniform Law Conference of Canada and also items that come 

from the commercial code in the United States to make sure that 

it‟s absolutely clear where particular banking documents need 

to be registered to make sure that you can get your money back 

if somebody doesn‟t pay you for the loan that you‟ve given 

them. 

 

And so I think that this may be one of the first attempts at doing 

that here in Saskatchewan. And I know that we‟ll end up having 

questions from our Justice critic in committee as it relates to 

these specific issues, but clearly the goal is the right goal, which 

is to make sure that economic activity in Saskatchewan is not 

hampered by laws in our jurisdiction that don‟t mesh well with 

laws in other provinces and territories and also with states in the 

United States. 

 

Now it‟s also interesting in this particular legislation to 

understand that the history of development of this kind of 

security legislation in Saskatchewan has also moved into a new 

stage that provides for some ease of use. And I know that we‟ve 

seen in other places in government that the ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], the government 

registry company has developed to the stage where it‟s being 

trusted by many aspects of the business community and 

individuals, but also of government and of this legislature. 

 

And here‟s another example where some of the rule changes 

that are made in this particular legislation will assist in the ease 

of developing electronic registries of interests that are available 

for others to have access to them. We know for example that 

there‟s work being done in the mineral registries to have them 

more available than they have been. 

 

Clearly the land titles system itself has made some dramatic 

improvements. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s quite a pleasure 

for me to see this because when I became the minister of Justice 

and attorney general in 1995, there was no thought of electronic 

land registry. All we knew was that we had very good records 

that were all kept quite carefully pretty well by hand in a 

number of offices across the province. And there were a few of 

us, I guess, after I asked a number of questions about whether it 

would be possible to transform what we had into what could be 

a leading land titles system, a modern land titles system. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And we all know that this was not a simple task, but I think this 

legislation today is an example of giving an affirmative answer 

to the question, was it smart to do that back in the late ‟90s, to 

make this change to our land titles system? Because in turn 

what we had or what we were able to do was set a base there 

which now is the base for many of the other registry systems 

that we have in the province. 

 

So here we have personal property security amendment 

information that will be connected together through ISC, and it 

will be connected in all of the appropriate places so that 

searches can be done with a minimum amount of hassle and 

hopefully a minimum amount of money. And as this particular 

legislation is setting out and developing on that strong base, I 

think it‟s also an example of where having good civil servants, 

good people who you rely on for advice within the department, 

and taking that advice, you can then make sure that there‟s a 

certain stability in the structure that we have in the province. 

 

Now it‟s unfortunate that doesn‟t happen all the time. And we 

had a good example last week where it‟s pretty clear they made 

a bunch of changes in the film industry without talking to the 

people involved. We‟ve seen changes they‟ve made other 

places where there haven‟t been the kinds of discussions that 

are necessary, and we‟ve seen some fairly unusual and I would 

say sometimes damaging decisions. We know that that style of 

trying to govern without getting proper advice is something that 

doesn‟t serve the people well. 

 

And we see this particular Bill as maybe one that is an example 

of where they have listened to some advice, and so therefore I 

don‟t think we have any more questions about it. And so I 

suggest that we move this Bill onto committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 



4938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

The Speaker — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 102, The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 102, The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to 

the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 124 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 124 — The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

looking at this Bill one can see that this Bill is being introduced 

at the request of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. Now the 

Law Society of Saskatchewan is the professional regulatory 

body that oversees the legal profession in the public interest. 

This oversight is performed by elected and appointed benchers 

who act as the governing body or by professional staff of the 

society, as is quoted by the Justice minister in his second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

I‟m very relieved to see that the government is actually 

listening to an organization that wants to see some changes 

made that is of a progressive nature, and that they‟ve consulted 

with the Law Society, for instance, on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

because that doesn‟t seem to be the MO [modus operandi] for 

this government at all when they‟re introducing most pieces of 

legislation or making budget cuts or alterations to the budget, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen in many other Bills that have been 

introduced that there was absolutely no consultation, and the 

ramifications that come from the fact that there were no 

consultations done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve seen now that the UN, United Nations agency ILO 

[International Labour Organization] has now presented a ruling 

that the Harper Tories are now supposed to keep track of what‟s 

going on in Saskatchewan, and that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan and the Cabinet are supposed to report back to 

the federal Conservative Tory government with respect to that 

ruling from the United Nations on Bills, for instance, 5 and 6. 

Those were of course the essential services Act and the changes 

that were made to The Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker. 

And the reason for that ruling is simply because of the fact that 

the changes (a) were not of a progressive nature. They were of a 

regressive nature, Mr. Speaker, and were done completely 

without consultation with the main stakeholders, being the 

workers of Saskatchewan, believe it or not. So the United 

Nations ILO is very clear in their ruling, Mr. Speaker, about 

what should be happening in Saskatchewan, that those two 

pieces of legislation should be repealed, that those consultations 

should take place. 

 

And, you know, having gone through those consultations, if 

there‟s legislation that should come from that, Mr. Speaker, that 

it should be done so on a consultative or collaborative basis 

with the people that it affects, the stakeholders, and not just 

done as a favour to some Sask Party supporters or as a favour to 

some of the ideologues in the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we see that out of Bills 5 and 6. But what‟s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, is that this ruling goes even further than that. It also 

talks about some other pieces of legislation, for instance Bill 

No. 43 which was the trespass . . . the amendments that were 

made to the trespass Act and how that may affect democracy in 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the notion of 

free speech and free expression and how that may be stifled by 

that pieces of legislation that the Sask Party rammed through in 

the last session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we can see that the United Nations is quite concerned, not 

just with the complaints that were brought to them, but with 

some of the other pieces of legislation that are being brought 

forward by the Sask Party government with respect to a 

complete lack of consultation and therefore are of a very 

regressive nature in the way they‟ve been adopted. 

 

So I‟m very pleased to see that in Bill 124, The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, we see that there‟s been some 

suggestions made by the Law Society of Saskatchewan, and 

through those suggestions with the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan, that the Sask Party government has taken heed 

to those suggestions, and on a consultative basis, it sounds like 

has made some changes that were desired. 

 

So like I said, when one looks at the typical way that the Sask 

Party government moves forward with legislation, it‟s quite 

unlike what we‟re seeing here in Bill 124. Now there‟s another 

piece of legislation of course that is of great concern to the 

United Nations and the ILO, and that‟s obviously Bill 80, which 

is the changes that are being made to The Construction 

Industrial Labour Relations Act with respect to some sweeping 

changes that are again of a very regressive nature for the 

workers and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s been well-documented now by the stakeholders who are 

most directly affected, that being the workers that will be 

directly affected, and how they will be affecting not just them 

but their families and their style of living, their income, 

potentially their benefits, Mr. Speaker. There‟s so many 

different facets that tie into that piece of legislation and how 

dramatically it can affect the front of working people, 

tradespeople in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s really critical that the Sask Party government does what 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4939 

it‟s claiming to have done with Bill 124, in terms of having 

done these consultations with respect to The Legal Profession 

Amendment Act and make sure that the legislation is accurately 

reflective of what people in Saskatchewan are looking for and 

what is needed to make us truly the best province to live in in 

all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when one looks at this Bill, the public who make complaints 

and the lawyers facing those complaints deserve greater 

certainty and a timely resolution to their disputes. The proposal 

to streamline the sentencing process for serious misconduct 

appears to achieve that and as such is a positive move. 

Similarly, allowing the Law Society to appeal a finding of the 

conduct investigation committee to the Court of Appeal seems 

to be an appropriate move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are some changes that seem to be causing a good 

streamlining of the process and allowing some recourse in the 

event that there is still a dispute or a difference of opinion, Mr. 

Speaker, and that‟s something that‟s obviously so vital to have. 

There‟s always going to be . . . Not always, I shouldn‟t say, but 

there is going to be from time to time differences of opinions on 

rulings. 

 

And it‟s important that when decisions are made or rulings are 

made, no matter what the case may be or what it pertains to, 

that there is always a mode of recourse, Mr. Speaker, and a 

mode of recourse that the complainant or the person that has 

concerns feels comfortable with — that they don‟t feel that it‟s 

biased, that they don‟t feel that it‟s a useless exercise to pursue 

to begin with, but that they truly feel that they can be heard, that 

they will be respected when they are heard, shall we say, and 

that those complainants will be taken seriously and maybe then 

addressed going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s very good to see that the changes seem to be of a 

positive nature and that there is recourse built into those 

changes, Mr. Speaker. Now there is more than a little irony in 

the government‟s proposal to include a statement to the effect 

that the legal profession exists to serve the public, and, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats couldn‟t agree more. One 

of the most admirable qualities of the Law Society is the degree 

to which they operate openly and transparently. Complaints and 

findings of misconduct for example are posted on the Law 

Society‟s website. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it would be a great relief if only this Sask 

Party government operated as openly and trustworthy as the 

legal profession. Instead we see a government obsessed with 

secrecy and spin at every turn. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Now I hear one of the members saying, excuse me, excuse me. 

So it‟s nice to hear that one of the members is actually paying 

attention to what I‟m saying. Because it is quite obvious from 

what we‟ve seen here, just in the last few days, Mr. Speaker, 

that they‟re having a difficulty getting their story straight, Mr. 

Speaker. And we‟re still trying to wade through the mess and 

still trying to get to what are the accurate facts, Mr. Speaker, 

besides all the spin and rhetoric that we‟re getting from the Sask 

Party government and their Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again as I said, it‟s a relief to see that the Law Society acts in 

a much, much different way than the people that have the 

ability to make the laws and change Bills and bring Bills 

forward in the province of Saskatchewan — that being the 

Premier of Saskatchewan and the Sask Party government 

behind him, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Because what we‟re seeing is quite the opposite. It‟s quite the 

opposite. We don‟t see any open . . . We don‟t see any 

transparency when it comes to the financial management of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. My colleague, who is the critic for 

finances, has quite an onerous job trying to sort through what 

the Sask Party government is doing with the finance in the 

province. 

 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a shame that my colleague, 

the Finance critic, isn‟t the finance master because I guarantee 

you, I guarantee you that the finances in this province would 

look dramatically different, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn‟t be 

sitting in a deficit position. We would be sitting in a situation 

where we‟d be in the black instead of the red in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, because decisions would be made differently, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the main decision that‟d be made differently, Mr. Speaker, 

would be that we wouldn‟t have increased our executives‟ 

salaries within government to double of what they were when 

we were in government, Mr. Speaker. That would be one of the 

first differences. There‟s many, many other differences, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We wouldn‟t have over projected potash revenues in this 

province because we were the ones saying at that time, when 

their budget came out in 2009, that their projections were way 

off base. Now why is it that the opposition could see that but 

the government itself, with all the resources it has, Mr. Speaker, 

could not? Why is that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see, as I said that the Law Society operates 

in a very different manner. There is transparency. They operate 

in a very open way. When complaints and findings of 

misconduct come forward, are found, for example they‟re 

posted on the Law Society‟s website. 

 

Now again as I said, it‟s quite different from what we‟re seeing 

in other ways with the government. When we ask questions 

about whether a crane on a construction site is properly 

certified, all they want to know is, who gave us the 

information? That‟s all the Sask Party government is interested 

in, is who gave us the information, not is that crane safe for the 

workers that are currently there at the time that the question was 

asked. No. It‟s, who gave us the information? It‟s simply the 

issue of witch-hunting, which is not what the Law Society does. 

 

The Law Society is quite different. They want to know who 

brings forward the complaint. They want to know what the 

situation is. And they want to know how they can best deal with 

that situation and complaint, and rectify it, versus the witch 

hunt which is what the Sask Party undertakes when a complaint 

comes forward from the opposition or from members of the 

society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for instance, you know, when we bring forward, through our 

critic for Corrections and Public Safety, an issue of an offender 



4940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

being mistakenly released from custody, what happens with the 

government? Do they simply . . . [inaudible] . . . the facts or 

look at the facts or do a due diligence with respect to the 

complaint that has been brought forward? No. Instead they lock 

up my colleague in a closed-door meeting for an hour and 

subject him to all sorts of threats and subject the workers within 

that unit to a witch hunt as to who brought forward the 

complaint. 

 

That shouldn‟t be important when dealing with the Law 

Society. That shouldn‟t be important when dealing with 

complaints to the government. It should be, what is the 

complaint? Who is the person that the complaint is about? And 

how should that complaint be handled going forward, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So I‟m glad to see that Bill 124, The Legal Profession 

Amendment Act is taking a careful review of how those 

complaints are being dealt with when brought forward to the 

Law Society. 

 

Another one of those concerns I have, Mr. Speaker, is when 

members of the public file freedom of information requests, and 

they‟re either rejected or large portions of documents are 

blacked out, Mr. Speaker. That doesn‟t speak to open 

accountability and transparency, Mr. Speaker, even if nothing 

nefarious is in the blacked-out section. The problem is, is that 

when the section is blacked out for no good reason, of 

protecting an individual‟s interests or such, but when there‟s 

literally three-quarters of the page blacked out, it then has the 

appearance of being nefarious, Mr. Speaker. And once it takes 

on the appearance of being nefarious, then unfortunately there is 

mistrust and distrust, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So that is what‟s so critically important about the Law Society 

and The Legal Profession Amendment Act being open and 

accountable in what it‟s doing through its means, as well as the 

government being open and accountable as to what it‟s doing 

through its means. It‟s to make sure that the public feels that it 

can have trust in those entities to act on their best behalf, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

So if there is no trust, Mr. Speaker, then the system breaks 

down in many different ways. And there currently is no trust, 

Mr. Speaker, when people bring forward complaints to the 

government that they will be taken in the manner that they are 

being presented, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I‟m reassured to see that the Law Society through The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act is working in that way, that it is 

giving a great deal of confidence to complainants and trust and 

is, like I said, allowing the appropriate amount of time for the 

public to make complaints and the lawyers that are facing those 

complaints to deal with things in a more timely resolution in 

those disputes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we look again at the full overview of the Bill, and we 

see that there has been consultations done from what the 

minister has said in his second reading speech and that these 

changes, according to the Minister of Justice, are being brought 

forward at the request of the Law Society, as well as the fact 

that we can see that the Law Society is acting in a very open 

and transparent way, Mr. Speaker, which as I said brings great 

trust from those who are having to deal with the Law Society. 

We will continue to consult with members of the legal 

profession to ensure that these changes meet their needs and, 

more importantly, the needs of the public that they and we as 

members of the legislature serve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will recommend that this Bill now 

be moved to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 124, 

The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 124, The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 129 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 129 — The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to weigh in on debate and discussion here today as it 

relates to Bill No. 129, An Act respecting the Enforcement of 

Judgments for the payment of money, making consequential 

amendments to certain Acts and repealing certain Acts titled as 

The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, Mr. Speaker. Not 

only is the title long in length, Mr. Speaker. The Bill itself is as 

well with a 111-page Bill before us today which certainly 

speaks to the importance of scrutiny in great depth on this 

matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know when we‟re looking at this Bill here specifically we‟re 

talking about matters of creditors and debtors, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly these are common issues and common challenges 

that are raised within our offices on an ongoing basis and 

around the province, Mr. Speaker. 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4941 

So it‟s something that‟s important to our constituents. It‟s 

important that we get the legislation right, Mr. Speaker, and 

make sure that it doesn‟t create undue hardship for creditors or 

for debtors, Mr. Speaker, making sure that it marries that proper 

balance and making sure that it‟s effective in meeting the 

objectives set out by the minister, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

sets out principles which certainly we support, Mr. Speaker, but 

it‟s a matter of making sure that the Bill itself is actually going 

to achieve the kind of results and needs within our community 

that exists here today. 

 

When we talk about the common challenges that come through 

our office as it relates to creditors, we hear from frustrated 

creditors from time to time who have obtained a court judgment 

which states they are entitled to compensation or restitution of 

some kind but find they are unable to enforce it, Mr. Speaker. 

So this is something that causes great frustration and 

consternation and rightfully so, Mr. Speaker. You have many 

businesses, many organizations, and individuals who are found 

in this circumstance as creditors who have a court judgment that 

says they are entitled, Mr. Speaker, but then don‟t have the 

ability to go after the amount owed.  

 

And it questions the enforceability of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

And this is something that this Bill needs to make sure that it 

sets out to achieve, and these are the good questions that we 

need to be asking. And the thorough, thorough consultation 

within the legal community that we‟re engaged with right now 

is allowing us to dissect and understand this 111-page Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that the delicate balance and the issues 

that it sets out to address are in fact addressed within this 

legislation and done so in an effective manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other group that we do hear from within our offices as well 

is, we hear from the creditors, the businesses, the organizations, 

the individuals who are owed money and have no ability at 

times to go out and retrieve that money that they‟re rightfully 

owed. But we also hear from debtors, Mr. Speaker. And we 

hear from debtors who worry about whether or not they‟ll be 

left with sufficient income at times to support themselves and 

their families. This is something that‟s important — the ability 

to sustain and be able to provide for their family. 

 

They are concerned about the use of the family vehicle to 

transport themselves to and from work, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly within their lives, vehicles that in many cases are 

something that enables their employment, Mr. Speaker, 

something that allows them to achieve revenues within their 

own life. And of course these revenues are needed as well 

because those dollars are needed to be able to transfer and flow 

to, in some cases here, the debt that‟s owed or to a creditor 

who‟s rightfully owed money. So those are some of the 

concerns. 

 

I know that we also hear concerns about the powers given to 

sheriffs to enforce these judgments and how they interact with 

the public in the course of enforcing those judgments. And 

those sheriffs are put out in a very difficult role, Mr. Speaker, to 

go out and seek the dollars that are owed to a creditor. And we 

know that in doing that work, that important work, Mr. Speaker, 

that they‟re dealing with highly sensitive environments, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When we‟re talking about matters of money, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that we would know that there‟s likely nothing more 

sensitive within many, many people‟s lives. Certainly many 

times I think it‟s the challenge of many that causes many 

problems for individuals and for relationships, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we‟re dealing with money matters, we‟re dealing with 

something that certainly needs to be dealt with in a great deal of 

sensitivity. And as a result there‟s a lot of emotion involved in 

these exchanges, Mr. Speaker, and there‟s a . . . It‟s difficult for 

everybody involved, whether that be the debtor, the creditor, 

and certainly for the sheriff that‟s intervening. And we need to 

make sure we find the right balance in our legislation. 

 

These matters, when you‟re looking at taking away something 

— the property or the rights or the money of an individual — 

certainly can cause great stress and can heighten circumstances 

to different types of environments that may not be desirable. 

Certain crises emerge at times, Mr. Speaker, and we need to be 

very thoughtful in making sure that this legislation has the right 

balance. 

 

And as I‟ve said, this is a piece of legislation that certainly isn‟t 

short in words at 111 pages. And it‟s one that we‟re really 

working — the opposition New Democrats — are working very 

diligently with the legal community to make sure that the 

scrutiny of this Bill allows us to make sure that we put forward 

a document that‟s meaningful and sets out the objectives of the 

. . . to achieve the objectives of the minister, Mr. Speaker, 

which, as I‟ve said, we support those basic objectives. 

 

I know the minister said that the legislation needed to be 

modernized, and we certainly agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s a broad statement, and there‟s a definite need for clarity 

on these fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government has also brought together, on one piece of 

legislation, rules that have in the past been scattered over 

several pieces of legislation. We agree with that principle, that 

idea of consolidation, and it‟s one of those activities that we‟re 

working with the legal community on right now to make sure 

that what we‟ve achieved is a document that works and that 

achieves the fine balance that needs to exist between these 

entities that in some ways are competing, but also each of them 

have their pressures and the entitled arguments that need to be 

represented. We need to make sure that this consolidation 

serves, serves the enforcement of these judgments properly, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need to make sure that this consolidation 

provides the kind of protections that are needed to families and 

individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the minister promises that this is more than a consolidation, 

Mr. Speaker, and then he went on with many rather vague and 

broad statements, Mr. Speaker, for which we are having 

difficulty scrutinizing at this point in time. And certainly the 

committee process will offer that opportunity. 

 

It‟s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, that the clarity that should be 

provided from the minister in putting forward a piece of 

legislation that I hope the minister values and that I hope the 

minister understands, Mr. Speaker, it‟s disappointing that we 

don‟t have that kind of detail laid out at the front end, Mr. 

Speaker, because it only enlightens this entire process, Mr. 



4942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

Speaker, and adds to the debate and the discussion and the 

scrutiny that the people of the province, the legal community 

are engaged with right now as it relates to this Bill with the 

official opposition New Democrats, with ourselves. 

 

[16:30] 

 

He says, the minister says that it will remove a host of 

procedural burdens in legislative inadequacies in the process, 

Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately the minister does not take any 

time to explain what these burdens or inadequacies are, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s simply a broad statement. So for us to then be able 

to go in and understand the merit and effectiveness of those 

changes, Mr. Speaker, we‟re hugely hampered. Those are going 

to be questions that we request and urge the government to 

provide in detail at the legislative committee level. 

 

It‟s certainly a process that we‟re engaged with right now 

through our consultations with our stakeholders and with the 

legal community who are helping to understand from the very, 

very broad statements that were provided from this minister and 

very vague statements from this minister, what this legislation 

means as it relates to creditors, as it relates to debtors, and as it 

relates to sheriffs, Mr. Speaker — all with their different 

pressures and needs that need to be achieved in this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s certainly found itself commonplace with the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, to have legislation that has derived in vacuum, Mr. 

Speaker, and that doesn‟t in fact achieve the goal or objective 

that it‟s intended to, Mr. Speaker, because of being formulated 

either in haste or without any consultation with those people 

that either have expert opinion or with those individuals that it 

impacts, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s a recipe for poor legislation. 

It‟s a recipe for poor government and it‟s certainly what we‟re 

seeing from the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this reflective of the broader failures and the bigger 

failures that Saskatchewan people are identifying and always 

are asking myself and individuals of the opposition to raise 

within this Assembly — and I always commit to doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, at every opportunity that I do so — and that‟s the big 

and large failures as it relates to health care, Mr. Speaker. The 

massive failures of the Sask Party and broken promises as it 

relates to health care, cost of living, and financial 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m always pleased to take 

to my feet here in this Legislative Building and raise those 

issues, Mr. Speaker, that matter most to Saskatchewan people. 

 

So the minister lays out many aspects of what this legislation is 

supposed to do, Mr. Speaker, and yet he doesn‟t lay out any 

clear examples of how it, in fact, goes about doing that. He 

makes very broad and vague statements, Mr. Speaker, and it 

makes it very difficult to measure the effectiveness of this piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He did not provide examples of situations where people would 

not have been able to enforce a judgment in the past and how 

they‟ll be able to now. And this gets to . . . The crux of this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that one of the aspects that creditors 

have significant challenges at times, Mr. Speaker — those being 

businesses and organizations and individuals — to go after and 

retrieve those dollars that they‟re rightfully owed and rightfully 

recognized through a court judgment. 

 

This doesn‟t lay out any example of where in the past that those 

circumstances would, where there would have been challenges 

for those individuals to retrieve those dollars. And this 

legislation does nothing . . . Or I shouldn‟t say the legislation 

does nothing. The minister has provided no example of how this 

legislation changes that for specific examples, Mr. Speaker. 

And that‟s a very important piece for us to measure the impact 

and effectiveness of this legislation. 

 

Further to that, he, the minister, did not outline which specific 

provisions in the legislation would make it easier to enforce 

judgments, Mr. Speaker. And this is something that is very, 

very important to, well to each of those groups — the debtors, 

the creditors, and the sheriffs, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 

make sure that we understand the broad statement offered by 

the minister that he‟s trying to enhance the environment so that 

those judgments could be enforced and that creditors receive the 

dollars that they‟re owed. But we‟ve been provided not a single 

specific provision in this legislation that, in fact, enables that to 

happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that‟s problematic for the opposition. It‟s something that I 

challenge the minister responsible to table to this legislature as 

soon as he can, and certainly we‟ll be looking for that and 

scrutinizing it through the committee process. Without that 

information, Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to say that it‟s a process that 

we can only engage with to some extent. 

 

And I know that the broader consultations with stakeholders in 

the legal community cite these as major difficulties to be able to 

understand the impacts, when a minister says that his legislation 

is going to do this, this, and this, but then can‟t provide a 

specific example or a provision that actually is going to enable 

or allow that, Mr. Speaker. This is information that rightfully 

and dutifully should be provided up front, Mr. Speaker, and it 

prevents the democratic process from being as effective as it 

should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this should be of concern, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan 

people because what we have here then is a Bill that is not yet 

understood, not certain that it‟s understood by the minister that 

tabled it, Mr. Speaker. But we need to make sure that it is 

understood before that in fact becomes law. Because what we 

see, Mr. Speaker, is that many, many reckless actions of the 

Sask Party are causing huge harm for Saskatchewan people, 

their lives, and their well-being. And we can look at that in the 

devastating record of the Sask Party as it relates to health care, 

Mr. Speaker, the huge challenges and burdens created by the 

Sask Party as it relates to cost of living, and the gross 

mismanagement, the utter recklessness and irresponsibility as it 

relates to the financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these are big issues. And I know that the Sask Party 

members, many of them are recognizing here today in this 

Assembly here right now that these are big issues, that they‟ve 

completely failed Saskatchewan people. I noticed, you know, 

that some of these members and ministers are likely not proud 

of these devastatingly poor records, Mr. Speaker, where many, 

many promises were offered on the front end, Mr. Speaker. A 

bond of trust was supposed to be created with Saskatchewan 

people on these various issues. And now here we are with 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4943 

broken promise after broken promise, Mr. Speaker, and in fact 

going backwards on critical issues to Saskatchewan people and 

communities and businesses across Saskatchewan. 

 

And when you‟re getting onto issues of broken trust, Mr. 

Speaker, that are the result of failures to deliver and broken 

promises, Mr. Speaker, that we see on so many fronts, it 

becomes hugely problematic for there to be any element of trust 

with the government of the day by either the opposition or 

Saskatchewan people with legislation that they put forward. 

 

So when the minister put forward this legislation and said these 

are the . . . in very vague ways, this is what it‟s intended to do, 

it sort of comes with that “just trust us,” Mr. Speaker. “Just trust 

us” is sort of the plea offered by the minister, because he‟s not 

able to offer anything substantive as to how this legislation will 

in fact address the circumstances that it‟s intended to. And the 

problem with the minister from the Sask Party saying “just trust 

us” is that clearly, Mr. Speaker, the people from across 

Saskatchewan don‟t trust, don‟t trust the Sask Party. They 

certainly don‟t trust the Sask Party Premier, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly they‟re not going to simply trust them. 

 

So what they expect is more detail, Mr. Speaker. They‟re going 

to expect that the government of the day expand and extrapolate 

on how they‟re going to fulfill the objectives and challenges 

that they‟ve laid out here, Mr. Speaker. Because when this 

minister and those members opposite come into the legislature 

and put forward legislation that they say, just trust us with, 

Saskatchewan people clearly, clearly and resoundingly tell this 

government, and ask us to tell this government, that they don‟t. 

 

Saskatchewan people, businesses, communities don‟t trust the 

Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, because you can‟t take them at their 

word, Mr. Speaker. And not only can you not take them at their 

word, Mr. Speaker — and that‟s a sad state of affairs, Mr. 

Speaker — but you can‟t even take them . . . can‟t even trust 

them, Mr. Speaker, when you sign a document and form an 

agreement with this government. Contractual obligations mean 

nothing to this government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I find it odd that what we‟re dealing with here is a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that in fact is trying to enforce 

legislation so that creditors who are rightfully owed dollars can 

go and retrieve those dollars, Mr. Speaker, often through a 

contractual obligation, often through a contractual obligation, 

and to get those dollars. And we support that principle but we 

find it kind of funny that you should maybe practise what you 

preach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this government putting forward legislation that 

allows creditors to retrieve those dollars from broken 

agreements, but this government simply rips up agreements, 

Mr. Speaker. They rip them up as it relates to health care, Mr. 

Speaker. They rip them up as it relates to municipalities, and 

now we see the ill effects of that. We see property taxes going 

through the roof in most communities across Saskatchewan. 

That‟s directly tied to the financial mismanagement of this 

government, but also the treatment this government provides to 

the agreements that it puts forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟re at a point of time where you can‟t take 

this government at their word and, Mr. Speaker, you can‟t even 

take them in a contractual agreement. Yet the government of the 

day, the Sask Party, says well we can rip any agreement, any 

old agreement that we want, Mr. Speaker. We can rip up any 

agreement we want, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan people, 

institutions, organizations, and individuals are always on the 

hook for contractual agreements. 

 

And I think that‟s the way that it should be, Mr. Speaker, that 

not only I believe that it should be that one‟s word should be 

their bond, Mr. Speaker, and that that trust should be provided 

there, but certainly when pen-to-paper agreements are made, 

Mr. Speaker, that that obligation is one that‟s real and one that 

needs to be fulfilled by both parties, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see ripped-up agreement after ripped-up agreement that 

has created huge problems for Saskatchewan people as it relates 

to health care, huge problems for Saskatchewan people as it 

relates to the cost of living within our province, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a government that breaks most promises that they put 

forward, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to climate change, as it 

relates to making big promises that you never even hear 

anything about it any more as it related to addressing rural 

health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s taking an absolute beating under this government, Mr. 

Speaker, where we see doctor vacancies, the very vital service 

that Saskatchewan people and communities depend on for their 

own health and their own needs but also their own economic 

well-being, Mr. Speaker, and we see those vacancies increase 

by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in the past two years. 

 

And what this represents is a broken promise, Mr. Speaker, but 

one that affects the people, the businesses, and the communities 

across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And when you take 

something so vital to the trust that was offered by Saskatchewan 

people for the Saskatchewan Party to govern and to go about 

and fulfill their promises, when you see those kind of ripped-up 

agreements and broken promises, Mr. Speaker, it begs the 

question, can you trust them on anything, Mr. Speaker? Can 

you trust them on anything? 

 

And it goes directly back to this piece of legislation, Bill No. 

129, because we have a minister who stands in this Assembly 

with either the audacity to simply make very vague statements, 

Mr. Speaker, that basically are premised on, just trust us, Mr. 

Speaker — isn‟t able to offer any substance to those — or, Mr. 

Speaker, he doesn‟t understand the legislation that he put 

forward. 

 

Now either one of those could be realistic options, Mr. Speaker, 

but both of them are huge problems for Saskatchewan people 

— a minister that doesn‟t understand the Bill that he puts 

forward, a significant piece of legislation that consolidates in 

fact seven . . . several different pieces of legislation that 

addresses issues that are and challenges that are significant to 

our constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They‟re important to the member from Weyburn‟s constituents. 

I know that for certain. I know that they‟re important to the 

member from Humboldt. I know they‟re important to the 

member from Kelvington‟s. They‟re certainly important to my 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, and we need to make sure we get this 

kind of legislation right. 



4944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

And the reckless approach to both putting forward legislation 

and governing within this province by the Sask Party simply 

has to stop, Mr. Speaker. And when a minister stands up here 

and puts forward a substantive piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, that in fact consolidates many pieces of legislation and 

just simply says, this is what our goal is and just trust us, Mr. 

Speaker, is all he can offer for how we‟re going to achieve it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan people expect more. They‟re disappointed by 

this. And they‟re telling us all the time when the Sask Party 

takes them for granted like this, make sure we call them on it 

every time, make sure that they‟re accountable and that they can 

stand up and offer the kind of substantive material and 

examples that Saskatchewan people deserve. And in this piece 

of legislation that‟s certainly not the case, Mr. Speaker, 

certainly not the case. 

 

We‟re dealing with circumstances in this piece of legislation 

that deals with creditors and sheriffs and debtors, Mr. Speaker. 

And these are volatile situations and need to be dealt with the 

appropriate balance and the appropriate scrutiny needs to make 

sure that what‟s been put forward is going to be an effective 

solution to the challenges that exist because each one of those 

groups have respective needs in these disputes, in these 

challenges. 

 

We need to make sure that Bill 129 achieves that. But what we 

see, Mr. Speaker, is a government, the Sask Party government 

and a Premier who won‟t listen to anybody and puts forward 

flawed legislation, Mr. Speaker, and puts forward flawed plans 

as it relates to health care, Mr. Speaker, that we see devastating 

consequences for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker — our 

cost of living, our financial mismanagement. 

 

We look at health care, Mr. Speaker. We see in the examples 

here where we have a kidney transplant program that‟s cut, Mr. 

Speaker, without any sort of plan about how Saskatchewan 

people are going to receive those transplants. 

 

Now we have family after family after family, Mr. Speaker, 

who are sitting in their communities right now, within their 

homes, Mr. Speaker, in a state that is anything but comfortable, 

anything but peace of mind, Mr. Speaker. And this is what 

occurs when you lose your health, Mr. Speaker. And we have a 

minister and a Premier with the Sask Party that‟s all too willing, 

Mr. Speaker, to let these individuals linger with these poor 

health. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we‟re talking about 

circumstances where individuals are going to deteriorate, 

deteriorate quickly, and we‟re talking about death, Mr. Speaker. 

And this is a government that‟s put forward program cuts that 

they didn‟t understand and had no plan for individuals that 

needed that, Mr. Speaker. Now families after families, loved 

ones and couples and individuals are faced with the 

consequences of death for themself, Mr. Speaker, or the death 

of an individual for whom they love. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, this is not the kind of treatment 

Saskatchewan people deserve. And we expect a heck of a lot 

more, Mr. Speaker, from this Premier than that kind of 

treatment. And that gets to the point, Mr. Speaker, when we, as 

it relates to Bill No. 129, and when we have the minister stand 

in his place in this Assembly and speak to a piece of legislation 

that he simply doesn‟t understand, Mr. Speaker, or isn‟t willing 

to provide the kind of substantive detail that Saskatchewan 

people deserve. 

 

And when I talk about simply not being able to take this 

government at its word, it‟s a result of the broken promises, the 

ripped-up agreements that this trust has been broken, Mr. 

Speaker. This trust has been broken and that‟s a major problem. 

And Saskatchewan people have little, little reason, if any at all, 

to take this government, the Sask Party at their word. Or this 

Premier. This Premier you cannot take at his word for anything, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that‟s a huge problem, Mr. Speaker, when you have a trust 

that‟s completely broken with Saskatchewan people. Too many 

promises, Mr. Speaker, that matter to Saskatchewan people. 

Too many, too many promises have been broken up and ripped 

up in the face of Saskatchewan people. So what we recognize 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to 

members of the Assembly for granting leave. I want to take a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of the Assembly a group of individuals who are 

seated in your gallery. 

 

These individuals, Mr. Speaker, have arrived to Saskatchewan 

about four and a half months ago. They‟re originally from 

Pakistan and they are here working in the province. It‟s their 

first trip to the Assembly. So they, on a beautiful spring day, 

wanted to take the opportunity to come and see the proceedings 

and see the beautiful setting around the lake. 

 

If I could introduce the individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, Zahid Hussain — you folks can give a wave — Akber 

Rashid, Bilal Ahmed, Faisal Aziz, Zabi Ullah, Saima Hussain, 

as well as Angela Arden, who isn‟t from Pakistan, I believe. 

But I would invite all members to join me in welcoming these 

guests to the Legislative Assembly. Thank you for being here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave of the 

Assembly to join the member in introducing guests. 

 



April 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4945 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests as well. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to join with the member opposite in welcoming our 

newcomers to their Assembly, but also to the province. 

Certainly what we‟re endeavouring to do — all members of this 

Assembly — is building more diverse, dynamic, and 

cosmopolitan communities that offer greater inclusion and a 

spirit of welcome to all newcomers, certainly those included in 

the present group. Welcome to your Assembly. And I hope all 

members will join me in offering that welcome. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the 

minister opposite. I welcome the members to their Assembly. 

It‟s a pleasure to have you here today. 

 

The minister of great hand gestures gets up, Mr. Speaker, and 

speaks about cosmopolitan communities, Mr. Speaker. Yet the 

member opposite at the same time cuts the entire film industry 

and takes a huge chunk out of our economy . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask what that 

comment has to do with the Bill 129, the enforcement of money 

judgments agencies. I would ask the member to address the 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible 

for tabling legislation that‟s in contravention of the United 

Nations, Mr. Speaker, who stands in this Assembly, calls the 

state that he‟s providing a cosmopolitan nation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the member 

to proceed to the legislation before us. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister with big hand 

gestures stands in this Assembly, the very minister who is 

responsible for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 

member will either move to addressing the legislation or we‟ll 

move to the next individual. I recognize the member from 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. It‟s always a great 

opportunity to highlight the important aspects that need to be 

raised within this Assembly, and I think hypocrisy of the Sask 

Party are aspects that need to be raised, and thus I stand behind 

the comments that I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Cannington has something to say to this point of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 

Beauchesne‟s it clearly outlines that the use of the word 

hypocrisy to describe members of the House is not proper 

parliamentary language. I ask that the member withdraw that 

and apologize unequivocally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Clearly as 

my learned colleague would say over there, you cannot use that 

reflecting against an individual member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my learned colleague was referring to the 

government, not an individual but to the government, and the 

government is a legal entity of itself, Mr. Speaker. So it is not 

talking about the character of any one member or any member 

of the Assembly but of the government itself. 

 

The Speaker: — I‟ve listened to the point of order and listened 

to the response from the Opposition House Leader. And I would 

ask that members be mindful of the words they use and, 

whether or not it‟s directed against a group of members or an 

individual member, those types of words and phrases really do 

not add to the decorum or uplift members in the Assembly. And 

so I would ask members to be mindful of that in their comments 

and ask the member from Regina Rosemont to move directly to 

the business before us — Bill 129. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. It‟s a pleasure 

to continue with discussion of Bill 129 here today, Mr. Speaker, 

The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act that needs to make 

sure it strikes the very important balance between creditors, 

debtors, and those who collect those dollars — sheriffs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But fundamental to these agreements, Mr. Speaker, is 

contractual obligations, Mr. Speaker. And a point that should 

not be lost and that needs to be highlighted is that this 

government puts forward legislation that in fact allows the 

strengthening of going out and collecting dollars that are 

rightfully received through a contractual obligation, Mr. 

Speaker. But at the same time that this government says that 

Saskatchewan businesses, organizations, and people, Mr. 

Speaker, should be more bound by contractual obligations, this 

government rips up the very documents that they signed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I will cite specifically with municipalities, Mr. Speaker. An 

agreement signed in great fanfare that was ripped up, Mr. 

Speaker, in huge disgrace, Mr. Speaker, that has, now has the 

consequence to Saskatchewan people and businesses of 

property tax increases for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So I shame this government for putting forward legislation that 

either the minister didn‟t understand to elaborate on or thought 

that he could simply put forward such vague statements, Mr. 

Speaker, for a Bill of significance, Mr. Speaker. Put forward a 

Bill without any sort of detail or citing the provisions that in 



4946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2010 

fact are going to achieve the kind of goals and objectives that 

this legislation sets out to achieve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We don‟t have confidence in the Sask Party‟s ability to 

formulate legislation on this front. They don‟t even have the 

ability to explain it to this legislature, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s 

important that we seek the answers that Saskatchewan people 

are asking to make sure that they‟re protected and make sure 

that the legislation makes sense as it relates to those businesses 

and organizations and individuals who are seeking the dollars 

that are rightfully owed through judgments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those questions will be asked through committee, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟d ask the government at any point, the Sask Party, 

to table this information. In the meantime, we‟re going to 

continue to consult with stakeholders in the legal community, 

Mr. Speaker, and make sure that we arrive at a meaningful 

document, Mr. Speaker. At this point in time, there‟s many 

more questions to be asked and there‟s very little clarity to this 

legislation. So at this time, I will move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 129. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn for committees this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn to facilitate the work of 

committees this evening. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4913 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4913 

  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4913, 4945 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4913, 4944 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4914 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4914 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4914 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4914 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4914 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4914 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4914 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4915 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4915 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4915 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4915 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4915 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4915 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4916 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4916 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 La Ronge Ice Wolves Win Credit Union Cup 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4916 

 Haitian Children Welcomed 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4916 

 Newcomers Contribute to Community 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4917 

 Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4917 

 Pay Equity 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4917 

 Encouragement for Bone Marrow Donations 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4917 

 The Government and the North 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4918 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Status of Member 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4918 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4918 

 Police Investigation 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4920 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4920 

 Applications for Immigration 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4921 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4921 

 Kidney Transplants 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4921 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4922 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4923 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4923 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4923 

 Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4924 

 



 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi no 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4924 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4925 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4925 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4925 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4926 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4931 

 Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4936 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4938 

 Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4938 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4940 

 Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4940 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 4945 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 4945 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 4945 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


