




















































Hansard: March 11, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 29A  THURSDAY, MARCH 11, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4131 

 March 11, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly 16 special guests that we have with us all the way 

from Canada’s hot spot, Yellow Grass, Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, we have 16 students in grade 5 and grade 6 from 

Yellow Grass. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Jane 

Peters, who has brought a number of school groups to the 

Legislative Assembly over the last couple of years, and also 

with their bus driver, Wayne Obst. And I will be spending a 

little bit of time with them after routine proceedings are 

finished. And I would ask all members to help me welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of this honoured 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce some constituents of mine. 

Seated in your gallery are Brent and Allison Dinsmore from 

Estevan and they are accompanied by their daughter, Erica. And 

the Dinsmores are also friends of the member from Yorkton, 

Mr. Speaker. So I ask all members to join me in welcoming 

them to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I present 

a petition for the Saskatchewan Student Coalition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these people have primarily signed the 

resolution from Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the condition of 

Highway 22. As we know, Mr. Speaker, the highway 

deteriorated to the point where it’s a safety hazard for the 

residents who have to try and drive on that particular road. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 22 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 

from Earl Grey, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 

and to members of the Assembly a group of people from 

Warman who have come this morning to join us for question 

period. And we had a interesting discussion about issues in that 

area before we came to the Assembly. 

 

But included in the group we have Mayor Sheryl Spence, 

Deputy Mayor Gary Philipchuk, as well as Councillor Kevin 

Martens. There’s a number of other people here. I don’t have all 

your names, but I know we’ll be meeting with you after 

question period. I just wanted to welcome you here and I know 

that all members will want to join with me in recognizing the 

people here from Warman. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to join the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming the folks 

from Warman. It is one of the fastest growing towns, not just in 

Saskatchewan, but in the country. And we understand they’re 

facing some challenges, and I’ve appreciated the working 

relationship that I have with their mayor and town council and 

working towards some solutions to those. And so I’d hope that 

everybody would welcome them to their Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 



4132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Continuing with petitions. I’d like to present a 

petition in support of wage equity for CBO [community-based 

organization] workers. And we know that workers in 

community-based organizations in our province have 

traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn poverty 

level wages. And in fact the low wages of CBO workers result 

in high staff turnover, and the subsequent lack of caregiver 

continuity has a negative impact on the quality of care clients 

receive. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks who have signed this petition 

come from the city of Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition in support of affordable undergraduate tuition 

costs and request that the Sask Party government’s actions 

match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

again today to present a petition in support of reducing the 

interest on fixed rate student loans to prime. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition, and the signatures are from 

folks who reside in Regina, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who have yet not had any sign of 

commitment from the government. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a proud history of craft union certification in 

Saskatchewan, and the building trades in our province support 

an apprenticeship system of training which results in a highly 

skilled workforce. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Regina, and I 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4133 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition by residents of Saskatchewan who 

wish to bring to the attention of the Legislative Assembly the 

fact that many seniors, Saskatchewan seniors, live on fixed 

income and are victims of physical, emotional, or financial 

abuse. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners respectfully request: 

 

. . . that the Legislative Assembly take the following 

action: enact a seniors’ bill of rights which would provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by my neighbours in the 

constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

signed by residents of Saskatchewan concerned about the 

disregard for legal and constitutional rights by this government. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference of the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligations to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and Rosthern. 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise and present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. They 

allude to the $1 billion deficit created by the Sask Party and 

they recognize that this a problem that’s getting worse, not 

better. And the circumstance that we’re now paying $200 

million to the potash . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. All of the members have 

been very conscious of the decision a number of years ago of 

limiting the opening comments and getting to the prayer. And I 

would ask the member from Regina Rosemont to follow the 

example of other members. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our provincial 

finances responsibly and prudently to ensure that it does 

not continue its trend of massive budgetary shortfalls, 

runaway and unsustainable spending, equity stripping from 

our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners are signed by concerned citizens of Regina 

and Estevan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of the expansion of the graduate retention program. 

This petition is about fairness and about recognizing the value 

of keeping our most educated citizens here. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by the residents of Moose Jaw, 

Mossbank, and Caronport. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Saskatchewan Party Convention 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to reflect on the 

people that showed up at this recent Sask Party convention. 

When you take all the MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], the former candidates and their spouses, that’s 

about 110 people. The party executive and the constituency 

presidents and their spouses will add another 120 people. All 

the political staff in this building and their spouses would add 

another 300 people. The constituency assistants and their 

spouses would add 75 more people. The party staff must have 

around 20 people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So add that all up. You get 625 people required to go to the 

Sask Party convention, but they only had 492 people show up. 

One of these was an NDP [New Democratic Party] observer 

and at least 30 other people were media or other visitors, so that 

leaves 461 people. And of these 461 people, roughly 80 per cent 

showed confidence in this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They only passed four resolutions, one of which was to 

establish a forestry centre in Prince Albert. The member from 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton brought forth that resolution. I 

have news for him. There is already a forestry centre in P.A. 

Address is 1410 Central Avenue. 

 

Of the 461 people that showed up when 625 were told to show 

up, it is not great. This wasn’t a political convention, Mr. 



4134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

Speaker, it was a staff barbecue. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

2010 Winter Paralympics 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow is 

the opening ceremony for the Vancouver 2010 Paralympic 

Winter Games. These Olympic-style games for athletes with a 

disability were first organized in Rome in 1960. 

 

In March 2003 the international Paralympic committee 

executive committee approved the new vision for the IPC, and I 

quote, “To enable Paralympic athletes to achieve sporting 

excellence and inspire and excite the world.” 

 

Each word in this vision has a clear meaning in defining the 

ultimate aim of the IPC [international Paralympic committee]: 

 

To enable: this is the primary role of the IPC as an 

organization: to create the conditions for athlete 

empowerment through self-determination 

 

Paralympic athletes: the primary focus of IPC’s activities, 

in the context of Paralympic athletes, is the development 

of all athletes from initiation to elite level 

 

To achieve sporting excellence: the goal of a 

sports-centred organization 

 

To inspire and excite the world: the external result is our 

contribution to a better world for all people with a 

disability. To achieve this, relations with external 

organizations and the promotion of the Paralympic 

Movement as a whole are of prime importance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give well wishes to all the 

competitors attending the Paralympics, especially the Canadian 

athletes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Financial Projections 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

federal Conservatives introduced their budget intended to get 

them out of their $56 billion deficit. And what was the response 

from the Sask Party? The Sask Party Finance minister, I quote, 

“. . . expressed deep skepticism about the financial projections 

. . .” Yes, Mr. Speaker, that Finance minister expressed deep 

skepticism about the financial projections of his federal cousins, 

saying that their revenue projections are far too optimistic. 

 

Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, this sounds a tad familiar. The 

Sask Party Finance minister may just remember the NDP telling 

him that very same thing. The Sask Party put all their eggs in 

one basket last year, predicting potash revenues to be $1.9 

billion, and then proceeded to spend like kids in a candy store. 

 

Now we find out that actual potash revenues will be at least a 

negative $204 million. This is a miscalculation of over 110 per 

cent. From unprecedented revenue to unprecedented payments, 

this government, that government is writing cheques to the 

potash companies and actually paying them to mine our potash. 

And our Finance minister actually has the audacity to criticize 

his federal cousins. Mr. Speaker, this is a classic example of the 

incompetent pot calling the mismanaged kettle black — 

hypocrisy at its finest. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

Convention 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities is 

concluding their annual spring convention. Mr. Speaker, SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] delegates 

came to Regina and started meeting on Tuesday, and they 

discussed a number of resolutions dealing with a wide variety 

of topics including agriculture, environment, health, and also 

resolutions pertaining to their own organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

The issues that they discussed in the resolutions concern people 

living in rural municipalities but also concerns of citizens across 

this province. 

 

But last night, Mr. Speaker, they took time to have a little fun at 

their banquet. And the theme of their banquet was Green and 

White Commemorative Night, celebrating Saskatchewan 

Roughriders’ 100th anniversary. And in attendance, Mr. 

Speaker, were a number of current and past Roughrider players 

and executive along with a large number of government MLAs. 

And it turned out to be quite a fun evening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The highlight of the evening was when Scott Schultz took the 

podium to talk about his teammates. And to be frank, Mr. 

Speaker, we think as MLAs that we’re sometimes tough on our 

colleagues. We haven’t seen anything until you saw Scott talk 

about his colleagues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would like to congratulate SARM and its delegates for 

hosting another successful convention and wish them good luck 

in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Minister’s Comments 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the Minister Responsible 

for Energy and mines was on TV during supplementary 

estimates to admit that he couldn’t say if Crown corporation 

borrowing was going up or down. 

 

Many thought they were watching reruns of that program with 

the minister’s recent appearances on TV and on BNN [Business 

News Network]. First he said, during one appearance, that 

Saskatchewan would realize about $100 million in potash 

royalties this year, even though he should have known for 

weeks that his government actually has to write a cheque to 

companies for over $200 million. 

 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4135 

Was the minister confused again, Mr. Speaker? Was he trying 

to hide his government’s rerun of Devine-style mismanagement 

from the national media? 

 

Next, Mr. Speaker, he relied on out-of-date Conference Board 

numbers to say that Saskatchewan would lead the nation in 

economic growth next year. Wrong again, Mr. Speaker. The 

Conference Board does predict growth for Saskatchewan, 

though not at the levels the minister boasted. And he should 

have known that. 

 

When it came to talking about the source of that growth, he did 

finally tell the truth. He gave credit to the fair and stable royalty 

and regulatory system in the oil and gas sector. And where did 

this regime come from, Mr. Speaker? The minister’s answer 

speaks for itself. We haven’t made any changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people will take a rerun of classic NDP policy 

over a rerun of Grant Devine’s mismanagement every single 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster. 

 

Good Economic News 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I have some good news for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, RBC [Royal Bank of 

Canada] has released its latest provincial economic update. The 

report says 2010 will be a good year for Saskatchewan and 

2011 will be even better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, RBC predicts the Saskatchewan economy will 

grow by 3.6 per cent this year, second highest of all provinces; 

and then grow by 4.6 per cent next year, first in the country. 

And according to a Canadian job market . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It would be appropriate 

to allow the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd to be able to share 

his statement without a lot of interference. I recognize the 

member from Cut Knife-Lloyd. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to a 

Canadian job market report, the number of job postings in 

Saskatchewan is up 17 per cent over last year to over 7,000. 

 

I humbly share this news with members of the House this 

morning, Mr. Speaker, to show the contrast between reality and 

the fantasyland of the members opposite. While the NDP cling 

to their negative, backward-looking attitude about 

Saskatchewan and her people, our province is doing quite well, 

very well. In the coming weeks, our government will share with 

the people of Saskatchewan a forward-looking and responsible 

plan that will ensure this growth continues. 

 

This kind of news, Mr. Speaker, puts a smile on my face, but 

not so much obviously for the members opposite which is why I 

invite them to turn those frowns upside down. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

Comments at Convention 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday at the SARM 

convention in Regina, the Premier took the opportunity to stress 

his caucus members’ ties to the farm. Some had strong 

connections to the farm, family connections to the farm, while 

others, he joked, had only ever driven by a farm. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the Premier turned to the member for 

Saskatoon northeast, and he joked that that member had been 

arrested on a farm in Quebec. Mr. Speaker, that member was 

running a multi-million dollar lab for producing crystal 

methamphetamine in Quebec. His arrest as a brutal drug 

kingpin whose violent acts and illegal drugs ruined countless 

lives is a matter of public record. It is also, apparently, a joking 

matter for the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s latest episode in his long record of 

inappropriate comments caught on tape continues to disappoint 

and leads many to wonder if he knows what subjects deserve to 

be taken seriously or not. Cancelled children’s hospital and 

growing waiting lists resulting from historic fiscal 

mismanagement are not matters for standing ovations and jokes 

about potato chips. They are the serious consequences for 

Saskatchewan families of nearly unprecedented incompetence 

and mismanagement. 

 

Similarly, while the Premier may think an arrest for drug 

dealing and violence is a matter for levity, families affected by 

illegal drugs and gang violence aren’t in on the Premier’s joke. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for School Divisions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition received a 

heartbreaking letter from two concerned parents from Warman 

who have a deaf son in kindergarten. Their son has to take his 

one-on-one lessons with his educational assistant in a paint 

storage closet because the school is overcrowded. Here’s part of 

what the parents say in their letter: 

 

This is totally unacceptable to have to learn in a setting 

such as this. To be stuffed into a small storage room is par 

with being shunned and degraded, making the child feel 

uncomfortable and embarrassed to be segregated and 

subjected to this kind of treatment. 

 

To the minister: does he agree with these parents that using a 

paint storage closet as a classroom is completely unacceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

boards of education rely on plans. They rely on making sure 

that they put in place services. There is a system in place where 

the school division, along with the school, develop personal 

program plans. They’re referred to as PPPs. 

 



4136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

In the planning of a program for a child with intensive supports, 

a lot of people are involved in that. A lot of people deliver the 

services, right from the classroom teacher through to an 

educational assistant through probably even in some instances a 

speech pathologist or other professionals that are brought in by 

the school division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a pressure put on school divisions 

to ensure that those services are provided. But the decision is 

made at the local level, the decision is made by the school 

division, and it is made by the school involved. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is ducking the 

question. The question was not about the role of EAs. The 

question was about the fact that students are being forced into 

paint closets to learn in the school. The reason why that 

kindergarten boy has his lessons in the storage closet is because 

Warman is in desperate need of a middle school. The 

elementary school was built for 350 to 400 students, but almost 

700 are enrolled and over 130 more are expected to enrol next 

fall. The school division calls the overcrowding at the 

elementary school a crisis. 

 

To the Minister of Education: when can the people of Warman 

expect an announcement regarding the desperately needed 

middle school? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it was very evident when I 

became Minister of Education that the position that we inherited 

from the NDP was a very serious infrastructure deficit. Mr. 

Speaker, in the first week, in the first week of becoming 

Minister of Education, we actually allocated $13 million to fund 

the projects that had been previously announced in 2003. Mr. 

Speaker — 2003. We finished those projects in Saskatoon and 

we were going to move forward, Mr. Speaker. We have . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think it would be 

appropriate for the opposition in asking the question to allow 

the minister to respond. And I understand there are some guests 

who would be interested in hearing the answer. I recognize the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two years 

and a couple of months, we have allocated over $300 million to 

capital. Mr. Speaker, there is a further need. There is a further 

need in Warman and in Lloydminster and in Martensville and in 

White City and in Balgonie. Mr. Speaker, these are projects that 

we want to move forward. Mr. Speaker, the opposition in the 

course of eight years never did as much as this government has 

done in two years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The director of education in the school division 

has said in the media that she doesn’t think the Sask Party 

government understands the urgency of the situation in 

Warman. The Leader of the Opposition and several NDP MLAs 

have been to Warman and we understand the urgency. 

 

Representatives from Warman have driven all the way down to 

Regina this morning to demonstrate to the Premier, the minister, 

and their MLA that this is a crisis and the government needs to 

take action. Since they’re getting no answers from the Minister 

of Education, I’ll ask their MLA. 

 

To the Minister of Environment: how can she go around talking 

about mega projects like carbon sequestration, like a domed 

stadium, when she can’t even ensure proper education through 

the facilities provided in their school? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, many MLAs on this side 

of the House and on that side of the House have lobbied for 

what they see as an infrastructure deficit in their communities. 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Martensville has done exactly 

that. She has been telling me over and over again about the 

pressures faced. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the project list, Mr. Speaker, the major project 

capital list which is printed in the summer indicates the position 

of 104 projects, Mr. Speaker, that have been put forward by all 

29 boards of education. This is an infrastructure deficit that the 

NDP did nothing about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to move forward. We’re moving forward with 

$300 million worth of projects. Twenty-two major capital 

projects are under way, Mr. Speaker. Will we want to do more 

capital projects? You bet. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the deficit is in their budgeting. 

That is the concern, Mr. Speaker. They had billions in surplus, 

Mr. Speaker, and now they have over a $1 billion deficit. 

 

The middle school is supposed to be attached to the 

half-completed Warman Sport and Cultural Village. The NDP 

provided funding for that facility through the building 

communities fund, but then the project’s bank account dried up 

as construction costs skyrocketed and funding requests were 

denied by the Sask Party and the federal Tories. 

 

If the Sask Party government announced the construction of a 

middle school, it would inject $3 million into the sport and 

cultural village, and construction would begin again. A middle 

school for Warman would solve the school overcrowding and 

the stalled construction of the sport and cultural village. To the 

Minister of the Environment: why should the people of Warman 

have to pay for the Sask Party’s budgetary incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I made mention of 22 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4137 

major capital projects, but I also want the member opposite to 

understand, along with all the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that there are many projects that occur. These 

are referred to as block projects. They’re smaller in nature. 

They’re usually under $1 million, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we have moved forward 90 projects. 

 

One of the projects, Mr. Speaker, that’s on the list is in fact the 

very new school in Warman — the high school — that in fact 

has a growing enrolment. And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve made 

application through the Prairie Spirit School Division to 

actually add relocatables to that school. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

project that is under consideration as well because we 

understand the pressures that Prairie Spirit is facing, along with 

other schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We want to address those things, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you 

that we’ve done far more in our two years than the NDP ever 

did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if everything is so wonderful as 

the minister says, why would the mayor, why would 

councillors, why would concerned parents wake up before 

dawn, drive to Regina, and bring their concerns to this 

legislature? The minister’s answer does not hold water. 

 

Recent press reports indicate that Warman has now around 

6,300 people. Tim Hortons is even setting up shop in Warman. 

But the Sask Party government’s mismanagement of our 

finances means that the children of Warman are crammed into a 

school that’s far too small, that a kindergarten boy has to take 

lessons in a paint closet, and that the shell of the Warman Sport 

& Cultural Village stands empty. 

 

To anybody over there who is willing to provide a credible 

answer: why is it that Tim Hortons believes in Warman, but the 

Sask Party doesn’t? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the difference between the 

former government and this government is that people believe, 

they believe in Saskatchewan now. They believe in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s why we have the problems that we 

have in Warman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a far greater number of people coming to 

this province. Saskatchewan now receives 16,000 more people 

last year than this year. Mr. Speaker, those are pressures that 

we’re feeling in the school system. No question, Mr. Speaker, 

no question. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated to the 

Prairie Spirit School Division that it would be . . . that their 

project which is number, I believe it’s number 6 on the list, is 

within the top 10. It is, Mr. Speaker. And that we’re going to 

look at the possibilities of moving some projects forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget is very near. And we’re going to be 

able to look at a number of things to do, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that we address the pressures that school boards are facing. Mr. 

Speaker, that is a commitment that we made two years ago. 

We’ve done that with over $300 million. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, last spring the Sask Party 

government took away school divisions’ ability to tax. And they 

indicated at the time that they were going to provide stable and 

predictable funding, and that they were going to reduce 

education property tax for families across the province. Can the 

minister explain to people today why his Sask Party 

government has broken that promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, our government made a 

commitment to the taxpayers of this province. We made a 

commitment that said the taxpayers in the province of 

Saskatchewan face the highest amount of education-related 

funding. That’s fact, Mr. Speaker. The member actually asking 

the question would know that. She was a former minister of 

Education. 

 

Saskatchewan taxpayers provided the most money to fund 

education. We made that commitment, Mr. Speaker. And last 

year, our first opportunity to address this, we in fact adopted a 

report that was done by the member for Rosetown, which said 

that we need to ensure that the property tax commitment is 

lowered. And we did that, Mr. Speaker. We did that. We’re 

working with the boards of education right now to develop the 

new funding formula that replaces a formula that was in place 

since 1972. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that this 

government has done a lot. This government is quick. Oh yes, 

there’s no doubt about that. This government is quick to claim 

credit for a growing population and increasing enrolments — oh 

yes, yes, yes — but then they refuse to take responsibility for 

helping communities manage that growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now they say to school divisions with increasing enrolments, 

like Prairie Spirit, that you’re basically on your own when it 

comes to skyrocketing enrolments and for students with special 

needs. So a very simple question to the minister: why is it that 

your government is leaving communities like Warman to fend 

for themselves? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan realize full well when that opposition was in 

government, they transferred to school divisions negative 4 per 

cent in growth — minus 4, Mr. Speaker. 



4138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize, we recognize that the funding 

formula that needs to be put in place is going to be developed, 

Mr. Speaker — no question about that. We also recognize, Mr. 

Speaker, in the interim we took the amount of budgets that the 

boards of education had from the previous year. We added to 

those budgets, Mr. Speaker, the amount of money needed for 

salary increases, for ensuring that there wasn’t inflationary 

pressure. And that’s the budget that boards of education are 

working with, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, boards of education 

today are spending $1.6 billion that is provided for in two ways, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Government of 

Saskatchewan took away school divisions’ ability to tax, they 

also said to school divisions, and I quote, divisions will no 

longer be funded on a per-student basis. 

 

So school divisions need to know exactly what future funding 

will be based on if it’s not enrolment. Parents need to know 

what services their local schools are going to be able to offer to 

their children. If the Sask Party has already decided that funding 

will no longer be based on a per student enrolment, then people 

need to know exactly what this government has in mind. 

 

So to the minister: no more delays, no more broken promises, 

no more policy on the fly which is obviously obvious. What is 

your new formula for funding school divisions in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the advisory committee that is working right now along with a 

number of subcommittees, they are working towards 

developing a funding formula that will replace the old FOG 

[foundation operating grant] grant. In the interim, Mr. Speaker, 

in the interim, really the current model is still being used. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in my last answer, we have 

adjusted for salary increases and inflation. Mr. Speaker, we 

need to develop a formula where we’re going to be assured that 

there is a base level of funding for all school divisions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in each school division there are different 

circumstances. In rural school divisions, we have something 

called schools of necessity; they require additional funding. In 

urban Saskatchewan we don’t have those situations. Mr. 

Speaker, in Regina for instance, there are programs that don’t 

exist in some of the rural school divisions. In northern 

Saskatchewan, where we have three northern school boards, 

they require a different kind of funding. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

working on that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well they’re working on it. But at the same 

time, the government changes education financing, making it 

impossible for school divisions to raise additional revenues on 

their own. Then they tell school divisions faced with rising 

costs and rising enrolments that you’re on your own. 

 

And everyone sees what’s going on here — cuts in programs 

for students, and the Sask Party hopes that parents are going to 

blame school divisions and not the provincial government. So 

to the minister: why is the minister setting the stage for program 

cuts in schools? And why should Saskatchewan students and 

Saskatchewan parents have to pay the price for your 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points because 

the member seems to imply that last year there was a reduction 

in funding. Absolutely not true. Mr. Speaker, every board of 

education, the former budget that the board of education had 

was added to. It was added to for the cost of salaries, and it was 

added to for inflation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those numbers have risen to, as I’d indicated 

in my last answer, $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. So for that 

member to suggest that a board of education has made a 

decision to cancel the program because of a reduction in 

funding, that’s simply not true. That’s simply not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move forward with a number of 

initiatives. There are going to be capital initiatives that we’re 

going to move forward with. There are going to be initiatives 

that we’re going to move forward as a result of the immigration 

program and the fact that we have a number of new students in 

our school. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move forward when the 

Minister of Finance stands in a few days and indicates to the 

people . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. Order. Before I recognize the 

next question, just to remind members of placing their questions 

through the Chair and not directly to individuals. I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Municipal Revenue Sharing 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

struck by what a difference a year can make. And last year in 

this Assembly, the Premier was on his feet often, waving his 

pompoms, and all of the government MLAs were the backup 

choir talking about promises made, promises kept. That’s all we 

heard. But, Mr. Speaker, this year, this year, Mr. Speaker, we 

are seeing a growing list — and I’m afraid on March 24th it will 

grow even larger — of broken promise after broken promise. 

 

And my question, Mr. Speaker: why is the minister picking the 

pockets of Saskatchewan’s taxpayers to pay for this 

government’s mismanagement and broken promise on 

municipal revenue sharing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And I am happy to talk about municipal revenue 

sharing and what this government has done. In two years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have raised revenue sharing by 43 per cent to the 

highest level it has ever been at — $167.4 million. Mr. Speaker, 

next year we’re going to be going to the full point of PST 

[provincial sales tax], which will be an unprecedented 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4139 

investment in municipal governments across this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, last year it was back-patting and 

congratulations all around wherever you went, but we didn’t 

realize they were developing a formula and then weren’t going 

to implement it. And, Mr. Speaker, this year in my home 

community of Moose Jaw, the financial services director, a Mr. 

Acker, is predicting that in Moose Jaw we’re going to a 7 per 

cent increase in our mill rate. And he said, and I quote: 

 

. . . the city would not have to consider raising taxes if the 

provincial government had increased its revenue sharing to 

the full one point of the provincial sales tax in 2010, as 

was promised last year . . . [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister forcing Moose Jaw families to 

pay 7 per cent more for their property tax to cover up their own 

incompetence and mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I’d indicated, revenue sharing has increased by 

43 per cent in the last two years to the unprecedented level it’s 

at today, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think it’s worth, I think the 

NDP should acknowledge as well the unprecedented investment 

we’ve made into municipal governments, whether it be through 

the municipal economic enhancement program, $100 million 

directly to municipalities, Mr. Speaker; whether it be through 

the Building Canada fund-communities component, $227 

million of provincial investment into the massive infrastructure 

deficit we know the NDP have left behind as one of their 

legacies. Recreational infrastructure project, Mr. Speaker, $15 

million, one of which is projects $528,000 went for Warman 

and their Linear Park, which was something that they had asked 

us to come forward with, and we did, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP record on revenue 

sharing, which is to claw back $600 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, after last year’s big celebration 

about creating a revenue formula that they had no intention of 

honouring, Mr. Speaker, the reality is is that in Prince Albert, 

this broken promise will mean a shortfall of nearly $1 million. 

And according to an article and information from Prince Albert 

on February 2nd, the initial numbers that have been put forward 

by the city, that they will see a tax increase at about 9 per cent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that the taxpayers in 

Prince Albert will pay 9 per cent more for their property taxes 

because of this government’s latest broken promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I find it interesting, as I had noted at the conclusion of 

my last answer, the NDP clawed back $600 million in revenue 

sharing over the course of their 16 years in office. We’ve 

increased revenue sharing by 43 per cent. 

 

The commitment we made, Mr. Speaker, in our campaign was 

that we would apply a point of PST [provincial sales tax] over 

the course of our four-year mandate. We’re going to get to that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know what? I find it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Athabasca will 

allow the minister to respond to the question. I recognize the 

Minster of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — And, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

for Moose Jaw Wakamow should remember that when she was 

in cabinet, she voted to claw back $20 million from her own 

community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

minister go back and read the Throne Speech last year because 

the Premier proudly declared that this is this year country. No 

more next year country for Saskatchewan. But over and over 

this year, they keep saying next year, next year, next year. Mr. 

Speaker, how can we possibly trust the Premier to fulfill this 

promise on revenue sharing next year when he’s clearly broken 

his commitment to municipalities this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the 

municipalities are going to be getting the same level of funding 

they got last year, which is the absolute record that they have 

ever gotten in the past, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? I 

find it really disappointing listening to the members opposite, 

yelling from their seats across the way, running down the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, running down the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? We have a record we can be 

very proud of. We are forecast to lead the country in economic 

growth next year, Mr. Speaker. We have the lowest 

unemployment rate of any province in Canada, and all we hear 

from across the way is negativity and it’s very unfortunate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I have a bit of a confession to 

make. And last year . . . Yes, I do. Last year I was a lot like the 

Sask Party. I thought I was going to win the lottery, Mr. 

Speaker. But the big difference was, I didn’t run out and spend 

it before it was in my pocket — $7.9 billion in projections in 



4140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

this budget. False. It was phony. It was questioned right from 

the very beginning, but they went out and they spent it before it 

was even in the bank. Now Saskatchewan taxpayers will be the 

ones that have to pay. When is this Premier going to own up to 

his mistakes and actually address some of the issues of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — You know, Mr. Speaker, all we hear 

from the other side is doom and gloom. We hear them running 

down the province. We hear them, we see them . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister Responsible for 

Municipal . . . Order. The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, you know, as what I’d said, Mr. 

Speaker, all we hear from the members across the way is the 

running down of the province, the running down of the people 

of the province, running down of the economy of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is Saskatchewan is forecast to lead the 

country in economic growth next year, in the year following, 

Mr. Speaker. We have the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country. We have the highest population we have ever had 

living in this province and working in this province, and all we 

have from the members opposite is negativity. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Services in Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 

remarks I will be moving a motion that the Assembly condemn 

the Saskatchewan Party government for abandoning rural 

Saskatchewan, their health services. 

 

There’s nowhere are they more evident than in rural 

Saskatchewan, the failure that the Sask Party has had in 

managing — well we’re going to talk health services — but in 

managing anything, as question period has highlighted. But 

health services is what I’m going to focus on today because it’s 

becoming extremely apparent and was very much a topic of 

concern and debate at the SARM convention this week. And 

rural residents are certainly feeling the lack of attention that the 

Sask Party is paying to them and their issues. 

 

Things like doctor recruitment are of course top of the mind. 

And there are many communities who we have seen over the 

last few years actually putting green garbage bags or black 

garbage bags over their hospital sign, indicating to the public 

who are travelling on the highways or are looking for them in 

the communities that there are no longer any services there. 

And this has happened . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 

gallery is a friend of mine, a community leader, a very 

well-known businessman from Yorkton, Mr. Jason Farrell. And 

he’s in the city today with his daughter. And I’d ask all 

members to welcome them to their Assembly and to say hi. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Health Care Services in Rural Saskatchewan 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I was starting to 

say was that at the SARM convention was extremely . . . 

delegates were extremely concerned about the issues of rural 

health in their communities and health services. And it’s quite 

apparent with the doctors, the recruitment issue around rural 

doctors, that this is something that is not being addressed by 

this government. And there are, like I was saying, several 

communities are putting black garbage bags or green garbage 

bags over their hospital signs indicating to people there are no 

services here. You have to go somewhere else. 

 

And over Christmas, the Christmas period, there was a whole 

stretch of a highway, miles and miles between Alberta and 

Saskatchewan, that had no emergency services available. This 

is unprecedented. 

 

There have been occasions where there had been some 

emergency services shut down in some communities because of 

a gap in services with doctors, but never has it been so prevalent 

and so chronic. And I think that rural Saskatchewan residents 

are starting to see that none of their issues are being addressed. 

 

The doctor issue is not going to be . . . The minister’s going to 

make an announcement today about doctor recruitment and a 

strategy, a Crown corporation. That’s not going to do anything. 

They actually need some solutions and they need them fairly 

quickly. 

 

Increasing seats in the medical college doesn’t turn out a doctor 

for at least seven years. There needs to be some more 

immediate solutions. And there are some things that could be 

done. I’m just astounded that we need a Treasury Board Crown 

to do it. 

 

When I was reading the OC [order in council] about the 

treasury Crown which is appointing the members of the Crown 

and establishing the Crown itself to do its work, it has the 

authority to make agreements, to enter into agreements. Well 

given the fact the chiropractors have seen what that 

commitment means, having their agreement torn up before the 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4141 

minister had promised them certain things and tore up the 

agreement, there is no honour in the agreements that the Sask 

Party will sign. So I think I would take cold comfort from the 

ability of a Crown corporation to make an agreement. I would 

certainly be hesitant to enter into it and think it would solve 

anything in my community. 

 

The SMA, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, is at the 

bargaining table right now. This also must send a chilling 

message to them about what it means to bargain in good faith, 

and we certainly need to see a contract with the SMA for 

doctors to have their issues addressed. That’s very important. 

We haven’t heard a word about that. We’re hearing about a 

Treasury Board Crown. and interestingly enough the minister 

when he was in opposition made it quite clear that there were 

too many Crowns, and we shouldn’t be seeing all these extra 

Crowns. Well now he himself is making one. 

 

So there are so many issues in rural Saskatchewan that have 

come up. And again through the SARM convention and all 

through the year and longer, through me as Health critic, 

through my colleagues bringing forth issues, people sending 

them directly to me from all communities around the province, 

they are not happy with what’s happening. 

 

Emergency services: when there is no doctor, there are no 

emergency services. People will have to drive and that is a 

hardship. They can’t get there in time. They’re worried about 

their health, especially in emergency situations. This can’t be 

fixed with adding more seats to the medical colleges. That’s just 

a pipe dream, wishful thinking. 

 

There has to be more on-the-ground solutions. And giving it 

over to a Crown corporation when there’s no money in the 

province, the Saskatchewan Party has blown the boom . . . 

There’s no money. We have a huge deficit. We have got 

chilling messages from the minister and the Premier that 

everything has to be cut — zero spending, minus 10, all sorts of 

things, and dire predictions about what departments will have to 

give up. Well when departments have to cut their budget, 

services are cut. People’s jobs are cut and the people’s jobs that 

are cut are the people who are delivering the services. 

 

So if you’re going to see cuts in health care, it’s going to affect 

home care in rural Saskatchewan. Right now, home care 

workers are saying they’re being asked to go back in time — a 

draconian measure to talk about working split shifts. So you are 

working, you can work eight, but have to be on call for 12. 

Come back, work part of your shift, come back. 

 

And interestingly enough — this is probably not the worst part 

but is one of the worst parts — you have to pay if you have to 

travel. You’re in the Saskatoon Health District and you live in 

Saskatoon, work in Saskatoon. You have to go to Humboldt. 

You have to pay for that. As a worker, you have to pay to go to 

your job because you’re having a split shift now. How on earth 

is that going to affect balancing work and family, which we all 

talk about? We talk about encouraging women in the workforce 

and supporting women in the workforce. How will that work? 

 

Home care workers are for the most part women. This is a 

significant issue for working families and rural women and 

women — well women everywhere — because this affects 

home care workers everywhere. And a lot of the women in the 

different occupations in rural Saskatchewan — teachers, nurses, 

home care workers, all the things the women’s occupations that 

we’re talking about in health and education, teachers — a lot of 

them are married to farmers. 

 

This affects everyone in rural Saskatchewan because it affects 

everybody’s life. And if the quality of life is impacted by how 

you’re going to be running around for 12 hours between 

communities, I don’t know how people are going to deal with 

their family issues. It’s going to be a lot harder and certainly 

going to cause more stress in the families. 

 

We do know from the department’s actual website — the 

Department of Health’s website — with the doctor recruitment 

issue, that there are fewer doctors in the province than there 

were last year. And so this is a significant issue. We can’t cover 

this over by saying we’ve got seven more somewhere. Overall, 

there are fewer. And this is the government’s own statistics. 

 

And at the SMA convention, Dr. David Ledding said, “This is 

our last kick at the cat, we’re going to have practices falling 

apart out there.” The doctors themselves are saying, help, we 

need help. Doctors are leaving rural Saskatchewan in droves. 

And I mean in groups they’re leaving. And we need to know 

why they’re leaving. What is causing . . . I mean we talk about 

what will bring them here. Why are they all leaving? What’s 

going on in the community that they’re leaving? 

 

And the minister said that the days of a doctor in every 

community are over. Well that’s cold comfort. What are you 

going to do instead? And he said: 

 

Can I ensure that there will be a doctor in every 

community like there used to be. We just can’t do that. 

The system is changing. The environment is changing. 

 

So communities like Shaunavon and Redvers and . . . 

[inaudible] . . . and Arcola and Spiritwood and Lestock and 

Climax and Frontier, who are struggling to find a doctor, he’s 

pretty much telling them, don’t bother; you’re not going to have 

one. Things are changing. Put a garbage bag over your sign and 

move on down the road. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Communities like Coronach and Shaunavon are hiring 

professional recruitment agencies to help them find doctors. 

And people are being forced to travel even as far as one to two 

hours for emergency services. And doctors are working long, 

long shifts to try and fill the gaps. They’re trying, but they 

can’t. I mean you can’t work 72 hours. And how’s that going to 

be safe for anybody? 

 

And when a rural community has to suspend hospital 

emergency services because of a lack of a doctor, their hospital 

gets a little closer to closing for good. And there’s been a lot of 

hype about what happened in the early ’90s with hospital 

closures. Well hospitals didn’t close; they actually converted. 

And they converted to health centres and to . . . They added on, 

amalgamated with the long-term care facilities. So we’re 

looking at now actually more hospitals closing because there 

are no doctors. And this will occur under a Sask Party 



4142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

government. 

 

There is no money. There is no money to make promises even 

though they’re making promises all over the place and have 

made promises for the last two years. In fact right after the 

election, people were coming to my office saying that the 

members from the Sask Party were going around saying, we 

have gobs of money. I mean it’s like euphoric. 

 

So you are not surprised; I don’t think anybody should be too 

surprised that they couldn’t manage it. They couldn’t even talk 

about it properly or professionally — gobs of money, telling 

people there was gobs of money. So expectations have been 

raised everywhere that there were going to be good services, 

adequate services. 

 

There’s a lot of conversation about how wonderful the 

infrastructure is. Well there’s an infrastructure deficit because 

we had to pay back the Grant Devine debt, and that happened in 

the early ’90s. When the Romanow government came in, there 

was a huge debt. The province was almost bankrupt. You 

couldn’t build anything. You couldn’t fix anything. We had to 

get the province out of debt first, a decade of getting out of 

debt. 

 

So there has been a lot of work done to try and do something on 

the infrastructure, but now we’re focusing totally, this 

government is focusing totally on big announcements — 

buildings, bricks and mortar. 

 

Meanwhile parents come to the legislature and say their child is 

being taught in a paint closet in a school. People are putting 

black garbage bags over their hospital signs because there’s no 

services. They’re having to drive two hours to find emergency 

services. We’re talking about taking home care workers back 

into the Dark Ages with split shifts and making them pay to 

drive to their work if it’s out of their own home community. I 

mean that’s ridiculous. 

 

And communities are being pitted against each other. I know 

one of the members from the Sask Party went out into a 

community a couple of years ago — I think it was two years 

ago — and told them to get on with getting their own 

recruitment of a doctor. Get busy and basically start going into 

the kind of competition with your next door community. And I 

know doctors have been sort of lured away from one 

community to another because people are desperate to get the 

services. They want to see some services. 

 

We’ve recently heard chiropractic services are going to be cut. I 

mean the minister has been almost categorically clear that that’s 

on the chopping block. Yes, I’m saying almost because that’s 

about as clear as he can ever get. You can’t take anything to the 

bank there because you just never know. Anything can be 

ripped up or changed. 

 

But the chiropractic, the doctors who are talking about this, 

their patients, a lot of them are in rural Saskatchewan. They 

don’t have a lot of options where to go for alternative services. 

And they’re going to be left with living in pain, living in 

chronic pain, going to emergency services, trying to get a 

specialist to see them. 

 

This is not going to save money. It’s very short-sighted to think 

that saving $11 million taking chiropractors out of the budget is 

going to, in the long run, save anything in Health. We’re not 

going to even talk about the pain and suffering and what it does 

to people’s quality of life and whether they can actually go to 

work and stay at work. We’re talking about what it’s actually 

going to cost the health system. Because you’re going to have 

to pay for them, these people, to see a specialist, pay for them to 

go to emergency, pay for them to see their general practitioner 

to have these services delivered in a different way by a different 

provider. We’re going to still pay. 

 

And now if people do want to go to a chiropractor, they’re 

going to have to pay on their own. A lot of low-income people 

won’t be able to do that so they’re going to shift over and come 

into the public system where they don’t have to pay. So we are 

going to see people using the system more, and we don’t have 

the capacity to take up. I mean if there’s 15,000 people already 

signing petitions, there’s 15,000 people that are going to be 

looking for alternatives. Where are they going to go? Our 

system already doesn’t have enough money. 

 

I was just reading today that the Saskatoon Health District has a 

$14 million deficit. If districts like Saskatoon has 14 million, 

you know rural districts have deficits as well and they’re going 

to have to cut services. Well they’re already telling us they 

don’t have very good services and they’re going to have to cut 

more. And this is how the Sask Party manages the budget. 

There was a lot of money left when the government changed in 

’07 and that has disappeared. Revenue has increased. Spending 

has increased, and it certainly hasn’t been balanced. This 

government doesn’t know how to manage money. 

 

And we’re talking, the minister’s talking, the Minister of Health 

talks about fearmongering, telling people that this or that 

service will be discontinued. What people fear most is that they 

won’t have services, of course, but they do fear that there is a 

government who can’t manage their money. Because they 

already have been there; they know that. That happened with 

Grant Devine. And what happened to the province for 10 years 

after that? We all suffered. We all had to suffer. 

 

So we need to look at managing the money that we have in a 

responsible way and making sure people are attended to — 

people’s issues. We don’t need buildings. People will 

understand if you can’t build a stadium, if you can’t build 

something that is not . . . Health and education — people want 

their money spent there, and highways too. They want 

something that they use and they see. Other things we can 

certainly wish for if we had the money, but if we don’t have the 

money, then the decisions we make have to reflect the people’s 

priorities. And the people’s priorities are health and the 

people’s priorities are their children’s education. 

 

We have to make sure we don’t lose sight of that when we start 

looking at megaprojects. And when we start committing the 

province to megaprojects that simply cannot be met — or if we 

do commit ourselves, we’re on the hook for more money than 

we will ever have — then the people are going to suffer, and 

people are going to suffer in health and education. Those 

programs are going to be cut. 

 

When health districts come with their deficits, they’re going to 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4143 

have to cut programs. When they get a 3 per cent increase, 

they’re going to cut their programs. And so people are going to 

suffer even more, and it’s really going to hit rural Saskatchewan 

very hard. So I, Mr. Speaker, will move — if I can find the 

actual motion — I will move: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 

government for abandoning rural Saskatchewan and 

health services that directly affect the health and 

well-being of rural Saskatchewan residents, including 

doctor recruitment, emergency services, long-term care, 

home care and chiropractic care. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 

government for abandoning rural Saskatchewan and 

health care services that directly affect the health and 

well-being of rural Saskatchewan residents, including 

doctor recruitment, emergency services, long-term care, 

home care and chiropractic care. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from P.A. Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s a pleasure 

today to get up in the House and add my voice to this debate. 

What’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s been a great two 

years and change that I’ve been able to represent the people of 

Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Now in that time in this House, I’ve heard some very interesting 

stories from the opposition members while we sat in session. 

I’ve heard them insult our government, run down the people of 

Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. Now while I’ve had to 

endure many odd things from the opposition, I think today’s 

motion for debate strikes me by far as the oddest to date. 

 

And I have to admit that I was very confused when I read the 

motion, Mr. Speaker, and not because it’s completely detached 

from our government’s positive and well-known record of 

addressing the monumental gap in health care left by the NDP 

government. No, Mr. Speaker, what struck me today was the 

motion for debate appears to describe the NDP’s 

well-documented mismanagement of rural Saskatchewan over a 

span of 16 years. The NDP’s willingness to decimate rural 

Saskatchewan’s health care is precisely why they sit on that 

side of the House today, Mr. Speaker. The people of rural 

Saskatchewan saw the gross incompetence of the former NDP 

government and threw them out of office, leaving the current 

NDP opposition with an embarrassingly low amount of rural 

seats. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why would the people of rural Saskatchewan 

have a complete loss of confidence in the NDP’s ability to 

govern? Well, Mr. Speaker, among other things, the words and 

actions of the former NDP government regarding health care 

would make even Tommy Douglas roll over in his grave. 

 

Let’s unpack the NDP’s record — shall we? — on health care 

under their term. The opposition’s former leader was quoted as 

saying in 1988 that, and I quote, “The first priority of 

Saskatchewan families and the priority they wish [for] their 

government [is] to uphold . . . the priority of health care.” Okay, 

I think everyone in this House can agree with that. 

 

But what else did they say, Mr. Speaker? Well fast-forward a 

decade, a decade that saw the further decimation of our rural 

health care system at the hands of the party of Tommy Douglas. 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s unofficial policy of decimating rural 

health care led to the largest nurses’ strike in this province. 

Now the health minister responsible for the strike, who now sits 

in opposition, wrote at the time, and I quote: 

 

I want to assure you, both personally and on behalf of the 

government, that we will listen and act on the concerns of 

nurses and other health care providers. [We] never again 

will . . . allow ourselves to get too busy with other vital 

issues to fail to listen and respond . . . If there are other 

workplace issues that also need to be addressed, I promise 

you that they will be addressed quickly and effectively. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely no objection to what I just 

read. Most of our members on this side think the same thing. 

But apparently the NDP objects to its own words as seen in 

their actions over 16 years. Let’s just look at what the NDP was 

responsible for, which put quite a strain on the rural health care 

system. 

 

The NDP created some of the longest wait lists in Canada. The 

NDP closed 52 rural hospitals in 1993 when their former leader 

was associate Health minister. The NDP closed 421 hospital 

beds since 1999. In 2003 the average surgical wait time in 

Saskatchewan was 32.6 weeks, the worst in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. In 2004, 93 doctors left Saskatchewan while every 

other province saw increases. 

 

They also eliminated 136 long-term care beds since 2002 and 

tried to increase long-term care fees to 90 per cent of seniors’ 

net income, while at the same time failing to increase the 

seniors’ income plan. They forced rural hospitals to reduce 

services and temporarily close due to ongoing staff shortages. 

They also delisted many drugs, including insulin and other 

diabetic supplies in their 1992 budget, their first budget after 

coming back to government. 

 

Their insufficient funding to the College of Medicine over the 

last decade, as their government, caused it to become the first 

College of Medicine in Canada to be put on probation and risk 

losing accreditation. The  NDP spent $2 million on a study 

that identified 1.2 billion in infrastructure repairs needed within 

the province, and they did nothing with that report, Mr. 

Speaker. One-fifth of the facilities in Saskatchewan were built 

prior to 1960, and over one-half had no substantial upgrades in 

the 25 years leading up to the 2007 election. 

 

What’s also distressing, Mr. Speaker, are the many callous 

comments and embarrassing admissions made by their members 

while serving as government for the good people of 

Saskatchewan. For example the member from Regina Lakeview 

and former Health minister is quoted by CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] as saying, “There is no advantage to 

training more nurses if other provinces can hire them when they 



4144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

graduate.” Knowing this was the truth, the NDP did nothing 

until the possibility of a defeat in the 2007 election became 

inevitable, but by that point they had lost the confidence of the 

people of Saskatchewan and rightfully so. 

 

Their record on rural health care is embarrassing, Mr. Speaker, 

as are some of the statements made by their members. One of 

the worse policies to come from the NDP was the suggestion 

that seniors “die quicker.” Yes, Mr. Speaker, a nurse who 

represents the people of Saskatoon Eastview suggested that the 

solution to the shortage of long-term care beds was to have 

seniors “die quicker” in April of 2004. So the former NDP 

creates problems like a shortage of long-term care beds and 

increasing wait-lists. And the best policy the NDP can muster is 

to suggest to the province’s seniors that they “die quicker.” 

That’s disgusting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that was the old Saskatchewan, and now I 

want to talk about the new Saskatchewan. In this Saskatchewan, 

promises are made and promises are kept. We campaigned on 

the promise of hiring 800 nurses, and after two years we are 

more than 70 per cent of the way there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this new Saskatchewan, our government developed many 

initiatives to help recruit, retain, and train health care providers 

in Saskatchewan. In this new Saskatchewan, our government is 

committed to the delivery of health care services to help 

Saskatchewan people get the everyday care they need to protect 

and maintain their health. In this new Saskatchewan, we’re 

breaking a cycle of developing Saskatchewan-trained doctors 

for other provinces and other countries. 

 

[11:15] 

 

In this new Saskatchewan, our government has launched a 

provincial agency aimed at recruiting and retaining more 

physicians to Saskatchewan as well as rural communities. This 

physician recruitment agency will act as a one-stop point of 

contact for physicians seeking to set up practice in 

Saskatchewan as well as highlighting the benefit of working in 

rural Saskatchewan. This same agency will also enhance and 

coordinate recruitment efforts across the province, working 

closely with health regions and communities to address the need 

for physicians. In the new Saskatchewan, the physician 

recruitment agency will focus first on retaining our own 

medical graduates, so the people of Saskatchewan benefit from 

the dollars spent training doctors in the province. 

 

Unlike the former NDP government’s practice of setting low 

targets and still failing to achieve them, the new Saskatchewan 

is also working to achieve ambitious but reachable goals. These 

include reducing the annual turnover of physicians in 

Saskatchewan to less than 10 per cent; increasing the number of 

University of Saskatchewan medical students and residents who 

train outside Saskatoon by 25 per cent; increasing the number 

of U of S [University of Saskatchewan] medical students, 

graduates establishing practice in Saskatchewan by 10 per cent; 

increasing the percentage of Canadian-trained doctors working 

in Saskatchewan by 10 per cent. 

 

And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, our strategies are working. 

We are beginning to achieve our goals, Mr. Speaker. The 

overall supply of physicians has been steadily increasing since 

we became government. The head count of all licensed 

physicians in Saskatchewan, including temporary licensed 

locums, was 1,742 at the end of March, 2007. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, since our government has come to power, we have 

increased . . . I think we have an increase of 164 doctors in this 

province. That is the difference between our record and their 

record. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, our government’s 

recruitment and retention strategies have resulted in an increase 

of seven family practitioners in rural Saskatchewan since March 

of ’07. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has reversed the former 

government’s trend of decimating our rural health care services. 

Right now Saskatchewan has more doctors, more specialists, 

and more nurses to ensure that this province’s rural residents 

are getting the health care services they need. This overall 

improvement makes today’s particular motion for debate 

embarrassing, I believe, for members opposite. They have a 

very sad track record and have made fairly irresponsible, albeit 

candid, remarks about their record on delivering health care to 

the good people of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to end this portion of today’s debate 

with a fairly simple statement and one that should bring comfort 

to the people living in rural communities throughout this 

province. I want to reiterate our Premier’s commitment 

comments, as he addressed the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, by saying rural health care is the number 

one issue in this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 

mixed feelings I enter this debate today. And I say mixed 

feelings because it’s with huge disappointment that rural 

Saskatchewan and that health care in rural Saskatchewan, and 

throughout all of the province, has been so disastrously 

mismanaged and mishandled and even bungled by the Sask 

Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just let me put some numbers to this, and it’s an 

easy number. At the time of election, the last general election in 

the spring . . . pardon me, in 2007, there were 84 doctor 

vacancies throughout Saskatchewan, 84 doctor vacancies at the 

time of the last election. Today there’s 123 vacancies of 

doctors, mostly in rural Saskatchewan. We have seen a situation 

where there’s an increase of 50 per cent of vacancies of doctors; 

that’s doctors who are no longer there providing services, 

primarily in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a difference a day makes, especially when 

it’s an election day, for the Sask Party government because the 

day before the election, they had all the answers. They were 

going to fix health care. They were going to manage the 

provincial economy. They were going to see that we had 

absolutely unprecedented growth and prosperity. And the good 

times were here. Let the good times roll. Just get the NDP out 

of the way, they said. That’s what they said the day before the 

election. Now they’re saying, well maybe next year. We’re 

working on our plans. We’re working on our plans. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I gave you some numbers on doctor 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4145 

vacancies, but I want to point one thing out. This year alone — 

never mind, never mind since the last general election — this 

year alone, 2010, January, February, and now into March, 

Saskatchewan has lost just over one doctor a week. The 

vacancies are happening at a rate of more than one doctor a 

week under this Sask Party government. 

 

The situation, let’s assume the situation needed to be addressed 

at the time of the last general election, Mr. Speaker. I am telling 

you that it has hit worse than crisis now under their bungling 

and their mismanagement, their ineptitude. They have had a 

plan to recruit doctors. They had a plan that is costing rural 

municipalities and municipalities throughout Saskatchewan tens 

of thousands and more dollars as they compete one with the 

other to try and get a good doctor, any doctor for that matter, 

but a doctor to their community. They pit community against 

community against community, Mr. Speaker, and who’s losing? 

All the people of Saskatchewan but particularly the people of 

rural Saskatchewan. It’s a shame. 

 

How could you claim . . . The Sask Party claim to have had a 

policy, to claim to have had the answers, to claim to know what 

they were doing. And they had all the answers the day before 

the last general election. None of them now. 

 

I ask the people of Saskatchewan to consider this. In 2010 this 

year alone, we’re losing doctors at a rate just over a doctor a 

week, one doctor a week by your own ministry’s numbers, one 

doctor a week. What will happen by the time the next general 

election rolls around if it happens when it’s scheduled in 2011? 

And even more importantly, what would happen four years later 

at a doctor a week at the current rate? 

 

The question is clearly . . . Let me state it this way. Doctors are 

clearly voting with their feet on their confidence in the Sask 

Party government. Doctors are voting with their feet. They are 

leaving their practices throughout Saskatchewan. The proof is 

in the Ministry of Health’s own numbers — not my numbers — 

the Ministry of Health’s numbers provided by that Sask Party 

minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have clearly a crisis in health care. We clearly 

have mishandling in health care. And all of this, I want to point 

out, has happened when the Sask Party had inherited $2 billion 

in the bank account, over $2 billion in the bank account. 

 

What have we got today? We’re facing what looks like a $1 

billion deficit. How quick things change. How quick things 

change when you get a right wing government that spends, as 

the deputy leader of our New Democrats said today in question 

period, they thought they had won a lottery. And the difference 

is, they went out and spent the lottery before they ever won it. 

 

But it’s Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that are left holding 

the bag. It’s Saskatchewan people that are left without doctors. 

It’s Saskatchewan people that are left in a crisis in health care. 

It’s Saskatchewan people that are left with a forestry industry 

that . . . despite the fact that, well, that the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton in his election campaign said a vote for Darryl is 

a vote for the mill.  

 

Well that mill is long gone now. And you hear nothing about 

the pulp mill in P.A. from the Sask Party. You hear nothing 

about it, nothing. The silence is deafening. The silence is 

deafening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then the Sask Party holds — this is just showing 

the ineptitude — the Sask Party holds a staff barbecue, called it 

a convention, an annual convention, this past weekend. And one 

of the resolutions was that the government should build a, set 

up a forestry centre in P.A. Notwithstanding that New 

Democrats promised, and you know what? We promised it. We 

built it. We opened it, and it’s been operating for quite a few 

years now, and it’s on Central Avenue in Prince Albert, Central 

Avenue. We tucked it away right out of sight on main street. 

Tucked it away so the member for Carlton . . . I guess we could 

forgive him and his delegates for not knowing that there’s a 

forestry centre in P.A.  

 

I mean, I wish this government would focus on some real 

problems like, I mean . . . We need a forestry centre or we 

wouldn’t have built it. We wouldn’t have set it up. We wouldn’t 

have operated it. I’m not trying to denigrate the forestry centre, 

but the fact is we’ve got it. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got it. 

 

What we’ve also got is a $1 billion deficit. How is it that the 

Sask Party is going to fix this inherent problem in health care 

when they ruined it when they had $2 billion in the bank. Two 

billion dollars cash sitting in the bank, and now there’s a $1 

billion deficit. And we’re waiting for the next plan from the 

Sask Party government. They say they’ve got a plan. They’re 

going to fix this hemorrhaging of doctors throughout 

Saskatchewan, doctors leaving at a rate of more than one a 

week. 

 

Now I’ve talked about doctors, Mr. Speaker. Let me talk about 

chiropractors. Let me talk about trust. Let me talk about how 

would you feel if your employer, whoever’s making your 

paycheque, would set up a contract negotiation with you. You 

enter in good faith. You negotiate. You reach an agreement. 

Ultimately it may not be a perfect agreement, it may not be the 

agreement that you wanted. It may not be enough money for 

you, but at the end of the day you said, that’s the best I can do 

— willing to sign it. So you sign it. And then the government 

says, well gee, you know, we’re going to put that on hold. We 

negotiated a contract with you chiropractors in good faith. We 

negotiated in good faith, but we’re not prepared to implement it. 

 

Why on earth would anybody negotiate anything with a Sask 

Party government? What on earth would possess you to do that 

when you sign a negotiated settlement in good faith and the 

government says, no we’re not going to implement it. You’re 

on hold. And that’s been the situation for nearly three months 

now, Mr. Speaker. Nearly three months chiropractors have been 

in that limbo, and it is looking really grim. 

 

My question would be, how is it that other health care workers, 

the more than half the health care workers that are being 

shunned by the Sask Party government — being made 

inadequate offers, being told that you’re going to have to be on 

call for 12 hours a day, you’re going to have to drive your own 

vehicle to other communities to serve split shifts at your own 

expense, and this is somehow an improvement — how can 

these people feel valued? And why on earth would they even try 

to negotiate a collective agreement with the Sask Party 

government while they’re in? Why would you even try? It’s 



4146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

kind of futile. They might reach a collective agreement, and 

then the government says, no we were just kidding. We’re not 

going to implement it. Just kidding. That’s what their history is. 

 

How can you trust a government that is so deceitful, so 

fundamentally wrong to working people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? It is wrong on every account. And I say to the Sask 

Party government members, shame on you all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To begin with, I will 

not support the motion by the NDP. My colleague from P.A. 

Carlton had the daunting challenge of listing all the NDP 

failures in the field of health care over the past 16 years and to 

shrink that list into 10 minutes. He did an admirable job, 

considering the vast amount of material he had to fit into just 10 

minutes. 

 

My challenge is to list all the accomplishments that the Sask 

Party government has achieved in health care in just 28 short 

months and to compress all these accomplishments into just 10 

minutes. 

 

Provided 54.9 million for medical equipment, including 

diagnostic imaging equipment — big. 37.7 million provided to 

several regions to continue their projects and major upgrades. 

Again another big, huge item. And then we come to 100 million 

in 2008-2009 to regions to address urgent health care facility 

maintenance and repair requirements. That was a record amount 

of funding for one fiscal year — a record amount. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Implementation of the provincial clinical pathways for hip 

replacements saw 307 more hip and knee replacement surgeries 

in 2008-09 compared to 2007-08. More than 18,000 

Saskatchewan seniors are receiving enhanced benefits through 

the seniors’ income plan: 190 million per month for single 

seniors, $190 per month for single seniors, and up to a 

maximum of 155 per person for seniors couples. An increase in 

the overall budget in 2008-2009 for autism spectrum disorder to 

$3 million. Rates for northern medical taxi operations were 

increased. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government is dedicated to fix the 

infrastructure deficits left behind by the previous government. 

Our government has given the health authority a green light to 

start planning this redevelopment project. 

 

Reduce the annual turnover of physicians in Saskatchewan to 

less than 10 per cent; increase the number of University of 

Saskatchewan, U of S, medical students and residents who train 

outside Saskatoon by 25 per cent; increase the number of US 

medical graduates establishing practice in Saskatchewan by 10 

per cent; increase the percentage of Canadian-trained doctors 

working in Saskatchewan by 10 per cent. 

 

Retaining and attracting physicians as a means of ensuring 

timely access to quality health care is a top priority for this 

government. We are working hard to solve our physician 

shortages and putting patients first by fulfilling our commitment 

to establish a physician recruitment agency. The overall supply 

of physicians has been steadily increasing since we became 

government. Our government has many initiatives to help 

recruit, retain, and train health providers in Saskatchewan. Our 

government is committed to the delivery of health care service 

to help Saskatchewan people get the everyday care they need to 

protect and maintain their health. 

 

Changing the health care system is a challenging, challenging 

task that takes time and unwavering effort. It requires strong 

and collaborative partnerships among municipal shareholders, 

multiple shareholders, including all levels of government. 

Seventy-one primary health care teams established and one in 

development. Of these, 45 are in rural Saskatchewan, 17 are in 

metropolitan areas, and 8 are in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We developed a provincial diabetes program, got a health line, a 

24-hour health care advice and information line, vendors 

selected for the provincial primary health care electronic health 

record. 

 

The big one of course is surgical wait times. There’s been a 

backlog carried forward that’s been huge. It’s become an 

unacceptable wait time. Our government has taken the 

challenge over the next four years to lower surgical wait times 

to three months. This is our goal. We are up for the challenge. 

We’re not just going to take the status quo. We are going to 

work hard to fix the surgical backlog. 

 

Doctors today is another huge issue. The actual facts are today, 

we have 164 more doctors than we did in March of ’07. That’s 

the numbers. That’s not twisting and turning and percentages 

and trying to make it the other way. The fact is 164 more 

doctors today than in March of ’07. 

 

We’re opening up the 60 seat enrolment to medicine; we’re 

moving it up to 100. We are going to educate our own doctors. 

We are building for the future. The key to medicine is 

education, and we will have the doctors and nurses. Resident 

seats, which is very important if we don’t want our medical 

students to leave, we will create 16 more. We are already at 

108, and we’re going up to 120. This is huge. This is important. 

This is key to building our future. We have a physician 

recruitment strategy in place, programs for rural doctors. And 

training will start in medical school on building rural doctor 

relationships. 

 

Nurses, we’ve got an agreement and work with SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] to recruit 800 nurses was our 

goal. We already in just 28 months, we’ve reached 560. We are 

the worst . . . We were the worst, the worst retention rate for 

nurses in all of Canada — the absolute worst. And today we, 

Saskatchewan were the worst, and it was under the previous 

government’s leadership. And now Saskatchewan, under this 

government’s leadership, is the best retention rate in all of 

Canada — a huge step, a huge step forward. That’s what 

happens when you work with our nurses and our training. 

 

The rural applications are key and important. We are working 

and building these relationships, and to quote one nurse’s term, 

we are leaving no bedpan unturned. 

 

Another project that is under way or we have consigned to is 

the midwifery program. The first four years that I sat here in 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4147 

opposition, every year the midwifery society would come and 

they would sit and ask to have it implemented. And every year 

the NDP would say, yes, yes, yes. But every year it didn’t 

happen. 

 

And it’s a great program. In fact I know of a family whose 

youngest child is actually my age, and there were 13 kids. And 

the father of that family was the midwife, so never took any of 

them to the hospital except the 13th one was at the hospital. So 

it is a program that we have got back now. 

 

Another one that is very important to me is our Humboldt 

hospital. It is at last in progress. We are seeing things happen. 

The building will soon be completed. It’s a $40 million 

structure, and it’s at last being built. The NDP promised it for 

three elections, Mr. Speaker. Three elections, they said, yes, 

we’re going to build you a hospital. Yes, we’re going to build 

you a hospital. But nothing happened. Nothing happened till we 

started. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me great pleasure to be able to speak to this motion today. And 

I just want to capture the essence of what this debate is about 

for anyone who is just tuning in. So I want to just repeat the 

motion quickly. And this a motion, of course, that was made by 

my hon. colleague from Saskatoon Eastview. Quote: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 

government for abandoning rural Saskatchewan and 

health care services that directly affect the health and 

well-being of rural Saskatchewan residents, including 

doctor recruitment, emergency services, long-term care, 

home care and chiropractic care. 

 

End of motion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this an incredibly important debate to be 

having in Saskatchewan at this point in time, given that health 

care is the number one concern on the minds of the 

Saskatchewan people. There’s no question about it. Whether 

you’re attending the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] convention, the SARM convention, 

or local conferences around the province or even just travelling 

about in rural Saskatchewan, one hears that this is the number 

one concern for people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And nowhere are Sask Party failures more evident than in 

health care, especially in rural health care, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party government promised to solve the rural health care 

problem, and to date there has been nothing but broken 

promises. They said they had a plan in the last election, Mr. 

Speaker, and we have yet to see any fruition of that plan or plan 

in general. And every single mini-plan that they come up with 

seems to make the problem worse. When they had $2.3 billion 

in the bank, they did nothing. Because of the Premier’s 

financial bungling and mismanagement, they are now sitting in 

a $1 billion debt possession and still haven’t done anything to 

improve rural health care — nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that the Sask Party government has blown all the money, 

has drained down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, the rainy day 

fund, whatever moniker they decide to use, people in 

Saskatchewan are wondering, especially people in rural 

Saskatchewan are wondering how are they supposed to have 

faith that this Sask Party government is going to do anything to 

solve this problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the SARM convention, which ends today, 

delegates at the SARM convention voted in favour of 

resolutions calling on the Sask Party government to do more to 

fund long-term care facilities, to do more to recruit and retain 

doctors in rural Saskatchewan, and to negotiate a 21st century 

alternative for physician-on-call care. 

 

Health care, as it did at the SUMA convention, health care 

dominated the SARM bear-pit sessions. When one listens to the 

quotes that came out of the SARM convention, it is readily 

apparent how serious this concern is. SARM president, David 

Marit, told reporters for instance, “The resolutions speak for 

themselves.” Another quote from the convention is, “It’s 

becoming a huge issue in a lot of (rural) communities. We 

definitely need some help.”  

 

These are voices of people who are desperate for their Sask 

Party government to listen to them, listen to their pleas, listen to 

their concerns, and find some viable solutions, not hollow and 

empty promises that they continually make and then backtrack 

on and say, oh we don’t have the money now or we can’t do 

this now. We can’t build a children’s hospital. We can’t build 

surgical care centre that we promised. We can’t do long-term 

care facilities. We can’t do this. We can’t do that. That’s the 

only thing that the people of the province have a guarantee on, 

is that the Sask Party government can’t do anything, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when we talk about doctor recruitment and retention for 

instance in the last two years, the doctor vacancy rates have 

increased by 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Let’s just repeat that. 

The doctor vacancy rates in the province of Saskatchewan 

under the Sask Party government have increased by 50 per cent. 

And this is from their own statistical data off their government 

website, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This isn’t something that the opposition is cooking up. This 

isn’t something that the naysayers in rural Saskatchewan are 

cooking up or anything. This is off of their statistical data from 

the Sask Party government website. Shame on them. Doctor 

shortages in Saskatchewan have reached crisis levels. 

 

And what was being said at the 2009 annual SMA convention, 

Mr. Speaker? At the SMA convention, Dr. David Ledding said, 

“This is our last kick at the cat, we’re going to have practices 

falling apart out there.” 

 

This is on November 9th of 2009. What did the Health minister 

respond, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, the Health minister said, 

the days of a doctor in every community are over. 

 

Can I ensure that there will be a doctor in every 

community like there used to be? We just can’t do that. 

The system is changing. The environment is changing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is shameful. This is not what the Sask Party 



4148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

government and that Health minister promised the people of 

Saskatchewan in their election platform, in the pre-election time 

when they were out there campaigning and telling people all 

sorts of promises, making all sorts of promises. And nothing, 

Mr. Speaker, nothing has come to fruition except for things 

getting worse. Communities like Shaunavon, Redvers, 

Broadview, Arcola, Spiritwood, Lestock, Climax, and Frontier 

are all struggling to find a doctor, Mr. Speaker, all of them. 

 

And as my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview already 

mentioned, black garbage bags are being put over hospital 

highway signs because they have no doctor and have to suspend 

services. Shameful, Mr. Speaker. People are being forced to 

travel one or even two hours to get emergency services. Doctors 

have worked for 72-hour shifts. How can that be safe for 

anyone, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And every time a rural hospital has to suspend hospital 

emergency services because of a lack of a doctor, their hospital 

gets a little closer to be closing for good. And yet the Sask Party 

government will not take any responsibility that it’s grown by 

50 per cent under their watch, Mr. Speaker, 50 per cent.  

 

[11:45] 

 

Long-term care, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised seniors a 

care strategy and they’ve broken that promise as well. Due to 

the Sask Party’s financial mismanagement and incompetence, 

$122 million worth of funding for 13 long-term care homes 

across rural Saskatchewan was cut last November. Cut, Mr. 

Speaker. This has worsened the situation for hundreds of 

seniors waiting for a long-term care bed in rural Saskatchewan.  

 

And it’s causing husbands and wives that have been married for 

30, 40, 50 or even 60 years to be separated by many kilometres, 

when one of them has to be placed in long-term care facility 

because there’s no bed available in their community or facility 

close by, Mr. Speaker. It’s shameful. It’s absolutely shameful. It 

causes unnecessary stress and strain on the family and patient. 

And it causes depression and mental anguish, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we talk about home care, home care workers perform 

an amazingly valuable service in our province. These are the 

men and women who come in the homes of our aging parents 

and grandparents and provide them with the support they need 

to remain in their precious homes, Mr. Speaker. Home care 

workers are overworked and understaffed. The Sask Party 

government, what’s their solution? They want to cut. They want 

home care workers to be on stand-by for twelve hours, but only 

pay them for eight. They want them to work in multiple 

locations and which is particularly troublesome in rural 

Saskatchewan as locations can be up to an hour or two apart. 

 

Most home care workers are women, and women often bear the 

main responsibility in the family for care of children. The split 

shifts in the family will . . . I mean the split shifts will force 

them to make child care arrangements for 12 hours or more a 

day. And, Mr. Speaker, this is particularly difficult in rural 

Saskatchewan where child care is so very difficult to find. Mr. 

Speaker, I could go on and on but, unfortunately, the clock is 

ticking. 

 

I want to touch on one more quick subject, and that’s 

chiropractors. The chiropractors have been left without a 

contract, have been without a contract for over a year. An 

agreement was negotiated and signed by the president of the 

Chiropractors’ Association at the Department of Health. 

Unfortunately the minister is now refusing to honour the 

negotiated agreement and that sells . . . it sends a chilling 

message through the entire health system where there’s no 

honour in bargaining. As a result, chiropractic care will be 

inaccessible for many people, especially those on low income, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on a final note, Mr. Speaker, before I run out of time, I 

want to talk about what some smaller communities are doing. 

They are going and they are taking the initiative of either 

providing hundreds of thousands of dollars to recruit and retain 

doctors, holding conferences like the Primary Health Care 

Conference in Southey that was organized by the communities 

surrounding Southey and Regina Beach to lobby the 

government for a primary care facility so that they can have 

some meaningful health care in their communities where they 

have an aging demographic and a growing population. And we 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this government is going to sit up and 

listen. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

enter the debate today on this very important topic. Mr. 

Speaker, in the ten and a half years that I’ve been in this 

legislature, I don’t think I’ve ever encountered a more egregious 

example of the pot calling the kettle black than this particular 

resolution today. Mr. Speaker, this is the most bizarre effort on 

behalf of an opposition that has no credibility in rural 

Saskatchewan and on this topic have zero credibility ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this situation is just over the top. It just pales. It 

would make everything else look significant by comparison. 

But this situation, this resolution is completely hopeless in its 

attack on the government of the day. And let me tell you why, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the party, ostensibly, of Tommy Douglas. Tommy 

Douglas borrowed the idea of community-based health care 

insurance from southwest Saskatchewan, called it his own, and 

ran with it. But under this opposition, when they were 

government, what they did to rural Saskatchewan and health 

care delivery was absolutely shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the group of men and women who created 

the longest waiting list in the nation for health care. And most 

of the people who had to wait came from rural Saskatchewan. 

What was their first response when they looked at rural health 

care initiatives? It wasn’t a positive initiative. It was to close 52 

rural hospitals. Mr. Speaker, that was the very first thing they 

did when they assumed power in 1991. 

 

Today we have the consequences of that decision replicated 

throughout small communities, impacting small communities 

today. And if they’re talking about driving time for patients to 

achieve health care services, it’s because many of those 

hospitals that were closed would have provided the services to 

the people in the small communities they claim to feel 

sympathy for today. 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4149 

They closed 421 hospital beds from 1999 onward in their 

tenure. In 2003 the average surgical wait time in Saskatchewan 

was 32.6 weeks — again the worst in Canada. In 2004, 93 

doctors left Saskatchewan while every other province saw an 

increase. They eliminated 136 long-term care beds after 2002. 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP delisted many drugs, including insulin 

and other diabetic supplies, in their 1992 budget. That was their 

first budget as a new government. 

 

The other thing that I really find disheartening, given this 

particular motion that’s before the House today, is the fact that 

that group of men and women will not take responsibility for 

what they did to the College of Medicine in this province. They 

cut back training programs, cut it back to 60 seats — barely 

enough to meet the needs of this province, if every graduate had 

stayed in the province. Unfortunately given the environment 

that they had created for health care province-wide and 

especially in rural Saskatchewan, many of those graduates at 

that time left the province for greener pastures — some in 

Canada, some in the United States. 

 

And as the College of Medicine struggled to maintain its 

viability, its funding was held in check. And it was held in 

check to such a point that the College of Medicine almost had 

its accreditation lifted by the overseeing body for colleges of 

medicine across the nation. That government at the time put the 

College of Medicine in the province of Saskatchewan in 

complete and total jeopardy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re living with the consequences of 

decisions taken by that group of men and women. The NDP 

spent $2 million on a study that identified a $1.2 billion 

infrastructure deficit, repairs that needed to be made on 

facilities all across the province. What did they do? They didn’t 

fix the damage; they didn’t make the repairs. They shelved the 

study. Mr. Speaker, that’s part of the record of the previous 

government. One-fifth of the facilities in Saskatchewan were 

built prior to 1960 and over one-half have had no substantial 

upgrades in the last 25 years. That’s the record of those men 

and women. 

 

And according to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, 

their latest report, Saskatchewan still has the oldest equipment, 

the oldest health equipment in the nation. Our average 

equipment now is thirteen and a half years old. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s the record of the opposition. That’s the record they have 

to live with. That’s the record of health care delivery in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we asked, when we were the opposition and we 

asked the government of the day for what they had planned to 

do to help deliver health care in rural Saskatchewan, they 

couldn’t come up with enough nurses. In fact the previous 

minister of Health wouldn’t even address that issue because he 

said it was impossible. They would be fraught with failure. Any 

program to identify a strategy and a target would be 

unachievable. They weren’t even willing to put a number out 

for the public to identify with, that we could judge their success 

or failure by. And, Mr. Speaker, that was true of the education 

of doctors. It was true of just about every form of health care 

professional that we desire to see in this province. 

 

You know, since the Sask Party government has come to 

power, we have actually created targets and met those targets, 

or we’re well on our way to achieving those targets. The 

importance is, if you don’t have a target, you’ll never reach it. 

There’s no motive to achieve success if you don’t identify a 

target. And the target that we have succeeded in meeting is in 

the nurses and the LPNs [licensed practical nurse] and the nurse 

practitioners. We now have more professionals working in 

support services, laboratory services, and those types of things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time is going by way too quickly, but I do 

want to say that the Leader of the Opposition has made an issue 

of health care in southwest Saskatchewan. I want to say for his 

benefit that one of the members of the doctor recruitment 

committee in the town of Shaunavon told me that they aren’t 

going to put up with this whining and complaining about what 

the government ought to do. They’re going to put their heads 

and their hearts and their money into recruiting their own 

doctors. And they’ve been very successful at this point. 

 

The community of Leader is moving forward in a very 

substantive way to see a new facility built in the community of 

Leader. They have dealt with doctor recruitment issues 

frequently and have done it on their own and have been very 

successful. Now they, just recently the Cypress Health Region 

has announced the funding and the development of a brand new 

health facility in the community of Maple Creek. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a project that came together in under 18 months. 

 

The NDP’s record on the last facility that was built under their 

watch was in Moosomin. That community fundraised for 20 

years. And that group of men and women promised them a new 

facility for 13 years, and it didn’t get built until just before they 

were thrown out of office. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 

government is happy to put this record, the record of this 

organization, this government, up against their record any time, 

Mr. Speaker. This particular motion is just absolutely 

inflammatory and has nothing to do with reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a real pleasure for me to participate in 

this debate because I have so much more good news I could 

share. I haven’t even got to most of the notes. But, Mr. Speaker, 

if there’s questions on this topic, I’m prepared to address them. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The time has elapsed for the debate period of 

the 75-minute debate. We will now enter the 10-minute 

question period. I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 

member from Batoche as a result of this debate. Mr. Speaker, 

the motion raises lots of concerns. The one I want to talk about, 

I have served a petition for long-term care, a new facility, a plan 

in this House. There’s hundreds of signatures. It has the support 

of the leadership of the Cumberland constituency. There’s a lot 

of concerns that the waiting list of almost one full year for 

residents to get into long-term care is appalling to the people in 

my constituency in the community of La Ronge — a year. 

 

There is no other community that faces this. A year — it’s 

actually appalling. It needs to happen. So my question to the 

member from Batoche: what is your government’s plan for 

long-term care in the Cumberland constituency and the La 

Ronge area? 



4150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — The challenges are great but if you want to 

know what the problem is, start with a mirror of your party. 

We’re in this mess because of what your party did to health 

care. That’s why there’s a shortage of beds. You’re the ones 

that closed all the hospitals. It’s your mess and we’re trying to 

fix it, so try to co-operate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was a great 

chance for the NDP to finally get reconnected with rural 

Saskatchewan this week. The annual SARM convention was 

held in Regina. There were delegates from all across rural 

Saskatchewan. Most importantly this was an opportunity for 

NDP MLAs to finally interact with rural residents and find out 

what was on their minds. The NDP care so much about rural 

Saskatchewan that not one of their MLAs could find the time to 

attend SARM’s banquet last night — not one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina Coronation Park: do 

you even know where rural Saskatchewan is? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank the hon. member for that question. Mr. 

Speaker, the fact of the matter is in rural Saskatchewan we’re 

hemorrhaging doctors at a rate of more than one doctor a week. 

 

I care for rural Saskatchewan. I care for my daughter and 

grandchildren who are farming in rural Saskatchewan. I care for 

aunts and uncles around the province, cousins. I care for family 

members that live in rural Saskatchewan. I was raised on a 

farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, the Sask Party government last 

November cut $122 million that had been committed to 13 

long-term care projects in rural Saskatchewan. They cut it. 

They’re the ones that are turning their back on rural 

Saskatchewan. And what a shame that is. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I had 

alluded to in my speech debate, debate speech I should say, I 

was talking about a conference that was held not too long ago in 

Southey by a group of concerned citizens and municipalities 

surrounding Southey and Regina Beach about building a 

primary health care centre there. And that’s just one of many, 

Mr. Speaker. There are other municipalities across the province 

who have the same concerns or are trying to at least maintain 

what they have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now given that there was no money in last year’s budget to 

address primary health care, can the member from Batoche 

please tell us what zero dollars buys? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, we are spending vast amounts of 

money to fill the hole that they dug. It’s their mess. We’re the 

one fixing it. Instead of helping, they keep on trying to pull 

some little figure out of who knows where and attack. 

 

Work with us. We’re building Saskatchewan. Join the ride. It’s 

going to be quite a trip. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the NDP 

were in government, they closed hospital services in the 

communities of Spiritwood, Big River, Shellbrook, Preeceville, 

Canora, Kamsack, Arcola, Bengough, Coronach, Broadview, 

Central Butte, Vanguard, and Maidstone, and a list of more. 

 

I would like to address my question to the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. It’s ironic that for 16 years, the NDP didn’t even 

know where rural Saskatchewan existed. And now they seem to 

know everything about rural Saskatchewan. My question is to 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres: what was the end goal 

of the NDP’s rural health care policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there’s absolutely no question that 

those were very, very difficult times for not just the NDP 

government at the time, but for the citizens of the province 

having to deal with the massive, absolutely massive and 

unequalled debt of $15 billion that was left by those 

Conservatives when they left office in 1991. There’s no 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about what’s happening right now, two 

years after they’ve been elected. It’s over two years since 

they’ve been elected and communities like Shaunavon, 

Redvers, Broadview, Arcola, Spiritwood, Lestock, Climax, and 

Frontier are all struggling to find a doctor. 

 

Communities like Coronach and Shaunavon are hiring 

professional recruitment agencies to find doctors. Hundreds of 

thousands of dollars are being spent to be able to retain and 

recruit doctors. And those communities are not seeing the 

municipal funding that they’re supposed to get . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government has failed in 

providing for the health and well-being of residents in rural 

Saskatchewan. We’ve seen how they’ve mismanaged and 

underfunded existing services and have lacked a plan for 

addressing rural residents’ very real concerns. 

 

If they can’t manage existing programs, I don’t suppose rural 

Saskatchewan has any hope of ever seeing any new 

programming. To the member from Prince Albert Carlton: what 

is the Sask Party government’s commitment to ensuring funded 

midwifery services are available for rural women? 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4151 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 

the member opposite for that question. To begin with, we look 

at the past where the NDP government never engaged 

alternative kind of ways of doing business, Mr. Speaker. Our 

party in the last two years has had consultation with midwives 

in Saskatchewan. The minister has talked with them, his staff 

have as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about what happened under their government. 

Prince Albert and Prince Albert Carlton saw a huge increase in 

services because they closed hospitals, they closed services 

under their tenure. So now Prince Albert had to take all that as a 

funnel for the North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government’s engaged. We’re consulting with the people in 

the communities. We’re consulting with groups about the 

services like this. And I’ll tell you what. The member from 

Prince Albert Northcote wants to talk about how things have 

gotten so bad. Under his government’s watch, they gave no 

money for infrastructure. They fell to a deficit position every 

year, Mr. Speaker. We gave money last year to give operational 

funds. We’re very proud of that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

set a goal to recruit 800 more nurses. We have recruited 603 

more nurses. These are full-time equivalents as of December 

30th, 2009. We set that target of 800. We’re 75 per cent there. 

 

On March 28th, 2004, the former minister of Health, the 

member from Regina Lakeview, told the CBC there’s no 

advantage in training more nurses if other provinces can hire 

them away when they graduate. To the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres: why did the NDP see no advantage in increasing 

the number of nurses in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

member for the question. I’m finding it very interesting in 

listening to the questions that are being posed across the way 

and responses that are being given. And I find it very interesting 

that the amazingly valuable question that was just posed by the 

member from Saskatoon was unfortunately not answered by the 

Sask Party government, regarding midwifery. 

 

So I don’t know if it’s something they forgot about or if it’s 

something they don’t have a plan for again, or again if it’s one 

of those things that is going to be cut in the next budget, Mr. 

Speaker, from seeing any progress whatsoever. I guess that’s 

what we can garner from the no answer that we got to that very 

valuable question on midwifery. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the doctor shortages in the 

province right now are reaching crisis levels. In the last two 

years the doctor vacancy rate has increased by 50 per cent. And 

contrary to what the member from Batoche says about us 

creating numbers, these numbers come off the Sask Party 

government’s website, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite, government members talk 

about all the things that they’ve accomplished or they tried to 

accomplish as a government. But, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan aren’t seeing any results. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are seeing longer waiting lists for 

health care services, longer waiting lists for surgical 

opportunities. They’re seeing more hospitals on bypass. The 

people of Saskatchewan, and in particular in rural 

Saskatchewan, simply want quality health services and, Mr. 

Speaker, why is this government not giving that opportunity to 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — That ends the 75-minute debate. We will 

move forward to the private members’ motions. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Motion No. 2 — Saskatchewan’s Entrepreneurial Spirit 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Over one-third of our province’s productive 

capacity is driven by the entrepreneurial sector. No enterprise, 

government or otherwise, can disregard this sector. To do so 

would lead to a stagnant economy, a hole in the fabric of our 

society, and a disregard for our common history. 

 

Today I will move a motion that recognizes this contribution. 

At the end of my statement I will read this motion and it will 

be: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the renewed entrepreneurial 

spirit in Saskatchewan, which is encouraging the 

establishment of new enterprises, while at the same time 

inspiring confidence in existing ones. 

 

This motion is to convey my heartfelt belief, and with the 

support of the members if this should come to a vote, an 

endorsement and recognition of those who struggled to make a 

better life for themselves and their families and in doing so 

strengthen the province as a whole for all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I speak specifically about those who start a 

business, but I also want to speak about the feeling of 

entrepreneurial growth, optimism that I think everyone feels. 

Whether they’re starting a business today or tomorrow or at 

some point in their future, I think that that feeling has really 

grown up within all of us. 

 

Why, one may ask, has this spirit of opportunity been 

awakened? Why now is so many taking this entrepreneurial 

step? This I will endeavour to answer with the help of Booker 

T. Washington and several case studies that I will assess today. 

From a promising start our province was populated with 

homesteaders, Saskatchewan’s original entrepreneurs. A family 

on every quarter section, a small business on every quarter 



4152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

section. There were missteps and failures but there were far 

more great successes, and this is our heritage. 

 

A ship lost at sea for [several] days suddenly sighted a 

friendly vessel. From the mast of the unfortunate vessel 

was seen a signal, “Water, water; we die of thirst!” The 

answer from the friendly vessel at once came back, “Cast 

down your bucket where you are.” A second time the 

signal, “Water, water; send us water!” ran up from the 

distressed vessel, and was answered, “Cast down your 

bucket where you are.” A third and fourth signal for water 

was answered, “Cast down your bucket where you are.” 

The captain of the distressed vessel, at last heeding the 

injunction, cast down his bucket, and it came up full of 

fresh, sparkling water from the mouth of the Amazon 

River. 

 

To those who hope of bettering their condition or understand 

the importance of cultivating their own ingenuity I would say, 

cast down your bucket where you are. Cast down your bucket 

here in Saskatchewan, “. . . in agriculture, mechanics, in 

commerce, in domestic service, and in the professions.” Cast 

down your bucket where you are. Start a tea house or a barber 

shop, a clothing company, a gift store. Start a law firm. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, maybe we do have enough law firms but 

everything else, please cast down your bucket. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I entered the profession of politics I was an 

entrepreneur. I started a small business in the oil field . . . One 

of my colleagues says, you still are. And that’s funny you 

should stay that. I don’t think of myself as a politician; I think 

of myself as an entrepreneur on sabbatical. And it may be two 

years before I can go back to that honourable profession, or 

potentially the good people of Lloydminster will extend that a 

little longer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak a little bit about the 

entrepreneurial spirit and what it takes, you know, why so many 

people are coming forward now with this step in their lives. I 

think that the biggest thing is an entrepreneur has to be driven 

by hope. You have to think, I can do this, for one. I want to do 

this, and it’s going to mean that my life will be better, my 

family’s life will be better, and my community will be better. 

 

If you are motivated by fear, Mr. Speaker, you are not likely to 

start a business. You do not start a business fearful. You start a 

business hopeful. Mr. Speaker, I hear calling from the other side 

about immature entrepreneurs. I will address that later on in my 

speech, Mr. Speaker. But I would like to talk about opportunity 

and optimism, Mr. Speaker, optimism which that member on 

the far side could obviously take a little bit of advice on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If you think Saskatchewan is going to have a positive future and 

you think your family is going to have an optimistic future, you 

will likely start a small business, Mr. Speaker. There are risks. 

There are risks. Of course there is. There are trials; there’s long 

nights, long days, Mr. Speaker. You have to know if you’re an 

entrepreneur that you get paid last. You have to make payroll. 

You have to pay your suppliers. At the end of the month, it is 

you who decides whether there’s a paycheque coming to you or 

not, Mr. Speaker. And that is something that I think more 

people are willing take on that responsibility because they’re 

confident that if they put in the work they will have a successful 

business, Mr. Speaker. Things have changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak of a friend of mine, Maureen 

Currie. She cast down her bucket about a year ago, Mr. 

Speaker. Maureen is a lady from Pierceland, Saskatchewan. She 

was a stay-at-home mom. She volunteered her time in the 

community. She was on town council for 13 years. She was on 

the fire department, the library board, and the Catholic 

Women’s League. Mr. Speaker, her children are grown, her 

husband works away often, and Maureen thought that she had 

something to contribute to her community. 

 

One year ago, Mr. Speaker, Maureen opened Up Town 

Treasures on Main Street in Pierceland. It is a country gift store 

filled with candles, cupboards, mirrors, wagons, stars, and many 

other things, Mr. Speaker. Maureen tells me that she saw high 

need for this type of gift store in rural Saskatchewan and in our 

province. The building came available. Maureen totally 

renovated it. She invested her money to renovate an old 

building to look like new in Pierceland, Saskatchewan. That is 

confidence, Mr. Speaker. It opened exactly one year ago 

yesterday. 

 

She tells me that the economy hasn’t slowed her down a bit. Up 

Town Treasures has had a fabulous year, in her words. Maureen 

opened in March 2009, and she wondered how long it would be 

before someone came to her store from each of the provinces 

and territories. And she kept track. She said it took five short 

months. By July she had had a visitor from every province and 

every territory and so far five US [United States] states. 

 

She tells me that she buys her supplies across Canada, many of 

her suppliers in Saskatchewan, and even brings some in from 

the United States, Mr. Speaker. Maureen hires two part-time 

employees. And I guess I would like to say, thank you for 

casting down your bucket in Saskatchewan. Thank you for 

contributing the way you do. And I hope that next year is better 

than this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:15] 

 

There’s another business in my hometown — not Pierceland but 

Lloydminster. It started in Lashburn, Mr. Speaker. It was two 

schoolteachers — worked with my wife — a nice couple we 

hang out with. About three, four years ago they bought a 

silkscreener and they were doing some T-shirts for community 

people, for sports teams. They did it in their basement after 

work and it was a little sideline and they really enjoyed it. But, 

like entrepreneurs, the spirit got them and we’d be over there 

for dinner or something and Chris would have to go downstairs. 

And for hours he would be making T-shirts. And slowly this 

grew, their product line grew, their suppliers grew. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that they are doing terrific. 

They call themselves Ironjet. They cast down their bucket about 

three years ago and they did well. In the last year, Mr. Speaker, 

their business has gone through the roof. If anybody watched 

the World Juniors Hockey Tournament, the Zamboni had a 

silkscreen over the top of it, a beautiful Zamboni. They did that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They, as entrepreneurs do, they bought another business in 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4153 

Lloydminster. They now have two shops in Lloydminster, 14 

staff. And one night Chris was looking on the Internet for some 

work. This opportunity came up. It was kind of a short notice. I 

don’t know what had happened to the original Zamboni 

silkscreener, but Chris found it and in short order was able to 

produce the product quickly and to an excellent standard, and 

they had their product on a world stage, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that entrepreneurial spirit . . . I’d just like to tell a little story. 

 

At Chris and Lara’s house, in their basement where they had 

their original silkscreener set up, the roof is only about 5 feet 

high. And I’d go down there and Chris would get me working 

and show me the process. And it was quite neat. You’d put on 

the paint and put the shirt in and make sure it’s straight. Not 

being a particularly careful kind of guy, I think I ruined two or 

three shirts and he got tired of my employment and kicked me 

out. 

 

But the roof was only about 5 foot high so you had stand there 

with your head cricked over doing this work. The funny thing is 

I’m about six two, Chris is about six foot six and I know he 

spent hours down there, hunkered down, neck cricked to the 

side. And I think it’s a testament to his work ethic that their 

business — and Lara’s, I have to give them both credit — their 

work ethic, they are where they are at today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about another business, this one in 

the oil industry, this one actually down in southern 

Saskatchewan. These folks asked me not to put their name on 

the record, Mr. Speaker, because of concerns that if the political 

situation in the province changes, they do not want to be run 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are a group of people. One is retired. He’d worked in the 

oil industry his entire life, and he went to work, and he was very 

successful. But never in his entire life did he ever start a 

business. Another one is actually in the States. He’s an investor. 

We’ve got another one that works in the oil industry today, and 

he’s working as well. But what they’ve done is they’ve put their 

common knowledge together. They’ve gone after and purchased 

property to drill an oil well. 

 

Currently today, Mr. Speaker, the rig is sitting on that piece of 

land. They’re drilling their very first oil well. I asked them this 

morning, you know, when will it come into production? Or 

when will it be fact? And his response was, you know, he didn’t 

know. When you’re such a small company and the oil industry 

is doing so well, it’s sometimes tough to muscle out the bigger 

players and get that equipment in here. But he thinks within the 

next week the rig will be off and the fracking will be done, and 

they’ll be going to completion and producing oil. 

 

And I just cannot imagine how exciting it must be for those 

people that have invested to watch a project that they’ve put so 

much time into to come to fruition. And you know, I’m pretty 

excited. And I, you know, I really hope that that it is a big 

producer for them, and it’s the first of many. Because when 

they’re successful, we’re all successful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’d like to just talk a little bit about why 

they were hesitant to have their names put forward, Mr. 

Speaker, and it goes back to something long ago. In 1973 a 

different government than this one enacted a law. I believe it 

was Bill 43. And many oil producers, small-business men, the 

people that had laid it on the line in the early ’70s to build an 

industry for our province, were left holding the bag and the 

government was left holding all their property. And many of 

them left and have not come back. I would say the majority of 

them have. 

 

And it has taken 35, 36 years for that sour taste to leave their 

mouth, where they feel comfortable . . . Actually they probably 

don’t. Any of those individuals that I know have said, you 

know, we will never invest in Saskatchewan again. You know, 

we trust your government. We think that you guys have the 

right idea and you’re doing a great job. But we aren’t, we just 

aren’t going to invest there. We’ve learned a lesson of what can 

happen. 

 

And I guess I assure everyone that that isn’t going to happen 

again. I think the province has changed. I think that we now 

have a government that recognizes that entrepreneurial spirit — 

people that are willing to lay it on the line and drill a well — it 

benefits everyone. And that is what we need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another case study again in my hometown of 

Lloydminster. It’s a clothing store; it’s called Socko. It opened 

up here just in the last month. And it’s two young women. 

 

I spoke of Maureen Currie who’s in probably the second half of 

her career and has the competence and the wherewithal and the 

experience to have a successful business and is going for it. 

 

This one, Socko, is a clothing store started by two young 

women, Holly and Chelsea. They’ve come together as partners. 

They’re best friends. Both of them are under the age of 25. 

Chelsea has two children — a girl who is two years old and a 

boy who is three — so trying to raise a young family at home, 

she’s got two very energetic pre-school kids, and is still so 

optimistic and confident and wanting to contribute that she has 

put a partnership together with her best friend and opened a 

store. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish them well. 

 

I know that Lloydminster is a great city to do business in, and 

I’m very confident that they will do very well. And I applaud 

them for their effort. Thank you for casting your bucket in 

Saskatchewan and in Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak about three gentlemen that I met 

earlier this summer. We were doing some renovations on our 

house. We hired a contractor to do it, and he had some health 

problems and couldn’t finish it and we were in a bit of a bind. 

We had our siding ripped off, we had some insulation half on, 

and we didn’t know what to do. I didn’t have time to start 

building decks and fixing our house. 

 

Through their building supply store, they said, well we know 

these three gentlemen that have done excellent work for other 

people. They’re a small business. They’re new to our area. 

Would you be willing to give them a try? And we said, 

absolutely. And they came out. And all three — a father and 

two sons — all born in Pakistan, they have moved to the 

Lloydminster area recently and they do great work, Mr. 

Speaker. They were punctual. They were everything you would 

want in a contractor. And they became friends of ours. 

 



4154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

And I think that this example speaks to several things. I think it 

speaks to an excellent immigration policy — and that’s 

something that the member opposite was questioning in my 

earlier comments — that we have people from around the world 

that when their ship is adrift, it blows into Saskatchewan where 

they can cast their bucket for fresh water. And I can tell you that 

these three people are casting it and are doing a heck of a good 

job to contribute here.  

 

They think that this is the best opportunity in Canada. They 

have started off in Surrey. They finished high school in British 

Columbia, the two young men, and they moved to Kelowna and 

built a house and did some work there. Then from Kelowna 

they took a good look at Saskatchewan. The boys, the young 

men are in their mid-20s and it was time to put down roots. 

They both married recently. And where would they move? 

Would it be Ontario? Would it be out East? Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They made a conscious choice to move to Saskatchewan. They 

started in Saskatoon and then Lloydminster. They built 

themselves a beautiful house. They’ve laid down roots. They’ve 

got a little girl. Nisar and his wife have their first little girl, and 

she’s cute as a button. And they’re doing great work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear from the opposite side, what year did they 

come to Saskatchewan? They came to Saskatchewan, I believe, 

in the last two years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I believe that they did. 

There’s some questioning about that. Mr. Speaker, I don’t want 

to quibble about that. 

 

My point is that they are being successful in Saskatchewan 

today. I think that these are such good businessmen, they would 

have even been successful under that government’s leadership, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re that good; they really are. But the fact that 

they’re here today, they are doing terrific, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think a couple points that would highlight this, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we’ve seen a 137 per cent increase in the urban housing 

starts year over year, Mr. Speaker. We see big increases in 

non-residential housing starts, Mr. Speaker. And I think, I think 

that the confidence that business has to be building buildings in 

Saskatchewan is attracting a lot of workers and a lot of notice 

from across Canada. 

 

I see it also from Eastern Canada. We’ve seen many people in 

the trades that have come to Saskatchewan for work, many in 

the Lloydminster area for the oilfield. They come out here for a 

month or two. They go back to Newfoundland or Nova Scotia 

where their families are. And you know, I thank those people 

for contributing to our province because we need their help, and 

we’re providing some work for them. 

 

But I’m also glad to say that those entrepreneurs are more and 

more moving their families to Saskatchewan. I certainly see it 

in my riding when you see people who have grown up in 

Newfoundland. They’ll still tell you that Newfoundland will 

always be home, that the rock is a piece of them. But their 

families are here. They don’t plan on leaving, Mr. Speaker. 

They love Saskatchewan too. And I think that that is a 

testament to the strength of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that it’s important that we ask ourselves what is the role 

of government in small business? And there would be those of 

you that’ll tell you, that’ll say you know, the less government in 

small business, the better. And that’s certainly one way to look 

at it. I know in the past, we’ve seen where the government has 

gotten involved in businesses and really left a bad taste in 

people’s mouth. One would be rotten potatoes, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ve never tried to eat a rotten potato, but I know that there’s 

several people that were in that business — small businessmen. 

 

And I would like to expand on this a little bit. You know the 

government may have had a disaster, the NDP government at 

the time, investing millions of dollars, tens of millions of 

dollars of taxpayers’ money into building potato barns and 

potato industry and a lot of other things that it could be argued 

that they had no right being in. But, Mr. Speaker, with today’s 

motion, I want to look at the small businessman. 

 

How many people in that area bought trucks to haul potatoes or 

bought infrastructure pieces that could contribute to that 

industry? They believed the then government that they were 

going to invest and make a profitable industry. It didn’t work 

out that way, Mr. Speaker. These people that had invested their 

own hard-earned money in trucks or in farms, in 

potato-growing equipment were left a few short years later with 

nothing more than a lawsuit suing the government to try and 

reclaim some of their losses. And like I say, Mr. Speaker, rotten 

potatoes leaves a bad taste in anyone’s mouth. 

 

I think I’d like to talk about what are more of the foundational 

elements which have made Saskatchewan a beacon to the rest of 

Canada and really around the world for their entrepreneurial 

spirit. You know, I think that a large piece is our commitment 

to infrastructure. We said, you know, you’re not going to haul 

your products across a bridge that won’t carry the load. There’s 

roads out there that businesses will look at and say, this is not a 

good place to set up a facility. 

 

Now you look at Saskatchewan and you look at the 

commitment our government has made to highways, to roads, to 

many pieces of infrastructure. I think that sends a signal. 

They’re not all fixed. They won’t be all fixed in another two 

years, in another four years but, Mr. Speaker, there’s positive 

signs on the horizon. There’s positive signs there today and that 

have been completed in the last two years, and I think — I 

know — that business looks at that and says, this is important to 

us. 

 

One example that just pops into my mind is the heavy-haul 

roads in the Lloydminster constituency. We have heavy oil. 

You can’t pipeline it, Mr. Speaker, to batteries, so trucks, 

tridem trucks, have to haul that oil from the well site to the 

battery. 

 

There’s a program in place that helps the rural municipalities 

keep the roads in a reasonable condition because of all that 

heavy traffic, and that benefits everyone, Mr. Speaker. The RM 

[rural municipality] needs the help. The oil company needs to 

get their oil to market, and the province is the beneficiary 

because we have a royalty on the oil. So there’s partners in this, 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4155 

and I think as long as everybody is working together and doing 

the right things, we will continue to see this level of success and 

optimism around Saskatchewan. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Saskatchewan government’s rethink on taxation, Mr. 

Speaker, that property tax, that’s something we campaigned on 

very clearly in the election and made some very big investments 

in last year and will continue to next year, Mr. Speaker. The 

amount of property tax that people have to pay on commercial 

properties is a real decision-making instrument for businesses, 

small and large. If there’s a disparity in the property tax 

between two jurisdictions, it is often the deciding factor 

between those two jurisdictions as where a company is going to 

invest their money, hire people, and build that province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a role for property tax; we’ve identified it. 

We just think that Saskatchewan has to be competitive with the 

rest of Canada. We can compete with the rest of Canada 

head-to-head in almost any realm, Mr. Speaker, but we can’t 

arbitrarily disadvantage ourselves about property tax, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Income tax, Mr. Speaker, that is another thing. When people 

look at why they’re going to invest in a province or if they want 

to quit their job and start another business, they have to have the 

incentive. And there isn’t a lot of incentive if the income tax is 

too high, Mr. Speaker. Why would you want to start, earn extra 

money, and just have the government claw it back. Again, there 

is a role for income tax. There always will be a role for income 

tax, but it has to be competitive with the rest of Canada. 

 

In the Lloydminster example, we have seen for far too long that 

Alberta had a more competitive income tax regime than 

Saskatchewan. Many of the entrepreneurs chose to live and 

locate their business on the Alberta side. And I think that that 

would be borne out through statistics that Saskatchewan and 

Alberta overall would very much mirror the example of what 

we see in Lloydminster in particular. The income tax is 

something that now a family of four on the Saskatchewan side 

of Lloydminster is very likely paying less income tax than the 

same family of four would be if they had located on the Alberta 

side. 

 

And when I look at the business, Socko, and I see the two 

young Saskatchewan women that have started that, it shows a 

little bit of anecdote and I think potentially truth to the fact that 

an income tax rate that is competitive or advantageous in 

Saskatchewan, as it now is, is going to drive small business as 

well as the incentive for people to earn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that debt reduction, it doesn’t seem like 

there’d be a direct tie between debt reduction and investing in a 

small business, but as a small businessman myself, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that is a major priority for me. When I 

look at a government like the Saskatchewan Party government, 

that has made a serious reduction in the provincial debt — 40 

per cent in the first two years — it shows me, it signals to me 

that this government is serious about having a fiscally 

responsible regime. And within two years, to make that 

commitment, I think is fantastic. 

 

The reason it would be important to me, Mr. Speaker, is as my 

business grows, as it becomes more successful and I bring in 

more people and hire more people, if a government wasn’t 

committed to debt reduction, you’re going to see that. It’ll catch 

up to you some day. 

 

And the NDP would have raised taxes, Mr. Speaker, where our 

government has made a commitment to lowering debt, 

long-term benefit of the province for strengthening the 

province. And if you have a business, you want a strong 

province because you need everyone to have confidence if you 

want to be selling your products, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the corporate income tax has been lowered in this 

province in the last two years by 5 per cent. Now that is a 

direct, you know, a direct link. If businesses are looking at 

direct dollars and cents on their bottom line, the corporate 

income tax is something that couldn’t be identified as maybe 

the largest or one of their largest decision-making instruments. 

 

And to look at how that is bore out, Mr. Speaker, I have some 

statistics here about the number of incorporated companies in 

Saskatchewan. In 2005-06, it was 8,700. In 2006-07, it was 

about 8,986. When you get into the last two years, Mr. Speaker, 

it jumps from that 9,000 range up to 12,000. And then in this 

past year, 13,300 incorporated businesses. Now if you want 

quantitative proof of how policies and confidence in a province 

can drive investment, can drive the entrepreneurial spirit, I think 

that the proof is borne out in this. 

 

Many of my friends, Mr. Speaker, have started trucking 

companies in the oil field. They have started steamers. They’ve 

started flushbys. I’ve got a friend, I spoke of him here a couple 

days ago, he started a oil field service company in 

Lloydminster, son of a former member. He now has, I would 

estimate, 20, 25 semis on the road, hauling everything from 

sand, salt water. They got pressure trucks, vac [vacuum] trucks, 

Mr. Speaker. And making a commitment to our community, to 

our province, locating it in Lashburn, Saskatchewan, where 

there’s a willing worker base. But that is becoming a problem, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing that the number of people that are 

starting businesses in this province is getting to a point that our 

unemployment rate is the lowest in the country. Our 

unemployment numbers very closely match the number of job 

postings. 

 

So I guess an economist would call that structural 

unemployment. Structural unemployment is almost zero 

because job vacancies and the number of unemployed pretty 

much balance, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that is a real 

reason why immigration from the rest of Canada coming to 

Saskatchewan to help us fill those positions is very important 

and people from around the world that are identifying 

Saskatchewan as a place of opportunity. 

 

I think it’s important we communicate to them that there is 

opportunity here in Saskatchewan and there will be for a long, 

long time, Mr. Speaker. And that is a good thing. I think one 

thing that a government, a government takes credit for a lot of 

things, but one thing I feel very comfortable saying is I think 

this government has communicated very well. 

 

They have told the rest of Canada the Saskatchewan story, that 

we are more than wheat. We are more than maybe what we 



4156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

were sold as in the past, that we are potash, we are coal. We are 

country gifts in Pierceland, Saskatchewan. We are recognized 

around the world as a leader in many, many things. And it takes 

a lot of hands in Saskatchewan to make us what we are. 

 

And we have to tell the world that we’re open for entrepreneurs 

that want to come here and be a part of it. It’s an exciting time 

in Saskatchewan. Let’s tell some people about it. And people 

are hearing it. They’re hungry to hear it, Mr. Speaker. And a 

few examples of that would be the CNN [Cable News Network] 

has talked about us. You can see it on American news stations. 

American newspapers are talking about Saskatchewan. National 

news programs are saying, Saskatchewan, who knew. 

 

And you know, 5, 10 short years ago, to see Saskatchewan’s 

number at the top of the growth expectations, to have lead the 

country in the last two years, that was unheard of, Mr. Speaker. 

I was going to university out of the province back then and I 

took a lot of good-natured ribbing from my colleagues. And it’s 

sweet desserts when I can call them up today and tell them that 

Saskatchewan’s doing great and that we’re looking into the 

future. 

 

We’re being a very responsible province, but we’re a very 

optimistic province as well. That’s all part of, I would say, the 

new winning attitude in Saskatchewan. It’s a belief thing, Mr. 

Speaker. We believe in ourselves. For a long time it wasn’t cool 

to believe in ourselves, that to be self-deprecating was the 

Saskatchewan way. And I think it’s still good to have a good 

sense of humour and to be able to poke a little fun at ourselves, 

and it’s what we are and what we should be. 

 

But we should also be able to stand up and say, no, we’re 

Saskatchewan. We’re going to lead the country. We’re going to 

drive investment. We’re going to bring in people from the rest 

of the country to be part of this experience, to work in our 

industries, and to start their own businesses, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re seeing it. We can come up with countless examples. 

 

When I started writing this speech, Mr. Speaker, I asked a 

couple of my colleagues, do you have examples of small 

businesses in your communities that I could speak about? And I 

started jotting down a few, and mine, of close personal friends, 

people across the street from my office and a few . . . Very 

quickly I got a list long enough that I wasn’t able to use very 

many of the examples that was given to me from my 

colleagues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that one thing that we talked about in this legislature in 

the past, but it speaks to the view of the rest of the country of 

us, as well as of our own people here in Saskatchewan, and that 

is the second annual Financial Post/CFIB [Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business] ranking of Canada’s top 

business-friendly cities. And I say the second annual, but the 

first annual, Mr. Speaker, was very similar results to the second. 

And it showed five of the top 10 cities to do business of in the 

country are where? Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They are 

Lloydminster. They are Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Regina, and 

Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear many of my colleagues on the opposite side 

talk about the forestry industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, Prince 

Albert is somewhat a hub of the forestry industry, and the 

optimism in Prince Albert has driven it into the top 10 in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, as places to start a small business, for 

confidence. 

 

We just finished the Crown corporations public hearings. We 

had many people from northern Saskatchewan come forward 

with business proposals, with optimism, with things that they 

want to be a part of, as Saskatchewan builds and builds to the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that as Saskatchewan moves through this 

year, through next year, we will be looking towards a province 

which is more and more diversified. Saskatchewan is the 

province that has the least reliance on our American neighbours 

to the south than any other province except British Columbia. 

 

We sell our pulse crops around the world. They have been an 

excellent source of diversification for us. Potash, which really 

spreads far and wide around the countries, around the world . . . 

We see, we see everything from tillage tools, seeding 

equipment, manufacturing, Mr. Speaker. For a long time 

Saskatchewan had a, I don’t want to say an inferiority complex 

but we had leadership that did not allow us to say, look at us. 

We are going to be aggressive; we are business people; and 

we’re going to drive our products and our province forward. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is important. That is very important to 

be able to go around the world, have people recognize that 

you’re from Saskatchewan — well I hear exciting things about 

Saskatchewan and I want to be a part of it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I hear the folks opposite ridiculing the small-business 

sector, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk to them. I’ve talked to them 

about their exploits in the potato industry and how they 

devastated the small-business people. If you look at the spinoff 

effects of the potash industry, you know, how many mills, how 

many belt shops, how many spring operations, how many 

mechanics organizations, small-business people contribute to 

that industry. 

 

And you don’t have to look very far back in our history to see 

when an NDP government in all senses of the word nationalized 

our potash industry. They passed a law that stole a company 

from those who invested in it . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

They ask what year that was, Mr. Speaker. What year was that? 

Very good question. 

 

Better question is, when was that law repealed? When did they 

repeal it? They left it on the books, Mr. Speaker. They had 16 

years to send a signal to industry that we’re not going to steal 

your business again. You know, fool me once, shame on you; 

fool me twice, shame on me. Well, Mr. Speaker, they had 16 

years to send a message that they weren’t going to steal 

companies any more. They didn’t do it. You know why, Mr. 

Speaker? I don’t think they believed in it. I think they always 

wanted to keep that card in their back pocket; that if times get 

tough, we can always go and collect the potash companies 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that isn’t going to happen under this government 

and I’m going to venture to say that isn’t going to happen in 

Saskatchewan again because I think the electorate has been 

there, they’ve seen what that produces, the stagnation in an 

industry, the hit that a province as a whole takes. 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4157 

They now see a government in power that says, we will repeal 

that law. A simple act of repealing that law, Mr. Speaker. It 

isn’t contentious. I remember they argued against repealing it, 

much like they’re arguing against many of the good pieces of 

legislation currently in front of the Assembly. But they argued 

against it, Mr. Speaker. What does that say? That says if you 

elect an NDP government again, well you know we’re one 

piece of legislation away from having that power. And I think 

the people of Saskatchewan have seen that and think that, no. 

There’s a new feeling of optimism, of entrepreneurial spirit 

that’s going to move forward. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about an entrepreneur, you’re 

talking about somebody that has taken the money out of their 

pocket, mortgaging their house again. They’re emptying their 

bank accounts, in all likelihood, to go after a dream. They think 

that they have what it takes to go forward and they’re, in most 

cases . . . And it was the case for myself, Mr. Speaker. To buy 

my first piece of heavy equipment left me in a very 

compromised state. And you get that . . . You’re hung out there, 

and you have to go to work. You have to find the contracts. You 

have to put in the long days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to have it hanging over your head that something not in 

your own control, that a government could come in with a 

heavy hand and devastate your industry, Mr. Speaker, it is 

something that puts the chance maybe too big for a lot of people 

where, when you’ve got your family’s investments on the line, 

you want to know that if I try hard, if I work hard, that the 

government of the day is going to support me, is going to stand 

behind me. 

 

When I cast my bucket, Mr. Speaker, I want a chance at fresh, 

clean water where in the past it seemed a lot more like salt 

water was coming up, Mr. Speaker. And today it is fresh, clean 

Saskatchewan water, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that when I was in small business, Mr. Speaker . . . And 

I plan to be in a small business again, Mr. Speaker. As I said 

earlier, it may be two years from now. It may be. It may be a 

much longer period of time. But regardless, I love being in 

business. I love the freedom of it. I love that you get to make 

decisions today that don’t need the scrutiny of a lot of 

colleagues. But the reality is, you live and die with those 

decisions and sometimes you make bad ones, Mr. Speaker. I 

have made them, and you live with that as well. But when you 

get out there and you’re doing the work . . . If you’re involved 

in the oil industry as I was, Mr. Speaker, it was incredibly 

rewarding. 

 

The good people in that industry, that worked for many of the 

big companies — the Huskys and CNRLs [Canadian Natural 

Resources Limited] — were very good to deal with. And the 

other contractors, Mr. Speaker. Most of that industry is run by 

contractors. Hauling the oil, doing the road maintenance, the 

welders, it’s a series of contractors, of small-business people 

that contribute to their industry, to their community by the hard 

work that they do. 

 

And many of them have built up from, you know, one little 

welding shop, one little truck. You know, next thing you know, 

they’ve got three trucks, they’re hiring two guys from out of 

province. They can’t hire enough because they want to buy a 

fourth truck. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the Saskatchewan dream 

as I see it today. It is that I can identify a problem that I can fill. 

And usually these individuals, they fill it; they fill it well. And 

the problem is that the larger company or their contractor says, 

you know, we need you to do more. You’re doing 14 hours a 

day. Can you do 16? And that’s really what drives the growth in 

this industry. 

 

I saw it in my business. I see it in very many of the other 

businesses in my area. It goes from one truck to two. You’re 

hiring people. And it soon comes into, you may be in the 

pressure truck business, but they ask you to get a vac truck on 

with them as well, Mr. Speaker, to broaden your service 

horizons and to help them fill their need. And it becomes a very 

symbiotic relationship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that a government as we have has certain roles. I think 

we have provided very good leadership in workmen’s 

compensation, in employment insurance, working with our 

federal counterparts, creating a tax environment as I spoke 

about earlier, Mr. Speaker. All those are very important. 

 

But I think more important is the feeling of optimism that 

Saskatchewan is the place to invest and that, you know, maybe 

you’ve worked in this industry your whole life, you’ve worked 

for one of the larger companies — you may have worked for 

government, Mr. Speaker — and you identify an opportunity. 

 

And it’s that decision, that conversation over the kitchen table 

. . . I would bet most of these conversations are over the kitchen 

table, Mr. Speaker — husband to wife, wife to husband, often 

kids involved — saying, we’re going to change our life. You 

know, we’re going to take this chance. Everybody get involved. 

Is this something we can do? And it’s probably one of the larger 

decisions people make in their lives. Do we mortgage our 

home? Do we mortgage our farm to take this chance? What’s 

the upside? It may be more freedom. It may be more work. It 

may be building something that can be passed on 

intergenerational. 

 

And I certainly see that in my community, that very many 

fathers and sons are in business together and the father retires 

and the son brings on his son. You know, the value of that 

cannot be underestimated, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve got two little 

girls — and I don’t know, they’re pretty young at this point — 

but at some point I hope that they’re entrepreneurs as well. And 

I will raise them with the skills, I hope, that if they so choose, 

they could start their own business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But these conversations over the kitchen tables, they aren’t 

taken lightly. They’re probably something that people have 

thought about for years before they go forward and make that 

plunge. And the fact that we’ve seen such a deluge of people in 

Saskatchewan do that in the last two years speaks volumes in 

my sense of, one, their view of our province, of their view of 

the future. Because you don’t invest your life savings in one 

year. You don’t invest it in a short period of time and think, you 

know, I’ll buy a welding truck or a gift store and a year from 

now I’ll sell it. You invest that money today knowing that very 

likely 15 years from now you will be the guy behind the till or 

the girl behind the till or behind the seat. And often that isn’t 



4158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2010 

the case, but I think that most people start with that expectation 

that this is something they want to do. 

 

With that Mr. Speaker, I think that the examples I’ve given here 

today are exactly that. Maureen Currie really stands out to me 

as someone that her husband was working away from home a 

lot and I’m sure they had a long conversation as, you know, 

how long of hours can a lady devote. Obviously it was a 

successful store. She’s now hired two people. Two people in 

that small town owe their employment to that one enterprise. 

 

Same with the example, the store in Lloydminster. You know, 

your business starts to grow and you start getting the pressures 

of hiring employees. And that’s where the role of government 

comes in that, let’s make this as easy as possible for people that 

are doing this, to engage with their government. 

 

And it’s not a perfect system, Mr. Speaker. I see many things 

come through my office of examples of things that either are 

working all right and it’s still a problem, or stuff that a 

government can work on. And I endeavour, and I know this 

government endeavours to ensure that we know that there will 

never be the perfect situation, but there will be an 

ever-improving one, Mr. Speaker, I am confident, under this 

government. 

 

I also think that many of the projections that we’re seeing out of 

eastern Canada and the big banks that Saskatchewan is going to 

grow at 3.6 per cent GDP [Gross Domestic Product] growth this 

year, I believe — CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of 

Commerce] came out with today — 4.6 per cent next year. 

Large portion of that, Mr. Speaker, is driven by the private 

sector, by entrepreneurs. Many of them that have just started 

out. 

 

And as I say, Mr. Speaker, between 2006 where we had just 

over 8,500 to today, five years later we see 13,500 people that 

have incorporated companies. That is a massive, massive 

improvement — I don’t want to say improvement — increase in 

the number of people that have incorporated their companies 

and are now probably employing more people and contributing 

to their communities and their province through employment 

and services and goods that they bring in for other people to 

utilize and other companies to utilize in their businesses. 

 

Now with that, Mr. Speaker, the number of people that were in 

Saskatchewan that are incorporating and the number of people 

coming in from out of province that are incorporating is a good 

sign. When I see in Lloydminster, people for lack of a better 

term . . . For 16 years all the industrial parks in Lloydminster 

were built on the Alberta side. And these industrial parks are a 

weather vane of a province. They are almost exclusively small 

businesses — there is hydraulic shops, there’s dealerships, 

there’s truck shops, welding shops, you name it, Mr. Speaker — 

but for the most part they are or at least started out as what 

would be considered mom-and-pop operations. 

 

Now with that, why did all the industrial growth over that 

period of time go on one side of the city? Because there was a 

border and there was a difference in many things — in taxes, in 

confidence in employment issues. And what we see recently is a 

real growth on the Saskatchewan side, Mr. Speaker, and it is big 

companies. And by big I still mean small business. Redhead 

Equipment, Mr. Speaker, is now on the Saskatchewan side. We 

see our local heavy diesel, heavy mechanic operations locating 

on the Saskatchewan side. 

 

We see that one of our real estate companies in Lloydminster, 

Remax, relocated themselves, Mr. Speaker, from the Alberta 

side to the Saskatchewan side. And you know, one, it’s a 

decision when a company has to decide where they’re going to 

build their shop; but, two, when they going to uproot their 

business and move it, physically move it to the Saskatchewan 

side, now that is in my opinion is a gesture of confidence in a 

province. And I think that Remax has made that commitment to 

Saskatchewan with that move. 

 

And I’ve talked to many of their realtors and I know the owner 

of the Remax in Lloydminster, and he is very confident and 

bullish about Saskatchewan and its future. And he has deep ties 

to the province. It’s funny in Lloydminster: you talk to most of 

the businessmen and most of them have Saskatchewan roots. 

There aren’t many Edmonton Eskimo fans in Lloydminster. 

 

And I think you’ll find that in Calgary as well, Mr. Speaker. 

And that goes back a long way in history that what drove out 

the entrepreneurial class to cities like Calgary or Edmonton out 

west. I think it’s certain policies in our past that sent a signal 

that Saskatchewan was not the place that an entrepreneur would 

find his best options. And I see it in Lloydminster. I saw it 

growing up. And again, as I say, I think if you balance 

Saskatchewan and Alberta historically, there are countless 

stories of oil entrepreneurs, of countless number of 

entrepreneurs that made that assessment themselves, and the 

history is what it is. 

 

But we know that at our core, our province was settled by 

entrepreneurs. I have my colleagues nodding their heads. Their 

forefathers, the people that they got their heritage from, came 

from Europe — many from England, from Scotland, from 

Ireland. Why did they leave there? Because they saw 

opportunity in Western Canada. By chance they ended up in 

Saskatchewan, but they stayed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people that are our forebearers, those of us that were born 

and raised here in the province, made the conscious choice to 

come to Saskatchewan. They toughed it out through the lean 

years in the ’30s. They toughed it out through the lean years of 

the NDP and they are still here. They are the purified strain of 

the business people that have survived. 

 

So I would argue that part of the reason we see such aggressive, 

successful entrepreneurs, first generation, that have left our 

province into Alberta are because they are the purified strain of 

the entrepreneur. And now they’re coming back, Mr. Speaker, 

just injecting into our province the optimism, the experience. 

And the people that are still in Saskatchewan come from that 

same hardy stock. And I see it of my colleagues and my friends 

that have made that commitment to Saskatchewan and just have 

that natural skill and tenacity to be successful in our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we are going to see this grow in 

Saskatchewan, and we are going to applaud them in 

Saskatchewan when they do succeed. So when they cast down 

their bucket, cast it down where you are, Mr. Speaker. And with 



March 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4159 

that, I would like to read the motion before the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And the motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the renewed entrepreneurial 

spirit in Saskatchewan, which is encouraging the 

establishment of new enterprises, while at the same time 

inspiring confidence in existing ones. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I move that for the record. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has 

moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the renewed entrepreneurial 

spirit in Saskatchewan, which is encouraging the 

establishment of new enterprises, while at the same time 

inspiring confidence in existing ones. 

 

The time of adjournment being as of now, this House now 

stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. Have a good 

weekend. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4131 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4140 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4132 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4132 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4132 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4132 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4132 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4132 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4133 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4133 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4133 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4133 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Party Convention 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4133 

 2010 Winter Paralympics 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4134 

 Financial Projections 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4134 

 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Convention 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4134 

 Minister’s Comments 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4134 

 Good Economic News 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4135 

 Comments at Convention 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4135 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for School Divisions 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4135 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4135 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4137 

 Municipal Revenue Sharing 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4138 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4138 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Health Care Services in Rural Saskatchewan 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4140 

  Hickie ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4143, 4151 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 4144, 4150 

  Kirsch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4146, 4150 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4147, 4150 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4148 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4149 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4150 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4150 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4150 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4151 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4151 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Saskatchewan’s Entrepreneurial Spirit 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4151 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


