




















































Hansard: March 17, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 17, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4283 

 March 17, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce some individuals seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 

They are the Intercultural Grandmothers Uniting, which is a 

nationally recognized network of grandmothers of many 

cultures whose purpose is to build bridges of understanding, 

respect, trust, and friendship among races and generations. 

 

We have with us today June Mitchell, no stranger to this 

legislature — her mother was one of the pioneering female 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in this Assembly. 

Veteran Florence Wuttunee, if you could please give us a wave, 

Florence. We have Carole Taylor. We have Sadie Jimmy; good 

to see you, kohkom. We have Phyllis Kretschmer, the Chair of 

the Intercultural Grandmothers. Hello, Phyllis. We have Helen 

Linton; we have Liz Cooper, past Saskatchewan award of merit 

winner and notable educator. We have Ellen Gillies, Ida Grosse, 

Mary Saso, and we’re particularly honoured to have Reona and 

Sheila Brass with us. Reona is the daughter and Sheila is the 

widow of the late Dr. Oliver Brass who was at one time the 

president of Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 

 

Please join me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming these kohkoms to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to introduce a guest seated in your gallery 

who has come to watch the proceedings today. Virginia 

Fletcher has made the trip to Regina from Swift Current and, 

Virginia, if you wouldn’t mind just standing up. Virginia is the 

general manager for SaskEnergy southwest area which includes 

Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Kindersley. Next month Virginia 

will be celebrating 31 years of service to SaskEnergy and, 

before that, SaskPower. Virginia has worked at a number of 

positions throughout the company and became the first woman 

general manager at SaskEnergy. 

 

As members will know, her hometown of Swift Current will be 

hosting the 2010 Ford World Women’s Curling Championships 

on March 20th to 28th, Mr. Speaker. Many SaskEnergy 

employees are volunteering their time to make this event a 

success, as SaskEnergy is the champion of volunteers. Virginia 

will be representing the corporation, giving a keynote address to 

many special volunteer appreciation events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Virginia to her legislature and thanking her for the excellent 

work that she’s done for SaskEnergy and the people of the 

province. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 

and through you to members of the Assembly two members of 

the Regina Catholic School Board who are with us here today in 

your gallery. We have Donna Ziegler, the Vice-Chair of the 

school board, as well as Jerry Adams who are with us here 

today. And we know they do the heavy lifting in keeping our 

schools organized, the separate schools in the city. I want to 

welcome them here, and look forward to meeting you later. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce two guests seated in the east gallery. Mr. Speaker, 

we have Brian Pastuch, who is the membership development 

representative for IBEW [International Brotherhood of 

Electrical Workers] Local 2038 based out of Saskatoon. 

Welcome Brian. 

 

And seated right next to Brian is a long-time friend of mine — 

and a friend of many us in this Assembly — Gunnar Passmore, 

who heads up the political action group for the Saskatchewan 

buildings trades. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome 

both of these guests to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly I would like to introduce a 

group of student representatives from the First Nations 

University of Canada who are seated in your gallery. With us 

today, Mr. Speaker, is Diane Adams, president of the First 

Nations student association. We also have Thomas Benjoe, 

vice-president of finance. We also have a number of other 

representatives: Shannon McNabb, Katelyn Ironstar, Angie 

Ironstar, Robert Whitehead, as well Desarae Eashappie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals have come here as they continue 

their important work for an institution they care about and love 

very deeply, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask all members in this 

Assembly to join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would like to join the members opposite in welcoming 

President Diane Adams and the other students at First Nations 

University of Canada. Certainly we’re working diligently on 

this side of the aisle to ensure that these students and their 

academic futures remain promising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to welcome these students to 

their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 



4284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to ask leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — Pardon me. Sorry about that. My apologies. I 

got caught. The member from Regina Walsh Acres has asked 

for leave for extended greeting. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you someone who is a very 

familiar face to the Assembly. His name is Tory McGregor and 

he’s seated in the east gallery. He’s a gentleman who’s 30 years 

old and has frequented the Legislative Assembly often with us, 

sitting through speeches that many of us wish sometimes that 

we didn’t have to listen to. But he’s been very diligent and 

interested in the political process that takes place here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He was born and raised in Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, and attended 

of course the local schools in the province, Yorkton Regional 

High School. He attended the University of Regina and 

obtained an economics degree. He’s been with the Armed 

Forces for nine and a half years and served with the Royal 

Canadian Artillery. 

 

Now up until this past month, Mr. McGregor was the Deputy 

Leader of the Green Party of Saskatchewan and is currently a 

candidate in the NDP [New Democratic Party] nomination race 

in Regina Coronation Park. He’s very active in community 

eco-groups and involved in environmental advocacy and 

activism. And it’s very nice to have him with us here in the 

legislature as often as he is, and I’m sure he looks forward to 

someday sitting on the floor of the legislature and not just 

observing from the gallery. So I’d ask all members of the 

legislature to please welcome him to the Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just would like to extend a 

welcome to our guests as well and just to let our guests know 

that while their presence in the galleries is appreciated and the 

opportunity to come to the Assembly, we ask you not to 

participate in any of the debate in any form, as we move on 

from here. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to have the duty to present a petition in support of First Nations 

University of Canada. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize the importance of 

the First Nations University of Canada, to restore the 

funding to that institution, and to call upon their federal 

counterparts to also restore funding to the First Nations 

University of Canada. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from the city of Regina, 

and from Balcarres, Mr. Speaker, and I proudly present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the safety of our 

highways across this great province, in particular Highway 310. 

310 Highway, according to this petition, has deteriorated 

significantly and is in a condition now where it is a potential 

safety hazard for the residents who have to travel on that 

highway each and every day. And the prayer, Mr. Speaker, 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway No. 310 that the people of 

Saskatchewan need. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Regina and Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce a petition that was started by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. Said petition is regarding the implementation 

of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund, the same fund that was 

promised by the Sask Party in the last general election. The 

petition reads, the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

These petitioners are from Regina and Saskatoon. It’s my 

honour to submit them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a portion of the over 20,000 petitions that were delivered to me 

yesterday in the legislature representing citizens deeply 

concerned about the possible cuts to chiropractic care funding 

in the upcoming budget. And this is a new form of the petition, 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4285 

so I’m going to read the whole thing. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. It’s been a 

long-standing tradition that we give maybe a general comment 

about the petition and then move into the prayer. And I’d ask 

the member to do that. The member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Yes, it’s just reworded the way we usually hear 

it. So this is about the possible elimination of government 

funding for chiropractic services. And we, in the prayer that 

reads as follows: 

 

. . . respectively request that the Government of 

Saskatchewan honour the agreement negotiated between 

the Ministry of Health and the Chiropractors’ Association 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the signatures today, Mr. Speaker, I went through all of 

these, which are about — I divided the pile into fifths — so this 

is about 4,000 signatures. So I went through them and wrote out 

the towns that they were from. So I’m going to say the 

signatures on these petitions are from Crooked River, Rose 

Valley, Conquest, Francis, Tribune, Kyle, Swift Current, 

Waldeck, Herbert, Lafleche, Success, Neville, Shaunavon, 

Admiral, St-Denis, Spring Valley, Wynyard, Elrose, Krydor, 

Kelliher, Bethune, Stornoway, Wroxton, Pelly, Birch River, 

Okla, Togo, St. Louis, Paddockwood, MacNutt, Bellevue, La 

Loche, Air Ronge, Cudworth, Cochin, Meota, St. Walburg, 

Glaslyn, Maymont, Battleford, Medstead, Paynton, Leoville, 

Mayfair, Rabbit Lake, Loon Lake, Weirdale, Canwood, 

Henribourg, Mervin, Plenty, Bjorkdale, Abbey, Webb, Tribune, 

Creelman, Trossachs, Scott, Big River, St. Gregor, Kenaston, 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Clavet, Martensville, Warman, 

Dundurn, Milden, Radisson, Ituna, Outlook, Delisle, Punnichy, 

Macrorie, Hudson Bay, Wiseton, Perdue, Asquith, Borden, 

Grandora, Osler, Langham, Young, Dalmeny, Melfort, 

Nipawin, Annaheim, Tway, Kelvington, Weldon, Unity, 

Wilkie, Naicam, Pleasantdale, Carrot River, St. Brieux, Star 

City, Cudworth, Kenaston, Aberdeen, Viscount, Rosthern, 

Waldheim, Hafford, Prud’homme, St. Benedict, Biggar, Clavet, 

Lake Lenore, Waterhen Lake, Christopher Lake, Blaine Lake, 

La Loche, Meadow Lake, Goodsoil, Rapid View, Speers, 

Kindersley, Hepburn, Turtleford, Stoughton, Ceylon, Senlac, 

Moose Jaw, Radville, Weyburn, Arcola, Gull Lake, Canora, 

Sturgis, Yorkton, Melville, Norquay, LeRoy, Invermay, 

Endeavour, Preeceville, Pilot Butte, Bredenbury, Buchanan, 

Springside, Canora, Rama, Manor, Churchbridge, Calder, 

Willowbrook, Kuroki, Ituna, Theodore, Estevan, Kenosee Lake, 

Langenburg, White City, Bienfait, North Portal, Macoun, 

Frobisher, Bromhead, Beaubier, Alameda, Oxbow, 

Gainsborough, Carievale, Pangman, Meath Park, Shellbrook, 

Spalding, Quill Lake, Humboldt, Spruce Home, White Fox, 

Macdowall, Birch Hills, Muskoday, Hoey, Domremy, Holbein, 

Shell Lake, Leask, Simmie, Val Marie, Cabri, Raymore, 

Rocanville, Kipling, Aylsham, Fort Qu’Appelle, Beatty, 

Eyebrow, Holdfast, Southey, Dilke, Tuxford, Fife Lake, 

Shamrock, Hazenmore, Hallonquist, Rush Lake, Ernfold, 

Frontier, Orkney, Main Centre. 

 

I’m sorry if I missed any. It was a fairly onerous job going 

through them, and I’m sorry if I mispronounced any. I worked 

at the post office. I think I did a pretty good job. I so present, 

Mr. Speaker. 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 

present a petition in support of the middle school for Warman. 

The petition indicates that the school presently was built for 350 

to 400 students and there are now 700 students enrolled in that 

middle school. I understand from the petition that over 70 more 

students are expected to be enrolled in school in Warman in the 

fall of 2010 and that Warman is a fast growing town, and they 

soon expect it to be a city. So the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize the urgency of a middle 

school for the fast growing community of Warman. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all of these petitioners are from Warman. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan’s seniors. And we know that living costs 

including housing is having a major impact on Saskatchewan 

senior citizens and that more affordable housing options would 

significantly help these seniors cope with the cost of living here 

in this province, especially those on fixed incomes. I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s seniors. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the good city of 

Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to rise today to present 

a petition in support of a new long-term care facility in La 

Ronge. With a waiting list of almost one full year for our 

seniors to have to wait to get in there, I’d like to read the prayer 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 



4286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a request that the Sask Party 

government’s actions match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition being circulated by the Saskatchewan Student 

Coalition. The petition is in support of students that are paying 

the highest amount of interest on fixed-rate loans in Canada at 

prime plus 2.5 per cent. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good folks from 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

and present a petition, a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan dealing with yet another water issue. In this 

situation, a government ministry has directed that customers 

may no longer treat non-potable water using methods approved 

by Sask Health and that Furdale residents dealing in good faith 

with SaskWater for over 30 years have paid large amounts for 

their domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. The 

alternative water supply referred to by the government ministry 

is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at 

great cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability 

of water. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to residents of the hamlet of Furdale 

causing great hardship with no suitable alternatives, to 

exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further water service 

cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause under The 

Environment Management and Protection Act, 2002 and 

The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this government 

fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of 

eliminating poverty in Saskatchewan. The petitioners note that 

freedom from poverty is an enshrined human right by the 

United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to social and 

economic security. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners call upon the 

Legislative Assembly to: 

 

. . . cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition has been circulated by the Saskatoon 

Anti-Poverty Coalition and signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford and the town of Battleford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal and 

constitutional rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition today is signed by residents of Swift Current, Val 

Marie, and Saskatoon. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise today, as I have every day throughout session, to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. They 

allude to the shameful $1 billion deficit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to 

move to the prayer of the petition. I recognize the member from 

Regina Rosemont. 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4287 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With reference to the shameful deficit, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Saskatoon, 

Swift Current, and Eyebrow. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of the expansion of the graduate retention program. 

This petition is about fairness and about ensuring we maintain 

the best and the brightest graduating from our universities here 

in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 

order a certain petition regarding the management of provincial 

finances presented on March 16th, 2010 has been reviewed and 

pursuant to rule 16(4) is found to be irregular and therefore 

cannot be read and received. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Monday 

evening, Tourism Saskatchewan presented awards to 

outstanding contributors to our Saskatchewan tourism industry 

at their Awards of Excellence gala in Saskatoon. Awards were 

presented in 18 categories. 

 

The Rookie of the Year Award went to Chief Whitecap Trail, 

the newly named tourism corridor on Highway 219. Awards for 

excellence in service were presented to Debbie Aldous-Ibbotson 

of Tourism Saskatoon and to Tourism Moose Jaw. Awards for 

promotion and marketing went to Shearwater Cruises of 

Saskatoon, the Moose Mountain Tourism Association, the 

Western Development Museum, the Yorkton Film Festival, and 

Auto Clearing Motor Speedway’s NASCAR [National 

Association for Stock Car Auto Racing] race event. 

 

A travel journalism award was won by D. Grant Black for his 

book The Saskatchewan Book of Musts, 101 places everyone 

must see, and the Creative Excellence Award by Suzanne 

Paschall of Saskatoon for her musical accomplishments and her 

recent book The Birth of a Boom: Lives and Legacies of 

Saskatchewan Entrepreneurs. 

 

There were two awards to businesses of the year. The one for 

the business with fewer than 50 employees was the Cypress 

Hills Vineyard and Winery. The one for over 50 employees was 

Prairieland Park of Saskatoon. Other award recipients were 

Claude-Jean Harel, the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve, and 

Canoeski Discovery Company. Congratulations to all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Canadian Red Cross Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March is Canadian 

Red Cross Month. Saskatchewan has a unique history 

connected to the Red Cross. Dr. George Sterling Ryerson, a 

regimental surgeon of the Royal Grenadiers, created a British 

chapter during the 1885 Northwest Rebellion in what would 

eventually become Saskatchewan. 

 

To protect wagons carrying medical supplies, he sewed two 

pieces of red fabric into the shape of a cross on a white piece of 

fabric, creating one of the first Red Cross flags seen in Canada. 

In 1915 Saskatchewan registered nurse and school teacher Miss 

Jean Browne organized the first official Junior Red Cross 

charter in the world at Northgate, Saskatchewan. 

Approximately 400 children assisted adult members during the 

Great War effort. 

 

Today the Red Cross works with governments and 

humanitarian organizations to provide rapid, large-scale, and 

cost-effective community-relevant programs. The Canadian Red 

Cross assists vulnerable communities nationally and 

internationally in cases of natural disasters, debilitating health 

issues, and war. The organization’s support is based on 

volunteers and donated dollars. 

 

The Red Cross has a strong presence in Iraq and Afghanistan 

and has responded to the horrific earthquakes in Haiti and Chile 

in a matter of hours. Locally it provides extensive education and 

first aid and CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation], and for 60 

years has been involved in swimming and water safety 

programs. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in commending both the 

Saskatchewan and the Canadian Red Cross for the wonderful 

work that they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Economy 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the great 



4288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

honour to rise in the Assembly and share more good news about 

Saskatchewan’s economy. It seems like a daily occurrence that 

members can stand and bring forward new examples of our 

province leading the country. I know that it pains the opposition 

to hear good news about our province, but please bear with me. 

 

According to StatsCan, Saskatchewan’s wholesale sales 

registered an amazing 18.4 per cent increase, the highest in the 

nation. This growth is attributed to a diverse sector which 

includes agricultural supplies, recyclable materials, and 

wholesale distributors, just to name a few. 

 

StatsCan has yet to create a category for the production of hot 

air and doom and gloom. But, Mr. Speaker, if it did, I’m sure 

that there would have been a rise since spring of 2009 from the 

NDP caucus office. But I digress. 

 

More good news is a wonderful thing for our province, Mr. 

Speaker. The new numbers show that this is the largest rise in 

wholesale sales in the province of Saskatchewan since July of 

1993. Back in 1993, the singer Meat Loaf would do anything 

for love, but today he won’t vote for that. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of attending 

the 21st annual Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

on Monday. These awards offer an opportunity for all of us to 

celebrate our province’s shining stars in the tourism industry — 

entrepreneurs, employees, volunteers, and businesses that set 

the bar just a bit higher. 

 

Although it is certainly an honour to be nominated, I would like 

to especially recognize the winners of the tourism awards: 

Cypress Hills Vineyard and Winery, with whom I had the 

pleasure of sitting that night; Prairieland Park, Gabriel Dumont 

Institute publishing department, Suzanne Paschall, Claude-Jean 

Harel and Great Excursions, Shearwater River Cruises; the 

Western Development Museum in Moose Jaw, North 

Battleford, Saskatoon, and Yorkton; Moose Mountain Tourism 

Association, Yorkton Film Festival, Auto Clearing Motor 

Speedway’s NASCAR; Canadian Tire series, Chief Whitecap 

Trail, Tourism Moose Jaw, Debbie Aldous-Ibbotson, CanoeSki 

Discovery Company, D. Grant Black, Jim Yuel and Adventure 

Destinations International, and Janet Olsen. 

 

[14:00] 

 

One organization in particular deserves extra accolades. The 

Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve received the Land of the 

Living Skies Award for its innovative efforts to reduce the 

environmental impacts of its operations. But unfortunately it 

sounds like the Sask Party government has cut its funding. 

Recognized for its good work by its peers, this organization 

certainly deserves proper provincial funding. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in congratulating the winners 

of the 2010 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

North Saskatoon Business Awards 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have the 

pleasure to rise and congratulate all the winners of the North 

Saskatoon Business Awards. Last night’s evening event was a 

program meant to honour our own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the awards handed out were as following: Credit 

Union Centre won the Management Quality Award; Horizon, 

the New Direction Award; Regency Advisory Corporation, the 

Job Creation Award; Pronto Airways LP won the Team 

Building Award; Reed Security, the Small Business Award; PSI 

Technologies Inc., the Export Award; Saskatoon Custom 

Powder Coating Corporation, the Green Award. 

 

The Leadership Award went to Handy Group of Companies. 

Travelodge Hotel Saskatoon won the Safe Employer Award. 

The Member of the Year was Bryan McCrea and the Business 

Builder Award went to North Ridge Development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the highlight of the evening was a presentation of 

a Lifetime Achievement Award to Shirley Ryan. Mrs. Ryan was 

the NSBA’s [North Saskatoon Business Association] long-time 

executive director who started her career with the organization 

in 1990 and retired at the end of 2009. Because of hard work 

and dedication from great people like Mrs. Ryan, Saskatoon is 

becoming recognized as one of the top places in Canada to do 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the award 

finalists and the biggest winners of all — the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

St. Patrick’s Day Luck 

 

Mr. Furber: — Today is the day everybody wishes for a bit of 

the luck of the Irish. The Finance minister’s been a little short 

of the green so he’s looking over a four-by-four leaf clover to 

solve his budget problems. That’s bad luck for ordinary people, 

Mr. Speaker. But for the very few that are friends with the 

Saskatchewan Party, the favours are flowing like a swift current 

of green beer on St. Paddy’s Day. 

 

Take Corey O’Soup, Mr. Speaker. After his wearing of the 

green and yellow in the Riversdale by-election, he’s found 

himself appointed superintendent in the Ministry of Education. 

Or Garnet Garven. He used his golden parachute to make a soft 

landing at a half-million dollar think tank of the Sask Party’s 

creation. Or Doug Emsley. He must have a golden horseshoe 

somewhere because he’s got a third of a million dollars just for 

reading a few extra emails. 

 

Not everyone is so lucky, Mr. Speaker. Not front-line health 

care workers looking for fair treatment, not students worried 

about the future of their education, and certainly not 

Saskatchewan families being asked by the Saskatchewan Party 

to pay more and make do with less. But for friends of the Sask 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4289 

Party, Mr. Speaker, there’s always a pot of gold at the end of 

the rainbow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 

well know, today is St. Patrick’s Day, a day where people dress 

up in green, and some people pretend that they are Irish even 

though they are not. However after St. Patrick’s Day is over, 

those people resume their daily lives and no longer to pretend to 

be something that they aren’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately there are some people in this 

province that continue to pretend to be something they are not. 

There are 20 people on the opposite side of this House that 

think they are friends to people in rural Saskatchewan. These 

people pretended for 16 years that they were the friends of those 

folks that live in the rural area, all the while closing down 

hospitals — 52 to be exact. These 20 people . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members to 

give the member the same opportunity to present her statement 

without interference as the members have given other members 

in the Chamber today. Member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these 

people pretended for 16 years that they were friends of rural 

Saskatchewan, all the while closing down hospitals — 52 to be 

exact. These 20 people pretended to be friends to agriculture 

producers in rural Saskatchewan, then tore up GRIP [gross 

revenue insurance program] and never replaced it. These are the 

people that decimated rural infrastructure, highways, hospitals. 

You name it, Mr. Speaker, and they ignored it. 

 

Now in 2010 they are still pretending that they listen to rural 

Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, there is a better chance of 

catching a leprechaun and having him lead you to the pot of 

gold than finding something good that the NDP have done in 

rural Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

School System Funding 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Education. And for weeks now, parents with 

children in the Catholic school system have been calling on the 

government to correct the inequity of funding that exists under 

this government’s administration. And during these months, 

they’ve asked that the government come forward with an 

equitable form of funding so that the children who are in the 

public school and the children in the Catholic school system are 

treated equal. There are people and a number of the trustees 

who are in the gallery today who have indicated to us that, in 

the Regina Catholic school system, the difference in funding 

between the public school and the separate school system is 

$275 per student. 

I want to ask the minister whether or not, whether or not he is 

correcting this inequity in next week’s budget. Will that 

happen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the question that the Leader of the Opposition 

raises is around funding across all of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We had a system in place that existed from 1972 

under the foundation operating grant. It was a system that many 

people indicated was flawed. It had outlived its time, and it was 

a need to develop a new funding formula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing. We’re developing 

a funding formula that will replace the old formula. So, Mr. 

Speaker, right now in this current year, what the Ministry of 

Education did was to take the former budgets of all of the 

school divisions, add to them the cost of the teacher salaries, 

add to them the cost of inflation, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

still using the exact same formula that the school divisions had 

in place until we replace it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister 

and for his information, by his own numbers, the numbers that 

he has shared with the Catholic School Division in Regina, the 

inequity amounts to 2.6 million for Regina alone. So you can 

imagine what that amounts to across the province. The fact is 

the Regina Catholic School states, and I quote, “If this inequity 

continues in 2010 and beyond, the Regina Catholic School 

Division faces the possibility of program and/or staff cuts that 

will affect all students . . .” 

 

Mr. Minister, you can talk all you want about how you’re not 

responsible and how this government isn’t responsible, but the 

fact of the matter is you’ve been in government two and a half 

years, and we want to know what you’re doing to correct this 

inequity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — What this government recognized was 

that under the former NDP government, we had come to the 

point where Saskatchewan taxpayers, Saskatchewan property 

owners were paying the largest amount of tax to fund education. 

That’s reality, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan led the way. We 

knew we had to address that, Mr. Speaker. And in fact . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, and in fact the members 

opposite will realize that we added $241 million to fund 

programs to make sure that the Northern Lights School 

Division, that the school division in Ile-a-la-Crosse, that the 

school division in Creighton, Mr. Speaker — who spend on 

average well over $12,000 per child, Mr. Speaker — is quite a 

bit different than the programs at Regina Catholic where the 

expense there is a little over $9,000 per student, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s reality. 

 

We’ve also, Mr. Speaker, changed the amount of funding. The 



4290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

government used to fund about 51 per cent in ’08-09. Currently, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re projecting that to be at 63 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

minister. And he can yell all he wants, but it doesn’t take away 

from the fact that he is putting the onus and the burden of cost 

on Catholic families in the province of Saskatchewan and that’s 

not fair. That’s not fair. 

 

The question to the minister is: when will you come to your 

senses and make the system equitable? It’s not about cutting 

taxes. We all want our taxes cut. The question is . . . We all 

want lower taxes. There’s no doubt about that. But the question 

is: why the inequity between the public school students and 

Catholic families in this province? Why the inequity? 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, just to remind 

members again that the questions are to be placed to the Chair 

and to the ministry or department, not at individuals. I 

recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, and if the opposition 

allows me, Mr. Speaker, I’ll make sure that my voice is kept 

very quiet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the programs that are delivered cost 

Saskatchewan, in separate school divisions, in public school 

division . . . are different. Mr. Speaker, there is a cost per 

student that is different right across the province. The Prince 

Albert Separate School Division will have a different cost per 

student than does the Regina Separate School Division, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have put in place an advisory committee. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s becoming more and more difficult for the 

opposition to hear me. Mr. Speaker, we have put in place an 

advisory committee. We have put in place technical 

committees. We have sub-committees that involve all of the 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. And they’re bringing those very 

concerns that the Regina Catholic Board has brought up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact right now, the two separate boards in 

Regina and Saskatoon, the two public boards in Regina and 

Saskatoon, the chief financial officers of those four boards are 

getting together to in fact ensure that our ministry is able to 

compare apples to apples because we need to have the same 

kind of reporting period. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, while I don’t agree with the 

minister on most things, he is correct in one thing — that the 

discrepancy in Prince Albert is even greater than Regina. He’s 

right on that. While the discrepancy between public school 

students and Catholic students in Regina is 275, the discrepancy 

in Prince Albert is even greater than that. And that’s a mistake 

and it’s wrong, and the minister should correct himself on this. 

 

I want to ask the minister as well. You have appointed the 

committee, the provincial advisory committee, to deal with new 

funding formula, and you’ve neglected to include any member 

of the separate school, the Catholic school divisions across the 

province. Here again, inequality and inequity. When will you 

correct that part of the formula as well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member raises two 

points. I think the member is suggesting that it wouldn’t matter 

whether you’re the Regina Public Board of Education, the 

Regina Catholic Board of Education, or the Northern Lights 

School Division. Somehow the cost of educating that child in 

any one of those three areas has to be the same. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members of the opposition 

to allow the minister to respond to the question. I recognize the 

Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the question then is, 

from the member opposite, is whether or not the cost of 

educating a student in Prince Albert Separate is the same as 

educating the student in Saskatchewan Rivers because, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the difference. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, what the 

government currently is doing for this fiscal year is we took the 

budgets that had been in place under that government for years 

and years. We took those budgets, and we added to the inflation 

costs. We added to the teacher salary cost. If those budgets, Mr. 

Speaker, if those budgets in fact were wrong in terms of 

funding, they were wrong under the NDP because that’s the 

budgets that we’re using, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to spend the next while addressing 

those concerns. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, in rural school 

divisions we have something called schools of necessity, and 

maybe the Leader of the Opposition would understand that 

term. We fund schools of necessity in rural school divisions. 

We don’t fund schools of necessity in Regina Public or Regina 

Catholic. Regina Public also has programs that the Regina 

Catholics don’t have, Mr. Speaker. And there are different 

costs. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister 

— and I’ll repeat and I’ll try to be brief — the question is, in 

terms of the provincial advisory committee dealing with the 

funding formula, you forgot to include any members of the 

Saskatchewan Catholic School Boards Association. Will you 

correct that? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Again remind the members to 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4291 

place their questions to the Chair. The member . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the Leader of the 

Opposition has spent enough time in the Chamber to know what 

the rules are, whether it was this Speaker or previous Speakers. 

I’d ask the member to follow the rules. I recognize the Minister 

of Education. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Leader of the Opposition has also 

sat on the government benches as a minister and knew what 

parameters ministers had. They could answer directly. They 

could . . . whatever response that applied to the question and to 

their ministry. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If the member from Regina Coronation 

Park wants to allow the question period to roll by and members 

to not answer questions . . . Order. It’s up to you. Do you want 

to have question period, or do you want it to go by? Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the members on 

committees, we ask our stakeholders to appoint members. We 

asked the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, which all 

29 school boards belong to that association. Mr. Speaker, they 

put people on all of our committees that represent all of the 

trustees, all of the students in the province of Saskatchewan. 

We don’t put a person on there to represent the three northern 

boards. There isn’t a person on there to represent the public 

boards and the Catholic boards. Mr. Speaker, we rely on the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association. That’s who is 

putting the people on the committee. 

 

There has been great work on the committee, Mr. Speaker, 

because we’ve had officials from the Saskatchewan school . . . 

School business officials have been very good on the technical 

side to be able to identify that, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 29 

budgets that we have currently to work with are all different, 

Mr. Speaker, so we need to ensure that we can compare the 

same things, so that when we do develop this formula, it’s 

going to last for a long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

First Nations University of Canada 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Advanced Education, 

and it’s regarding the First Nations University of Canada. I 

want to quote from a letter written to The StarPhoenix of March 

11th. It’s entitled “Grandmas support [First Nations 

University],” and it’s from the Intercultural Grandmothers 

Uniting. I quote: 

 

FNUC is a unique creation. Among other things, it has a 

unique linguistics department that teaches the five 

languages of Saskatchewan’s First Nations. That this, the 

first university of its kind in the world, was established in 

Saskatchewan speaks well of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what will it say of our province if that minister 

and that government presides over the closure of this 

university? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update on this most important file. 

First and foremost our focus has been and remains on the 

students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To that end, Mr. Speaker, as we came into office, we were 

asked to ensure that assistance went to that institution. We 

provided $2 million. We took care of the collective bargaining 

agreement that had been outstanding since 2005. We provided 

additional operating funds, Mr. Speaker. And we ensured that 

there was a blueprint put forward in the form of the 

Hanselmann standing report, Mr. Speaker, so that the institution 

could actually proceed on a path to progress, thereby protecting 

the current and future students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of seeing that progress, Mr. Speaker, we saw that 

agreement broken, and we saw backsliding by that institution. 

Mr. Speaker, we are diligently working with other members of 

the working group to ensure that the interests of these students 

are taken care of, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

quote further from the letter from the Intercultural 

Grandmothers Uniting. They say and I quote: 

 

To close the university now is to go back in time. We 

stand to lose the ground that many of our elders and 

academic leaders gave years of their lives to gain. Their 

efforts, along with those of FNUC’s world-class faculty, 

must not be forgotten. 

 

What is that minister saying to those grandmothers, to those 

elders, to those academic leaders at this, the eleventh hour when 

that university is in a very precarious position thanks in large 

part to the actions of that government opposite? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll also quote from a recent 

letter, the Aboriginal Grandmothers Caring for the 

Grandchildren support network. And in that letter, it quotes: 

 

The irresponsibility of some uneducated FSIN 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] chiefs, 

vice-chiefs, and their unqualified collaborators has been 

taking its toll on the First Nations University of Canada 

for the past five years. What a shame nothing was done 



4292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

sooner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it speaks volumes, Mr. Speaker. As we focus on 

the students . . . what I’d like to do, what I’d like to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is highlight in February 2005 when the first crisis 

began, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t more than October 2005 before 

the members opposite stroke a $150,000 cheque of one-time 

funding that allowed the mess to continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can get up on his 

high horse, but you know perhaps I’d like to find out what he 

thinks of the following quotations. This one is from the chair of 

the academic council of the First Nations University, Randy 

Lundy, somebody who’s been intimately involved in this file 

for a number of years. And it’s in response to what the minister 

had to say yesterday about how proposal-based funding is going 

to carry First Nations University forward somehow. He said 

that that approach by that government is “disingenuous at best 

and dishonest at worst.” 

 

The current president of the students’ association, Diane Adams 

says “. . . how can you plan academically for four years degrees 

on a proposal-driven system? That’s absurd.” When is that 

minister going to stop playing games with the First Nations 

University of Canada and come to the table as a helpful partner, 

not as one who wants to hurt the institution? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said, in early 

February after years of controversy — after a vice-president 

was fired, after a CEO [chief executive officer] was fired with 

allegations that trips to Las Vegas and Hawaii and luxurious 

and excessive compensation packages — Mr. Speaker, in early 

February, this government took a decision. That decision was 

not to renew funding. Mr. Speaker, what we did say is those 

dollars are available, Mr. Speaker, through a partnership . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the notion of what the 

member opposite is speaking, that relates to federal funding. 

And I’ll let the federal minister respond. 

 

But this is curious, Mr. Speaker, because on February 4th of 

this year, the new board was appointed, and I want to applaud 

Chief Lonechild with what he’s doing. On February 6th and 7th 

the former president said in an email, in fact the board authority 

was still contested. On February 8th, what did the NDP do? 

They called for restoration of funding. That’s not acceptable 

today and it certainly wasn’t then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the sanctimonious denial of his 

responsibility is appalling in this situation. The students, the 

staff and the faculty know that the minister should be their 

biggest supporter at this point. He should be going to Chuck 

Strahl and insisting that the $7.2 million be reinstated. At a time 

of billion dollar deficits and funding cuts here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, this minister should be working to bring funding 

dollars into the province instead of chasing them away. 

 

My question to the minister: since he’s been so successful in 

chasing away those federal dollars, will he commit to increasing 

provincial dollars in order to cover the difference? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen from the 

members opposite a blank cheque approach, and that is while 

they were in office, just throw money, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly, certainly today, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve said, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’ve said, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve said is 

clear. And that is, our dollars for this institution . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the members are 

aware of the fact that sometimes it’s hard to hear in the galleries 

where there’s a loud, boisterous response. And I’d ask the 

opposition members to allow the ministers to respond, so the 

visitors can hear the response. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen from this 

government is principled and responsible decision making. 

We’ve provided additional support. We offered additional time. 

We offered a blueprint, Mr. Speaker. And what we saw instead, 

we saw backsliding. There is responsibility from this 

government. And that is to the taxpayers of this province who 

have quite rightly said, can we not have a post-secondary 

institution based on the best practices of this province and 

across the country? 

 

And the answer is of course, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 

continue to work with a variety of stakeholders at the working 

group level to see if we can actually work our way through to a 

new model of accountability and also student success, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this minister’s bungling of the file 

has set First Nations University up for failure. He demanded 

that the U of R [University of Regina] and the FNU [First 

Nations University] hammer out the details of an MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] over the weekend. Maybe this 

works for Sask Party budget deliberations, but it does not work 

for such a valuable institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit that his track record is one 

of mixed messages, unrealistic timelines, and a deliberate 

strategy of divide and conquer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very clear, and 

that is we are not going to renew funding to this institution, Mr. 

Speaker, but there is an opportunity for a partnership. We’ve 

said from the start, the nature of that partner is completely 

dependent on First Nations stakeholders. What we’ve said is a 

publicly funded, post-secondary educational institution within 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4293 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly 

what we’ve said. That’s what we’re working towards, Mr. 

Speaker. As far as the nature of the partnership that’s being 

worked out, certainly the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour is there to help foster and facilitate 

that. We’ve been working diligently with a number of partners, 

Mr. Speaker, but in the end, the partnership, that was selected 

by Aboriginal stakeholders . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 

partnership. He says partnership in the public . . . [inaudible] 

. . . to people. And he goes to the media. He says actions. He 

does other things in public, and he does the complete opposite. 

It’s doublespeak, Mr. Speaker. That is not accurate when he 

says he is wanting to engage in a successful partnership. It’s 

clear the minister was in cahoots with the federal government in 

the decision to yank millions from the province. As Randy 

Lundy said yesterday, all they’re trying to do is lay the failure 

of the FNU at someone else’s doorstep, namely the University 

of Regina and Vianne Timmons. Unlike the minister, the U of R 

has been at the table advocating for the students, advocating for 

the First Nations University. 

 

Will the minister admit that he has been in cahoots with 

Minister Strahl from the get-go and now he’s using the U of R 

as a scapegoat? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the policy put forward by 

the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

and the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan has been 

independently formulated. We came out in front of this. We 

said we’re here to protect the students, but we’re also here to 

protect the taxpayers of the province, Mr. Speaker. We said that 

from the start. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we then said, in addition to not renewing, we 

would work through a partnership. We offered that, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve been very active through the working group, 

Mr. Speaker. As far as relationships with Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, 

that dialogue remains open. What we’ve obviously learned is 

there’s a different model coming, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

need a signed, legally binding agreement, Mr. Speaker, in order 

to move forward, and I await that arrival. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister stands in the 

Assembly. He goes in a scrum and spins a story about 

partnership and good faith negotiations, Mr. Speaker. But when 

you get out into the community, Mr. Speaker, when you speak 

with student groups, when you speak with individuals on the 

campus, Mr. Speaker, when you speak with individuals that 

want the best for this institution and want to see success in the 

years going ahead, they tell a very different story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

Will the minister just finally admit, Mr. Speaker, that he’s 

forcing Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan students to pay for 

this government’s own incompetence and their own desire to 

make up for budget shortfalls? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a very 

proud track record of post-secondary education, a vision that 

precedes the creation of this province. Premier Haultain actually 

was one of the first ones to make sure that post-secondary 

education was going to be a priority. And we’ve seen through 

the ages, Mr. Speaker, some of the best practices and examples, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan there are more than 

13,000 First Nations and Métis students in a variety of 

programs and institutions. Mr. Speaker, this institution has 

struggled since 2005, and when it comes to pointing fingers 

there will be fingers plenty to point in all directions, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why we’re working diligently on behalf of the 

students to ensure, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the students (a) 

have an opportunity to finish this academic term; (b) make it 

through the summer; and if a partnership can be penned, Mr. 

Speaker, then to continue on in this form or in others that are 

accessible across the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

New Provincial Cultural Policy 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to make a significant announcement that reflects who 

we are as a people and as a province. After intensive period of 

research, dialogue, and discussion, I am proud to announce 

Saskatchewan’s first cultural policy in more than 25 years. 

 

Culture is a fundamental cornerstone of our Saskatchewan 

quality of life. It plays a great role in growing our economy and 

building pride in our communities. Culture shapes our identity 

and articulates our dreams. A vibrant culture, Mr. Speaker, 

attracts talented and creative people, promotes business 

development, spurs population growth, and revitalizes our 

communities, making them destination points for citizens and 

tourists and magnets for business. Mr. Speaker, we find talent, 

creativity, and innovation in those who work in the culture 

sector. 

 

Current sociological research tells us that these creative 

qualities affecting the quality of life in our communities serves 

to attract newcomers as much as economic factors. For that 

reason we’ve titled our new plan Pride of Saskatchewan: A 

Policy Where Culture, Community and Commerce Meet. 

 

Pride of Saskatchewan has a plan to foster the development of a 

vibrant culture sector. It is a framework that encourages 

collaboration, guides our decision making, and recognizes that 

culture is the heart and soul of this great province. It is a 

foundation for working together to foster artistic excellence, 



4294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

creative expression, shared stewardship, access and 

engagement, community capacity, and commercial viability. 

 

Pride of Saskatchewan is based on extensive dialogue including 

a discussion paper, two online surveys, and fourteen 

face-to-face dialogue sessions that were held across the 

province. Hundreds of people participated, including strong 

representation from First Nations and Métis communities, and I 

want to thank all of those involved who participated in the 

process. 

 

As we move into the implementation phase, my ministry will be 

working with other ministries, communities, and organizations 

to use the policy as a planning tool. Implementation will require 

the commitment, creativity, and collaboration of all those 

involved in the sector. Pride of Saskatchewan will guide us 

through more challenging economic times and ensure that we 

are ready to grow as our economy strengthens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have listened and we have acted. With this 

policy we have created a blueprint that will benefit future 

generations and all of us who call this beautiful province home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first I 

want to say thanks to Minister Duncan for sending over your 

statement prior to sitting here. That was very helpful. 

 

I couldn’t agree with Minister Duncan more that a vibrant 

culture attracts talented and creative people, promotes business 

development, spurs population growth, and revitalizes our 

communities, and that we find talent, creativity, and innovation 

in those who work in the cultural centre. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t use Duncan’s name. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I’m sorry. Anyway there’s a couple things I 

just want to flag here in thinking about . . . I think that this is 

great that we’re moving forward with this cultural policy, but 

we need to keep in mind that this was referred to as a 

foundation for working together to foster artistic excellence. So 

a foundation is great, but you need to have financial 

commitment. So I do have some concerns that you have words, 

but you don’t have financial commitment. So we’ll be making 

sure that, or watching to see that, this isn’t just lip service. 

 

As well there’s some concerns in the arts community and 

cultural community, having met with many, many stakeholders 

who are concerned about this upcoming budget and potential 

funding cuts, so I hope that that doesn’t have negative impact 

on here. 

 

As well we have to keep in mind that we have a great system 

here in Saskatchewan where we’ve invented arm’s-length 

system where we fund organizations and there’s no political 

interference. So I trust that this new model doesn’t impact that. 

And again I haven’t seen the policy yet so I don’t know 

precisely what it includes, but broad motherhood statements 

don’t help in situations where artists still earn half the median 

income. So I just want to keep those things in mind, but I think 

it’s definitely a step in the right direction. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cannington on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cannington can state his 

point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during question period when the Deputy Premier was on his 

feet, the Leader of the Official Opposition was hollering from 

his feet that the minister should be truthful, be truthful, Mr. 

Speaker, implying that the minister was not being truthful. 

You’re not allowed to impugn a member’s honour and you’re 

not allowed to do indirectly what you cannot do directly, Mr. 

Speaker. I ask that the Leader of the Opposition withdraw those 

remarks and apologize unequivocally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — If I said anything in question period to 

upset or impugn the minister, I apologize for it. There was no 

intent to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, to 

request leave of the Assembly to move a motion under rule 59. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave to move a motion under rule 59. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 752 through 769. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 752 through 769 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 770 through 792. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 770 through 792 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4295 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 121 — The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased this afternoon to enter into the debate on the 

environmental protection Act, Bill No. 121. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important Bill to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The citizens of our province take the 

environment very, very seriously. They are watching the 

government and watching, quite frankly, governments across 

Canada to see how seriously governments are dealing with the 

issue of environmental protection in our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, pardon me, this Bill is a 

very broad-based Bill that’s dealing with the clean air and the 

environmental management and the protection of 2002, but it 

also encompasses the litter Act and the state of the 

environmental report and consequential amendments as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government has promised to stabilize 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 and it didn’t. The 

government said, when they were coming into power, that they 

would stabilize the greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re now in 2010. We have seen no direct action by 

this government to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was nice to say in an election platform and nice 

to say as they were moving to convince people of this province 

that they should be the government, that they would in fact 

stabilize greenhouse gas emissions in the province of 

Saskatchewan, not at some point in the future, but by 2010, Mr. 

Speaker, and they simply haven’t done it. 

 

This is a government that has promised the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan in its last election platform that it 

would in fact implement the targets that were put forward by 

the previous NDP government, targets that would have seen the 

reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. But, Mr. Speaker, they 

later admitted that they would break that promise. 

 

They told the people of the province of Saskatchewan going 

into the last election that they would meet the targets put 

forward by the previous government, that they were going to be 

as good as environmental stewards for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan as the previous government. And in 

fact they were going to be, not just as good, Mr. Speaker, but 

they were actually going to implement the exact targets of the 

previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was a promise that many in the environmental 

community in the province of Saskatchewan wanted to hear. 

They wanted to hear an environmental package, an 

environmental promise, an environmental direction from the 

Sask Party government if they were in fact going to be the 

government. And they heard it. And they believe they heard 

something that they could work with and live with, that they 

would in fact live up to the targets and the promise of the 

previous government. Mr. Speaker, the reality was not the same 

as the promise. The reality wasn’t the same as the promise, Mr. 

Speaker, and in fact the reality was much different. 

 

So now we are in 2010. The government said they would 

stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by the year 2010. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re now in 2010. We aren’t seeing action on behalf 

of the government. We’re not seeing a plan that in fact would 

reduce the growing greenhouse gas emissions in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, what are we seeing? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re seeing a piece of legislation that doesn’t do 

anything. Mr. Speaker, it is a piece of legislation, but it’s the 

actions that come from the legislation that in fact would result 

in reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we have a government that was serious about 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, they could’ve already 

started to implement strategies and to curb the growth of 

greenhouse gas emissions in our province, to show a path which 

the citizens of our province could in fact get behind, a path that 

we could follow towards stabilizing the growth of greenhouse 

emissions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what are we seeing? We aren’t today seeing anything but a 

piece of paper that in fact doesn’t do anything for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. We haven’t seen a reduction in 

greenhouse gas emissions. We haven’t seen a stabilization of 

greenhouse gas emissions. So, Mr. Speaker, what is the true 

plan of the Saskatchewan Party? What is the true plan of the 

government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were quick to jump on what was seen to be at 

the time a popular promise by the former government to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions — a target that although many would 

say was not a bold initiative, that still had a great deal to be 

desired — but nonetheless a target with a plan and with money 

attached to the plan, some $350 million attached to a plan to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new government, the Sask Party during their 

election said, look we will in fact meet those targets. And they 

told the people of the province of Saskatchewan, as they went 

around from the election in 2007, that they would stand behind 

the targets of the current government and they would meet 

those targets, Mr. Speaker. And people believed them, Mr. 

Speaker, people believed them. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And what do we see today, Mr. Speaker? We see a reduction in 

those targets. We have a government who says that their 

original promise can’t be met and won’t be met. Mr. Speaker, 

we see a government who, we believe, never had any intention 

of meeting those targets, never had any intention of stabilizing 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2010, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here we are, two and a half years later in 2010, Mr. 

Speaker, and reality is here. We haven’t seen the stabilization of 

greenhouse gas emissions, but we’re finally seeing a Bill 

talking about the issue of our environment. Mr. Speaker, we see 



4296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

a government instead that’s, quite frankly, ragging the puck — 

taking its time, trying to stall any implementation of 

environmental protection. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s shameful 

when you will go and run an election campaign saying that you 

will meet specific targets. They weren’t bold or creative. They 

didn’t say that they would do better than the previous 

government, all they said is they would accept those targets and 

they would meet those targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just days after the election they said it wasn’t 

possible, and in fact those targets were not going to be their 

targets. Mr. Speaker, in order to do that in the manner in which 

this government did, Mr. Speaker, I think it becomes obvious to 

many in the public that that was a good election promise, Mr. 

Speaker, but it was no more than that. Mr. Speaker, now two 

and a half years later as we examine what the government’s 

done on this very issue, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s one situation 

where many people in this province look upon it with 

disappointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the environment’s important to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. It’s important to parents. It’s 

important to grandparents. It’s important to children because the 

decisions and changes we make today are going to impact the 

world we live in in the future. And, Mr. Speaker, as a parent 

and a grandparent, I have a grave concern for the world in 

which my grandchildren will have the opportunity to live in, the 

environment in which they will have to grow up in, Mr. 

Speaker, the types of terrain that will be left for them to enjoy, 

whether we’ll have the forests and the great prairies that we 

have today, or as a result of environment change, they will have 

to live in a much different world. Perhaps their water and other 

valuable resources that you need to have a quality of life may be 

in much greater demand or, Mr. Speaker, much less quality. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know what the new environmental 

code that the legislation talks about will look like. It sounds like 

an intriguing idea. As the government notes, there are other 

examples like the National Building Code. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, without a greater and more information on 

this particular piece of legislation, it’s like buying a farm that 

you never saw or buying a home which you never walked 

through. And, Mr. Speaker, so why should the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, after hearing the government say 

that they were going to accept the targets of a previous 

government, we’re going to undertake to stop the growth of 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 — and they’ve done neither, 

Mr. Speaker — why would we believe that some code that 

they’re going to bring forward for the protection of our 

environment is in fact going to enhance the protection of our 

environment? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is asking us to pass a new 

environmental management protection Act without knowing 

what the new minimum standards will be, without telling us 

what they will be. Who’s going to write these? What criteria are 

they going to use? Who are they going to consult with? What 

do they want to accomplish with their targets? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, without all this type of information being 

provided to us, what are we actually agreeing to? What would 

we be agreeing to without knowing what they want to 

accomplish, what their targets are, what their goals are, what the 

code will say? Without that very detailed information, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re asking us to support an environmental 

protection Act without substance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And without that substance, Mr. Speaker, how do we know that 

the new environmental protection management Act will in fact 

protect anything? How do we know that it will provide a 

greener and brighter environment for our children and 

grandchildren — the things that which we all desire to have? 

 

The government claims they’ll be setting new baselines and that 

there’ll be emission requirements for major industrial emitters 

and a number of so-called new air management standards and 

systems that they’re going to require. But they don’t give you 

any detail. They simply want you to buy that house or that farm 

without ever seeing it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I don’t think many of us in this Assembly would buy a 

home without going through it, without seeing what it 

contained, without understanding what the flaws and the things 

that need to be improved in that home would be, Mr. Speaker. 

But that’s what they’re doing with this piece of legislation. 

They’re asking us to buy new standards and buy into new 

standards and new codes without identifying what they are, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

A government that would introduce climate change legislation 

that contains no year when greenhouse gases will be stabilized, 

no baseline year against which reductions of greenhouse gases 

can be measured, and no greenhouse gas reduction targets in the 

Bill itself, Mr. Speaker — so what are we buying? Why are we 

going to support or buy into a piece of environmental 

legislation that does nothing to protect the environment, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also anticipates a number of things like industry 

self-regulation, Mr. Speaker. Industry needs to be consulted, 

needs to be part of decisions about strategies and technologies 

to help establish a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. But 

first you have to stabilize them before you can even talk about 

reducing them, Mr. Speaker. But the regulator, the agency 

which in fact enforces the legislation needs to be independent 

from the industry itself, Mr. Speaker, so that it’s not seen as a 

responsibility of the very perpetrators of the environmental 

damage to have to go and regulate itself. 

 

This was a principle that although, Mr. Speaker, industry may 

or may not take seriously their own self-regulation, Mr. Speaker 

. . . In some cases they may but some they may not. But in cases 

where they may not, Mr. Speaker, who’s watching over them to 

ensure that they . . . to catch and to make sure that they do 

adhere to those standards put forward, Mr. Speaker? And if you 

have a total self-regulation model, Mr. Speaker, that does very, 

very little to help the environmental protection in our province. 

 

There is merit in the government’s proposal, however, to 

establish a series of baseline objectives that industry would be 

required to meet. But we need to know what those baseline 

objectives are. We need to know what standards are going to be 

established before you know if this is going to be good 

legislation, whether rigorous enough to be meaningful in some 

way, or they’re simply there, simply there, Mr. Speaker, so that 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4297 

they can say that they have some baseline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the principle is good but without some detail, 

some meat to it, Mr. Speaker, it has very little or no meaning. 

But what the government is trying to do here is to hand off the 

responsibility of protecting our environment to a third party, to 

industry. And the protection of the environment is something 

that is very, very important to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and shouldn’t be handed to third party private 

interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The protection of our environment needs to remain within the 

control of government because, Mr. Speaker, the environment is 

about the air in which we breathe, the earth or the land in which 

we live, Mr. Speaker, the water which we drink. Mr. Speaker, 

those are important things to the very sustainability of life on 

our planet, Mr. Speaker. And so the environment is so very 

important to be protected that it needs to have the government 

taking the major responsibility in protecting that environment, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one recommendation in February of 2009 reported 

by Clifton Associates suggested that, for example, permits to 

construct facilities would be discontinued except in certain 

extraordinary cases. So, Mr. Speaker, this would be a 

significant departure from past practice and the implications are 

potentially very troubling, particularly given the current 

government’s track record on environmental issues. 

 

The Clifton report noted, and I will quote that, “Saskatchewan 

does not have . . . [the current staff] capacity or capability to 

monitor and regulate the current industry and oversee the social 

license,” and notes that the Environment ministry is short of 

certain important skill sets of engineers, hydrogeologists, water 

quality and air quality specialists, toxicologists, epidemiologists 

and risk assessment specialists in order to properly be able to 

assess the risk to the environment by industry. In other words, 

the Ministry of the Environment doesn’t have the people to do 

the job. 

 

So what’s this government doing? Instead of ensuring that the 

Department of Environment has the people to do the job, 

they’re cutting back and reducing the number of civil servants 

in the province. They’re putting our environment at greater risk, 

Mr. Speaker. They are deciding that these issues like 

environmental protection aren’t important enough to put new 

resources into, Mr. Speaker. Instead they’re saying, well we’ll 

develop a self-regulatory model that in fact pushes out the 

responsibility away from government into industry itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem with that is, what requires industry to 

have those same specialists? What requires businesses to have 

specialists to ensure that in fact what they’re doing meets those 

standards? Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t say. How do we know that 

there will in fact be an assessment of the various industries and 

businesses, whether or not they’re meeting those standards? 

Whether or not there are changes in the air quality or water 

quality and what impact does that have on the air we breathe, 

Mr. Speaker, or the water we drink. And what impact does it 

have on the aquifer? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are all very important questions that 

without somebody out there with the responsibility to examine, 

to regulate, and to protect we have no idea what the future 

outcomes will be for our children and grandchildren. Not to 

mention, Mr. Speaker, the actual outcomes could be more 

catastrophic in nature than that and may impact us in this 

lifetime. 

 

Many of us in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, think many of these 

things may not have an impact well beyond our time here in this 

House or well beyond maybe our time on this Earth. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we all have family. We all have children and 

grandchildren, and the decisions we make today will impact the 

quality of their lives. And that’s very important that we consider 

that the decisions we make today are going to impact the quality 

of our children, the quality of our grandchildren and their 

children, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And hopefully many of us will have the opportunity to live long 

enough to see our great-grandchildren and, Mr. Speaker, be able 

to tell them that we took the steps today in 2010 to protect our 

environment, to ensure that they would have a world in which 

to live, a province in which to live that had a healthy 

environment, that had adequate protection laws in place, 

adequate regulation to ensure the air quality, Mr. Speaker. To 

ensure the water quality, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we’re not 

contaminating our great province at a rate greater than 

necessary, Mr. Speaker, that the ozone layer isn’t depleting 

faster than necessary, that we took steps today to deal with 

greenhouse gas emissions, whether it’s to reduce the actual 

emissions in a meaningful way or even to stop the progress of 

increasing greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s fairly well known that 

Saskatchewan is one of the larger emitters of greenhouse gas 

emissions because we use coal-generated electricity. As we 

know, coal generation electrical plants are huge emitters of 

greenhouse gases. Mr. Speaker, what steps are we taking today 

to try to reduce that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2005 and ’06, the previous government . . . 

Between 2000, pardon me, and 2006, the previous government 

took great steps to increase and develop wind-generated 

electricity in the province of Saskatchewan. Since then we 

haven’t seen any new wind power generation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s well known that you can increase the demand on 

your baseload up to about 12 per cent from wind power 

generation, Mr. Speaker. Today we’re at about 4. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can do significantly more. We need to do 

significantly more. We need to increase renewable energy 

utilization, Mr. Speaker, and electrical generation in the 

province of Saskatchewan so that any new generation that we 

require isn’t increasing the amount of greenhouse gas emissions 

that we’re putting forward in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Ministry of the Environment doesn’t have 

the people to do the job, they need to hire the people to do the 

job. They need to hire the people with the specific skills in 

order to ensure that we have environmental regulation in our 

province that allows our province to move forward, protecting 

the environment for future generations, for our children and 

grandchildren. Mr. Speaker, the Department of the 

Environment, the Ministry of Environment, needs to develop a 

long-term relationship with the private sector who would help 



4298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

the government to keep capacity if they can’t in fact do it 

themselves. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The preferred option would always be to ensure that the 

regulators are in fact free of outside interference, Mr. Speaker, 

work for the government of the day and, Mr. Speaker, don’t 

have to rely on being responsible to a private company which 

they work for. That would be ideal, but that may not be possible 

in all cases, Mr. Speaker. But at least if it isn’t possible, let’s 

develop the expertise within companies in the province of 

Saskatchewan to ensure that in fact we can deliver 

environmental protection. We can’t afford to have baseline 

requirements being put forward, Mr. Speaker, that don’t help 

sustain our environment, don’t help move forward the 

environmental protection of our province for the people of the 

province and future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for a minute about the environment 

of Saskatchewan and what proponents think about our needs as 

a province to move forward with environmental protection, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we read today in the chamber of 

commerce Action! magazine put forward by the chamber of 

commerce that the chamber of commerce is very supportive of 

the new results-based regulatory environmental model put 

forward by the department. 

 

However with that support comes the need for two-way 

dialogue with clarity on the government’s new vision. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, what’s being said even by the chamber of 

commerce is they don’t understand. They welcome the 

movement of the work out of the Department of the 

Environment into the private sector, Mr. Speaker. But they also, 

Mr. Speaker, say that there needs to be dialogue because they’re 

not clear what the vision of the province of Saskatchewan is, of 

the Government of Saskatchewan is, Mr. Speaker. So even 

those who are proponents to do away with the current 

regulatory environment, which is done through the Ministry of 

the Environment, Mr. Speaker, even those proponents who are 

in favour of pushing that work out into the private sector say 

they don’t have any idea what the government would like to 

accomplish. 

 

They go on to say that: 

 

Effective change management involves dynamic and strong 

communication with stakeholders. In business, 

communicating changes to external clients is critical to a 

seamless . . . transition both for the business and its clients. 

 

However it seems that the Saskatchewan Ministry of 

Environment has missed the boat on this . . . [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So even the proponents who want to see the change are saying 

the Ministry of the Environment has totally missed it. They 

don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They missed the 

boat, Mr. Speaker, so they’re not even on the lake. They’re in 

swimming, Mr. Speaker, and they’re in over their heads and 

they aren’t doing very well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem with that analogy is this. It’s 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan who ultimately pay 

a price for the government — this government or for that matter 

any government — not taking the time to fully understand the 

environmental standards that they need to bring forward to 

accomplish the results that the people of this province want to 

see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions is 

important to the people of this province. We have seen a 

deterioration in air quality and water quality in parts of the 

North as a result of particles and airborne particles being blown 

from the tar sands in northern Alberta into the waterways of 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen a 

deterioration in the air quality in parts of northern 

Saskatchewan. We’ve seen a deterioration in water quality, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what are we doing to monitor that? And what are we doing 

to ensure that those who are causing that pollution are paying 

for that pollution? And what steps are being forced upon them 

to reduce that pollution, Mr. Speaker, that is actually coming 

from sources in other provinces that gets up into the wind, Mr. 

Speaker, the trade winds, and blows it across, Mr. Speaker, into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the effect is on northern communities, northern waterways. 

It affects both the hunting and fishing industries in northern 

Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s being done by Alberta 

companies. They may pay compensation to the Alberta 

government, but certainly none of that compensation is coming 

to where the end result is occurring, which is within the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we need to spend some time examining what 

was intended by the government to deal with this particular 

problem within our communities, within our province, Mr. 

Speaker. But there’s not clarity within the Bill. It talks about 

targets. It talks about a new code. It talks about new baselines, 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s not there. They aren’t there. So without 

those targets, without those new baselines, Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated earlier, it’s like buying a house without going through 

it. 

 

It’s about buying a direction without any substance, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s like being said, walk 60 paces ahead, and you’re 

further ahead, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s like 

wandering around in circles, Mr. Speaker, not knowing where 

you’re going to end up. So, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of 

legislation may talk about providing new direction for the 

Ministry of the Environment, may talk about providing new 

codes and standards, Mr. Speaker. But without those codes and 

standards being brought forward, Mr. Speaker, to buy a new 

direction that’s going to see industry self-regulation, see a 

reduction in government involvement in the protection of our 

environment, I think it’s quite serious, Mr. Speaker. What it’s 

doing is off-loading the responsibility of government to its 

citizens and to the province, Mr. Speaker, to private third party 

interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, self-regulatory regimes have worked in some 

jurisdictions on items other than the environment. But, Mr. 

Speaker, our environment — which controls the air we breathe, 

the water we drink, and the land in which we live — is 

something far more important than many, many other 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4299 

self-regulated issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to say that all businesses 

would not be responsible corporate citizens because we all 

know that many, many of the businesses in Saskatchewan — if 

not, I would say, probably the vast majority — would be good 

corporate citizens and live up to their responsibilities in the 

issue of industry self-regulation. But, Mr. Speaker, without the 

government being there to be examining whether or not 

industry is in fact living up to its commitments, Mr. Speaker, 

how do we know? 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, it only takes one bad apple in a bag 

to cause significant problems for the entire bag of apples, Mr. 

Speaker, over time. And, Mr. Speaker, in that analogy it only 

costs or takes one bad apple, Mr. Speaker, to cause significant 

environmental damage if left unchecked for any period of time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it becomes even more important for us to 

ensure that as we examine environmental protection legislation, 

we’re not only examining it from our immediate needs, what 

we’d want to see today, but also, Mr. Speaker, what we’d want 

to see for our children and grandchildren and what we would 

actually want to see for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many of the members of this Assembly are parents, if not all 

members of this Assembly are parents and grandparents and 

have a keen interest in seeing that our children, grandchildren, 

the world in which they get to grow up has the opportunities 

that we have today, if not better opportunities, to go and visit a 

provincial park where you can in fact, Mr. Speaker, wander on 

trails through the pine forest, Mr. Speaker. Or visit, Mr. 

Speaker, the rolling plains of southern Saskatchewan — be able 

to drink the water, be able to enjoy the natural environment of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. A good example one of my 

colleagues wants to remind me of is to be able to eat the fish 

right out of the lake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those are all important things that we’ve all had the 

opportunity to enjoy. I know myself when I had the opportunity 

with one of my now-colleagues to, in northern Saskatchewan, to 

go fishing and catch a number of fish on a creek, a river just off 

Dillon, Saskatchewan, we had a great time. Caught some fish, 

had the opportunity to eat the fish, Mr. Speaker. And those are 

the opportunities that you remember that we’d like to have 

available for our children and grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. So 

we have to be very careful that the steps we take today to 

protect our environment actually is going to protect our 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill we have before us has no targets. It 

doesn’t have baselines for us to criticize, to question, to talk 

about, Mr. Speaker. It in fact misses the target, Mr. Speaker, I 

guess to put it bluntly, in showing us what type of direction the 

government will take in order to protect the environment 

moving forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that takes me back to a point that I started 

with originally. During the last provincial election, 2007, or 

lead-up to the election on November 7th, 2007, the members of 

the current government went and told the people of 

Saskatchewan that they would live by the environmental 

emission reduction targets put forward by the previous 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, those were targets that were at 

the time far more progressive than anything the government has 

said today. But before the election, those were their targets too. 

They were going to live up to the targets of the previous 

government, and they were going to put a plan forward in order 

to meet those targets, Mr. Speaker. In fact they were going to 

stabilize greenhouse gas emissions in the province of 

Saskatchewan by 2010. 

 

Well flash forward to 2010, as I stand here now in the 

legislature in the year 2010. What have we seen, Mr. Speaker? 

I’ve seen them reduce their targets, saying no. A few days after 

they got elected, no we can’t meet those targets, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re not going to attempt to meet those targets. And the 

outcome of that is going to be, Mr. Speaker, a scenario here 

where now we have a new piece of legislation forward, we still 

don’t have targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we pressured the government about not 

keeping their commitment to those targets, we didn’t even have 

the government actually attempt to answer the questions. They 

sent out officials from their ministries to answer the questions 

because, Mr. Speaker, we had ministers who didn’t know what 

they wanted to say. We had ministers who didn’t have, Mr. 

Speaker, any idea what their new targets would be. 

 

And then a year and a half later, Mr. Speaker, we get a piece of 

legislation talking about the environmental management 

protection Act; a new environmental management protection 

Act, Mr. Speaker. No targets in it. No stabilization of 

greenhouse gas emissions. All it talks about industry 

self-regulation and control of the environmental protection 

targets, Mr. Speaker, that may or may not be a good idea, Mr. 

Speaker. But the minister hasn’t outlined for us, with any 

clarity, what she intends to do. What her new environmental 

code will be, Mr. Speaker. What her baseline for monitoring 

emissions will be, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s like buying that house we never walked through. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are people, there are people who may 

look at a picture of a house and say, oh I want that house, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m going to pay for it regardless. In fact I think 

that’s exactly what happened with the Premier when he bought 

a house in Arizona, Mr. Speaker. He saw a picture of a house 

and he bought it because, Mr. Speaker, it was listed for 

$99,000. And he paid 105,000 for it, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

why you’d do that. But, Mr. Speaker, the majority of people 

won’t do that. The majority of people, Mr. Speaker, want to 

walk in, they want to see it, and they want to know exactly 

what’s contained within that house, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

may buy a $99,000 house for $105,000. Okay. Worth $69,000 

today, Mr. Speaker. But the majority of the people wouldn’t. 

 

And that’s the same with an environmental protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have before me today. Why would I buy this 

without having any of the content that’s necessary for me to 

understand what it’ll do for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, I need to understand what this Bill 

is about before I can accept it. Mr. Speaker, I don’t have that. 

The people of Saskatchewan don’t have that information. If we 

had that information, we could actually analyze, Mr. Speaker, 

what’s intended. But without it, Mr. Speaker, we can’t do that. 

 



4300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wish the minister had included her new 

environmental code, her new baseline predictions in her 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not there. And without it, I 

don’t know, how do I buy the house? I can’t buy the house. 

How do I buy the legislation? It’s analogy, Mr. Speaker, but I 

think it’s really a practical analogy that most people in this 

province would understand. 

 

I wouldn’t buy a house by driving by it or looking at a picture, 

so why would I buy a very important piece of environmental 

legislation without knowing what the substance of it is? What it 

contains. What it’s designed to do. What it can do. What it can’t 

do, Mr. Speaker. Whether the windows leak, Mr. Speaker, or 

whether the air will get better. As a result of this legislation, the 

air quality will improve. 

 

Without that very important information, Mr. Speaker, why 

would I in fact, why would I in fact decide to move forward 

with this, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues I think want to take 

an opportunity to speak about this and many, many other pieces 

of legislation. But before I wrap up, I probably have 15 or 20 

more minutes, I’d like to talk about the environment in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and just to recap some 

of the very, very important things to the people of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my children, my grandchildren, and the children 

and grandchildren of my colleagues on both sides of the House 

care about the environment. They may not understand why they 

care about the environment today because it’s very difficult for 

a child to tell you why they care about the environment, Mr. 

Speaker. But they love to swim in the lakes you go visit, Mr. 

Speaker. They love to go camping and walk through the pristine 

forests of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They love to 

see the wild elk and moose and deer, Mr. Speaker. They love to 

see the beaver dams, Mr. Speaker, across the province as they 

walk along the creeks in either southern Saskatchewan and 

across southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They love to see 

those beaver dams. They love to see the beavers splashing in 

the water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they love the wildlife. They love the trees, and 

they love the water to swim in, Mr. Speaker. They know they 

like that. Now do they know that that’s part of the environment 

that needs to be protected by their government and by the 

leaders of the province of Saskatchewan? I would say that they 

probably don’t understand in detail that that’s what needs to be 

protected, Mr. Speaker. But nonetheless they know it’s 

important. They know that they want to see that wildlife. They 

know that they like to see deer. They like to see antelope in 

southern Saskatchewan. They go to northern Saskatchewan 

where into the forest you love to see the moose, and you love to 

see, Mr. Speaker, the bears. And you know children are 

fascinated by the things that they don’t get to see everyday in 

the wild, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And sometimes it’s as simple as a gopher in the prairie field, 

Mr. Speaker. Other times it’s something that you see maybe 

once or twice in a lifetime like a cougar or something in 

Saskatchewan, or a wolf, Mr. Speaker. Some children just 

absolutely love to see bears. But, Mr. Speaker, they exist today 

in our environment because there’s been steps taken by people 

to try to protect those species, and to allow them to move 

forward within the province of Saskatchewan, and to have an 

environment in which they can both live and thrive. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we also want to ensure that the air in which 

we breathe isn’t filled with particles and pollutants that make it 

more difficult for us to breathe, the things that could actually 

shorten your lifespan without you never knowing is shortening 

your lifespan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So governments have an obligation to protect the air quality in 

our province to ensure that the quality of the air we breathe in 

fact enhances our ability to live, Mr. Speaker. Governments are 

elected to be responsible to the people of Saskatchewan to 

ensure that we look to provide an environment which includes 

air quality, water quality in the land in which we live, which 

enhances our lives, is not a detriment to our lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people live off the land as well, and they 

have the opportunity to fish and trap, Mr. Speaker. Many of us 

eat the fish that are caught by commercial fishermen in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Many people eat the wild meat that 

comes from the moose and elk and deer in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. And we want to see them continue to flourish. 

 

We want to see an abundance of growth within the various 

species in our province so that we can continue to thrive and 

that those who make their living and eat from these sources, Mr. 

Speaker, have the opportunity to do that for many generations 

to come. Because many times, Mr. Speaker, it’s a way of life as 

much as it is any type of recreational activity. Many families 

use the meat that they catch, the fish that they . . . pardon me, 

the fish that they catch, the meat that they hunt, Mr. Speaker, in 

order to sustain life. They use it as the fundamental staples of 

their diet, Mr. Speaker. And for that, we need to have an 

environment, Mr. Speaker, that in fact provides for the 

continued growth of these species in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s my responsibility, it’s a responsibility of 

all members of this Assembly to continue to promote . . . It’s 

our obligation to continue to ensure that our environment is 

protected, that we take what steps are necessary to protect the 

quality of our water, the aquifers in which our water flow, Mr. 

Speaker, the lakes and streams and rivers which our water flows 

through, Mr. Speaker, to be as free of contaminants as possible, 

Mr. Speaker, so that future generations can also drink that 

water, and so that our children and grandchildren have the 

opportunity to have clean water that doesn’t have to be treated 

with more chemicals and artificially made pure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The best possible scenario is that you can drink the water from 

the river, from the lake without any form of purification, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, if we can maintain that in our 

northern communities and across the province for generations 

to come, Mr. Speaker, we are working to protect our 

environment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is important to consider that many people 

in our province look at our environment differently. Those who 

are from northern Saskatchewan may hunt and trap as a way of 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4301 

life. They may in fact feed their family as a result of the income 

made from trapping, Mr. Speaker. I am led to believe that in the 

last while we’ve seen the price of fur as an example go up, and 

so trappers in northern Saskatchewan in fact would have the 

opportunity to enhance their economic well-being as a result of 

having a very vibrant environment, Mr. Speaker, that needs to 

be protected by those of us who are entrusted with that 

responsibility as part of our obligations as members of this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have taken some time to talk about the 

environment and what is our responsibility to the people of this 

province and what our responsibility is to ourselves, to our 

colleagues, to our families, Mr. Speaker, but also to future 

generations, Mr. Speaker. We need to consider all legislation as 

it comes through this Assembly from the point of view as what 

impact does it have on people, Mr. Speaker? Not just industry, 

but what impact does it have on people? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I begin to conclude my remarks, I would 

like to say that over the last hour or so I have had the 

opportunity to talk about the importance of our environment to 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but I haven’t had the 

time I will need to spend on considering this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

So at a later date I’d probably like to once again join in this 

debate and talk about this Bill again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to move adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 121, The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 121. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 123 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 123 — The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

back again today by popular demand. And once again, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter into the 

debate in this House, and to be able to participate particularly in 

this debate, and to do so on behalf of the fine folks in Regina 

Northeast, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s fair to say that all of us 

would agree that it’s truly an honour but also a privilege to be 

able to represent folks in this great province of ours in this 

legislature and to be able to represent them in this and other 

debates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am truly honoured to have that privilege to 

enter into this debate, the debate on Bill 123, the forest 

management Act, 2009. Well that’s the short title. I guess the 

correct long title is Bill 123, An Act to amend The Forest 

Resources Management Act and to make related amendments to 

The Parks Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s obviously an important Bill. I say it’s an 

important Bill because it’s an Act that is I guess intended to 

promote sustainable use of our forest lands for the benefit of 

current and future generations by balancing the needs of the 

economy, the social and cultural opportunities, with the need to 

maintain and enhance a healthy forest land. And I think that’s 

fair to say, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And I think if you look at this great province of ours, you will 

see that forestry is very important to the economy of this 

country, of this province, I should say. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that we want to start out by fully understanding that the 

forest area in this great province of ours covers about 55 per 

cent of the province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we do have a very large province in 

area, and over half, over half of that area of this province is 

covered by forests. Now somebody once compared it to the 

country of Germany, and I believe this is a correct comparison, 

is that we have more area of our province covered by forests 

than the area that makes up the entire country of Germany. So, 

Mr. Speaker, that gives us some indication of the large, large, 

vast areas that are covered by forest and how important the 

forest industry is to this province, having such a significant 

amount of it. 

 

I believe it’s a little over 36 million hectares of land that is 

covered by our forests in this province. So, Mr. Speaker, it is 

important that we maintain that forest. It plays a major role in 

our economy, but what’s also important is that we maintain the 

balanced use of that forest. I know that at first blush when you 

mention the word forest, you think of trees, and trees means 

lumber and that’s it. Well no, Mr. Speaker, the forests bring a 

lot more to our economy than just the lumbering aspect of it. 

 

There’s many, many usage in our forest, and if you looked at 

the makeup of the forest or the forest boundaries in this great 

country and then you look at the other opportunities that present 

themselves within the forest, and if you did so through a lens of 

licence and permits, you would see that there is an overlapping 

of services and an overlapping of opportunity within that forest 

boundary to support other occupations and other industry within 

this province other than just lumber. 

 

For example in — I believe it’s still in practice today — but in 

the days gone by for certain it was a practice that the forest area 

would be also doubled in the summer months as pasture. There 

was available in the forest and the forest areas grazing leases to 

individuals who lived along the forest fringe and who were 

involved in the livestock and cattle industry. And they would be 

able to, for a reasonable fee, be able to permit an area of the 

forest, and they would be able to run their livestock herd in that 

forest and supplemented their grazing opportunities, I guess you 

would say. And in many cases it was a major part of the 

farming operation. 

 

And having been one of those, Mr. Speaker, who in the past 

enjoyed the ability to permit an area in the forest reserve to run 

then my cattle in there — and it was a great opportunity 



4302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

because the fee was a reasonable fee — the ability to use that 

land in the summer months to offset the need to purchase land 

outside the forest was certainly a benefit to my farming 

operation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I guess the point I want to make here and 

make it very clear is the multiple usage of our forests. And this 

is why it’s important that we have a forest management Act that 

will do exactly that: will manage the forest to the best of our 

abilities to ensure that there’s a good balance between the 

utilization of that forest and through support of our economy, 

but also to ensure that it’s not damaged in any way through 

wrongful use or overuse and that there is a balance so that we 

can maintain on a long-term basis a strong and healthy forest 

industry in this province and a strong healthy forest in this 

province. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the area that I had a grazing 

permit on, a good neighbour of mine also had a trapline lease 

permit or a licence to trap in that same area in the winter 

months. So while I would utilize the forest in the summertime 

to raise my cattle there, he would in turn utilize the forest for 

maintaining the wildlife within that particular boundaries. And 

it was really probably coincidental, but his trapline boundaries 

much mirrored that of my grazing lease boundaries. So we had 

a fair amount in common. But he would utilize that forest to be 

able to trap fur-bearing animals, and he used that revenue to 

offset his income each and every year. And that was again 

something he enjoyed from the forest, a forest that was 

available to us because we lived along the forest fringe and it 

was readily available. 

 

[15:30] 

 

That same area during the fall months in particular, the area 

would be well utilized by people from right across this great 

province. Not only local people, but people from all across this 

great province would use that area for hunting, the hunting of 

big game. They would be . . . Some hunters who had been in the 

business for some time had established cabins in the forest 

reserve which was, that practice was done away with by the 

department several years ago. But anyone who prior to the 

change in the regulations, anyone who had a cabin in that forest 

reserve and who had paid — again had paid — a permit to have 

a hunting cabin in that area were able to utilize that cabin for 

the purposes of hunting big game in that particular area. 

 

As well as those who of course didn’t have cabins to stay in 

would be able to, you know, drive in in the morning and, in 

many cases, drive as far with their vehicle, as far as the road 

conditions would permit, and then would go either on foot after 

that or sometimes snowmobile. Or ATV [all-terrain vehicle] 

vehicles would be used to transport the hunters. 

 

I believe there is regulations, hunting regulations that doesn’t 

allow the use of an ATV before noon. And I don’t know if 

those regulations are still in place. I’m not an avid hunter any 

more, Mr. Speaker, so you’ll have to forgive me. I’m not up to 

date on those rules and regulations. But the point here is that 

there was an opportunity for those to use that forest, the same 

area. The same forest, the same area, it was multi-use. 

 

There was also the opportunity for outfitters who had that area 

set aside as part of their outfitting area. They again paid a 

permit, paid a fee on it, and they were, had exclusive rights to 

use that area for their outfitting clients. And they would use 

that, again, in hunting season, in the fall primarily. I guess 

they’d also be using that earlier on in the season for bear, etc. 

But those were the multi-use facets of our forests. 

 

So when we talk about the need for our forest management, we 

talk about a lot more than just something that’s going to manage 

the harvesting of our trees and something that’s going to look 

after the well-being of that forest in its entirety. Because it is a 

multi-facet use area that certainly benefits the economy on a 

number of fronts and, Mr. Speaker, not the least to say, of 

course, it’s the forest. We need to maintain that forest and 

maintain it in a healthy condition because really, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s the last bastion of wilderness. It’s the last opportunity I 

suppose that we can have wildlife roaming in their natural state, 

in a natural way, and enjoy our wildlife herds and the wildlife 

herds of various species throughout our forest. And there’s a 

need to maintain that and, I say, a need to maintain it. It’s not 

only a need based on the economy. It’s not only a need based 

on the economic factors that drive that decision-making 

process. 

 

I think we, as this generation, have a duty. A duty to ensure that 

generations, next generations and generations to come into the 

future, will have the same privilege and opportunity to enjoy 

that wilderness, to enjoy that beauty that is a part of that 

wilderness. And it is necessary for us to ensure that we are able 

to provide that for those future generations. And I would hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that a part of the forest management plan here 

would be to ensure that we were able to get the maximum 

benefit from the use of our forests — a multi-facet use of our 

forests — to benefit the economy but not to do so at the price 

and the cost of losing that forest. 

 

We must be able to find a way to be able to balance the usage 

so we can ensure that there’s opportunity, economic opportunity 

within the resource of that forest boundary, but at the same time 

would be able to ensure that we will be using that forest in a 

way that’s reasonable and a way that will ensure that into the 

future we will continue to have a forest that our children, our 

grandchildren, and their children and their grandchildren will 

continue to enjoy. 

 

I think we’re obligated to do that, Mr. Speaker, because in this 

forest of course, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more than just the 

trees. I mean, usually yes, that’s the common thread I guess you 

could say when one mentions forests. You think of trees. You 

think of trees; you think of lumbering. You think of plywood. 

You think of building material and that sort of stuff. But within 

that forest is also the cradle of life for our wildlife species, 

whether they be big game, whether it be birds, whether it be 

waterfowl, whether it be, you know, coyotes. And as I 

understand, Mr. Speaker, I know that the coyote population in 

the province is down this year over what it was in previous 

years, but I don’t think that had anything to do with the forest. It 

probably had something to do with other management policies 

of the government. 

 

But what we need to do is ensure that those areas stay as they 

are, stay as pure as . . . to stay as fresh, to stay available, and be 

able to be harvested in a sustainable way to ensure that, yes, we 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4303 

enjoy the economy from the forest areas, but we do so in a 

manner to ensure that we will have the ability not to damage 

that forest but to ensure that that forest will continue in its 

present form and be able to support life well into the future for 

generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the government in this particular Bill 

suggested the purpose of this Act is to promote the sustainable 

use of our forest lands for benefit of the current and future 

generations, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t agree more. I think that 

should be the purpose of our . . . One of the major purposes of 

our existence in this House and participation in this House is to 

ensure that we create a society that we enjoy the economic 

benefits, we enjoy the economic prosperity, but we also ensure 

that we create a society that will protect, will protect our 

environment and protect our forests so that they would be 

available there in the future for economic purposes, continue to 

support our economy into the future on an economic basis so 

that our children and our grandchildren would have a part of 

that as their economy, a part of that as the makeup their 

economy of the province at that time, but to also ensure that 

they have a forest that they can enjoy the same way as we have 

enjoyed it and past generations have enjoyed it. 

 

And to do that, Mr. Speaker, the government needs to work at 

finding a balance that will ensure the continued economic 

benefit from that forest as well as the social and cultural 

opportunities, and that this will be done so in a manner that will 

maintain a healthy forest. Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to do this, 

I would think that the government would need to consult with 

those individuals, groups, communities that have a significant 

investment in the well-being of the forest. 

 

I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, one of the questions that I 

would have of the government here is I would like to know to 

what extent was there consultations in regards to putting 

together the proposed changes as housed in Bill 123. I know 

that I’ve gone through the notes that they sent along with the 

Bill here and, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t yet been able to find any 

information that would give me a degree of comfort that the 

government has done a meaningful job of consulting with the 

forest industry, done a meaningful job of consulting with those 

other users of the forest, whether it be the trappers’ association 

or whether it be the grazing association. 

 

Have they talked to them? Have they talked to the communities 

who much of their commerce depends on the forest industry 

itself? Have they talked to others who use the forest on an 

ongoing basis? The sportsmen? Sportsmen who use the forest as 

an area for hunting in the fall time, whether it be waterfowl but 

primarily the big game hunters. Have they talked to the hunters 

or the hunting association as to their input into what needs to be 

done to ensure the balance and the management of the forest? 

Have they talked to those communities whose economy of the 

community depends largely on the forest and the activity 

around that forest? One of the communities I’m thinking of is 

Hudson Bay. I’ve had opportunity to be in Hudson Bay many 

times in the past. I’ve had even some relatives living in Hudson 

Bay. 

 

And it was, when you were in that community, you quickly 

recognized how important the forest was and the activity 

surrounding that forest was to the economy of that particular 

community. And it not only was the ongoing harvest of wood 

from the forest of course, which was very important, an 

ongoing mainstay of the economy of that particular community 

and area, but also the other activities such as hunting and 

fishing. Talking to those people in the service industries in 

those communities, they would tell you that hunting and fishing 

would play a very important part in their entire year’s revenue, 

so it was certainly important. And that was obviously a 

noticeable one. 

 

I’m just wondering if the government has taken the time to have 

a meaningful conversation, a meaningful dialogue with 

individuals or groups that represent individuals such as the 

business people in these communities. Has the government had 

those discussions? And if they did, then I would like to know 

who they met with. I would like to know what these 

discussions, really, where did they go and what was some of the 

responses of those people who were involved in the 

discussions? Were they positive? Were they negative? 

 

Did they meet with the Outfitters Association and discuss these 

possible changes with the Outfitters Association and what 

would that mean to their business? It may not mean anything. It 

may not affect them at all. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I’m just 

wondering if the government knows. I’m wondering if the 

government has carried out those consultations, had those 

discussions, and if the government . . . what the government 

learned and how they took those discussions and the messages 

within those discussions and how they incorporated them in this 

Bill. And what were the changes in this Bill that’s come about 

as a result, a direct result of those discussions, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So those, those are just a few of the questions right off the top 

of my head that I would like to know because I believe a role of 

government, a role of any government . . . And I think this 

government, Mr. Speaker, as well as any other government in 

the past or perhaps even governments in the future, the 

fundamental desire by a government is to make life better for 

the people they represent, for the people they govern. There’s 

no question about that in my mind, Mr. Speaker. And I think in 

the political realm of things it’s that we all differ on how we 

would achieve that. We all have our different ideas of how to go 

about achieving that. 

 

But I think fundamentally, if you want to really make changes 

that benefit the people out there, you need to talk to those folks 

who are on the front lines who are those folks that face the 

problems each and every day. An old schoolteacher of mine 

once, I remember in high school, one of the many messages that 

he would put across to us was that if you have, if you’re looking 

for a solution to a problem, if you’re looking for a solution to a 

problem, you go to where the problem is. In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, if you’re looking for a solution to a problem, you go to 

those people who have the problem and you talk to them. 

Because they have the problem and they understand the issue. 

They also know what it takes to solve that problem. They also 

know the answer to that problem. 

 

So if you want good advice, you go to the people who are on 

the front lines of the issue that may be at hand. In this case it, of 

course, it would be the forest management. So I would suggest 

that if you want to find out solutions to some of the questions or 

some of the issues that may be presenting themselves within the 



4304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

forest management issue, you’re going to talk to the people on 

the front lines, the people who are involved in the industry, 

whether it be the forest industry, you talk to the foresters. You 

talk to the large companies which, yes, we need them. They 

make jobs, and they do a good job of harvesting our forest and 

do a good job of forest husbandry. I know that they spend 

thousands if not millions of dollars in reforesting projects, and 

this is good. I think this is really good. 

 

But there’s also little independent operators throughout our 

forest, Mr. Speaker, that do, I think, also an excellent job. 

They’re smaller operators. They’re more selective, I guess you 

would say, in their logging practices. And I think we need to 

talk to them to find out from them what might be incorporated 

in this Bill that would affect them in a positive way. Perhaps the 

government has done that. I don’t know. What I’m asking is if 

the government has done that, if they would make that 

information available to us so that we would be able to, in our 

consultation process, would be able to know what level of 

consultation the government had actually carried out. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many various aspects of the usage of 

the forest. And this is why it’s very important that we do have a 

Bill, that we do have a Bill that addresses the needs to have a 

forest management and we do have forest management here 

because the forest is a multifaceted operation. It provides 

services to so wide and varied parts of our economy that it’s 

very important, and it’s important that when we make changes 

to the Act that we make the right changes to the Act. 

 

It’s very important that we talk to those people who are on the 

front lines, to those people who are involved in the forests in 

some aspect of the forest, that we find out from them what it is 

that they would recommend be changed and how those changes 

would benefit them and/or their industry, and take those 

changes and incorporate them in the Bill so at the end of the day 

we produce, we produce a product here that is beneficial to the 

people of Saskatchewan, beneficial to those people who are 

involved in the forest industry. And that we must, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to make sure that we get things right. And I’m hoping 

that a part of that process, that the government has carried out 

meaningful discussions, meaningful consultation with the 

various users of our forest. 

 

We do have of course the government department which is the 

overarching protector of the forest which supervises the use of 

the forest, which ensures that the rules and regulations as set 

forth by the department to protect the forest, to make sure that 

the forest renders its maximum economic benefit to the people 

of the province, but at the same time ensuring that it doesn’t do 

so in a manner that’s going to have long-term and significant 

damage to our forest. 

 

And I want to take my hats off to those people who do that 

because I have had in the past experience to be able to share 

some time with many of these people, and they’re truly 

professionals. They’re truly professionals. They take a special 

interest in that forest. It reminds me of an individual who, 

perhaps looking after his house in the city, he takes a special 

interest in it, a special care for it, or go the extra mile to make 

sure things are done right. Well those people who oversee the 

operations in the forest and are supervisory capacities to ensure 

that our forests are well maintained and that those who use our 

forests do so within the regulations set forward, they do so with 

just a real passion and it’s because they feel that that forest is 

really a living being; it’s a living, live being, and they’re proud 

of it. And they’re proud of their work, and they should be 

because they do a good job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the forests offer so many, so many different services, I 

guess you would say, that we enjoy. One of the things that I can 

think of, Mr. Speaker, that often goes missed when you use the 

word forest is that deep in our forest we often have very, very 

lucrative — as far as fishing is concerned, I guess — it’s 

lucrative lakes. They have very good lakes as far as fishing is 

concerned. They’re beautiful lakes. They’re fresh water, they’re 

pure. And they offer the sports fisherman really an opportunity 

to have a great experience and going out and spending time on 

those lakes. 

 

And I have, I’ve spent, you know, not a lot of time — I’m not a 

great fisherman, I’ll be the first to admit that — but I have had 

the opportunity to spend some time on McBride Lake and Parr 

Hill Lake and Saginas, Pepaw, Townsend, Smallfish, Spirit 

Lake, Smallfish Lake, many of these lakes that certainly are 

bountiful with fish, various species of fish. And it provides a 

great opportunity for individual sportsmen. It’s also a great 

opportunity for families to enjoy the great outdoors, and they do 

so by spending time in one of many of the great camping 

grounds that do exist within our forests. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again, this is just one more example of 

why it is important to have a forest management Act in place 

that will ensure the protection of our forests but also ensure that 

the fine people of Saskatchewan and travellers will be able to 

utilize the forest to its extent. 

 

And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, there is no one user of the 

forest. It’s a multi-faceted operation and many people use that 

forest. In some cases the usage is overlapped, the bounties are 

overlapped, but in principle, Mr. Speaker, it benefits all that use 

that forest. Some use it for economic purposes, others use it for 

sports purposes, and others use it for simply recreation 

purposes. 

 

But it’s a very valuable resource and we need to ensure that it is 

protected, looked after, well used in a balanced way, but looked 

after for our own present use now, Mr. Speaker, but so that we 

have the ability to pass it on from generation to generation with 

the same level of usage, the same level of protection, the same 

level of beauty, and that other generations should inherit from 

us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would trust that the government has taken 

the opportunity to carry out meaningful discussions with the 

various users of our forest so that they would be able to gather 

the information so that when they do make changes and drafting 

changes to the Bills and changes to the Bills, that it’s perhaps 

more than just a housekeeping or perhaps more than just 

window dressing. That the changes to the Bill will have been 

meaningful to those who use our forests for the so many 

different, different purposes. 

 

And I have no reason to believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4305 

government did not do this. I have no reason to believe the 

government did not do this. I also have no way of being able to 

prove that the government did do it. There is no evidence in the 

notes here, no schedule of meetings, no list of those who were 

met with, no information in regards, no notes in regards to what 

the discussions were with the various groups. There’s none of 

that that’s available to us, Mr. Speaker, and I didn’t detect any 

of it in the minister’s second reading speech either although I 

will admit I didn’t read it thoroughly. I just sort of had the 

opportunity just to glance at it here. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping that the government did because I 

think the government members over there would agree with me 

that the . . . and they fully recognize the importance of our 

forest and the importance that the forest plays within the 

economy of our province. And also the wonderful opportunities 

that it provides for the present generation to use that forest, not 

only in an economic way, but in a recreational way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that within the Bill there’s 

proposed amendments that will really cause a moving away of 

the department, of moving away from the present process of 

licensing organizations, individuals, and activities within the 

forest — moving that away from that licensing routine that 

we’ve had in the past to more of a self-regulated method, I 

guess you would say, within the forest. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, then causes me a little bit of concern. It 

caused me a little bit of concern because I don’t see any 

explanation in the notes provided to us here that would indicate 

that the government has thoroughly thought this process 

through. And my concern of course immediately would be that 

the movement away from licensing organizations, companies, 

from certain activities within our forest, would that then cause 

perhaps the government to have less ability to supervise those 

activities? If the government then has, and the government 

officials has less ability to supervise those activities, how can 

we be assured that those activities aren’t going to have a 

damaging effect on our forest? How can we be assured that a 

continuation of those activities might have a long-term negative 

effect upon our forests? 

 

My concern here, of course, Mr. Speaker, and one of those 

would be the perhaps weakening of the environmental 

protection rules and regulations, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

her feet? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — To request permission to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce a friend of mine in the Speaker’s gallery. She’s a 

school friend — we went to school starting in kindergarten 

together — and her name in Jeannine Fournier from 

Montmartre, Vibank, Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to comment that the member from Lloydminster had 

made a comment about casting down a bucket to venture into 

entrepreneurship in our great province. And I’d like to just say 

that my friend Jeannine has done just that, opening a new bistro 

in Montmartre. 

 

Welcome. I’d like to ask all to welcome her to her legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I’d like to thank the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland for the introduction. And 

the member from Regina Northeast has the floor. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to welcome our guest here too. I hope she enjoys her time 

in this legislature. It’s a unique place. And I hope she enjoys the 

time here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to continue on in expressing my concerns 

over the proposed amendments that are embodied in this 

particular Bill that has a tendency to shift the responsibility, I 

would think, the responsibility away from the ministry to a 

more self-regulated process within our industry and . . . within 

our forest, rather. And as I indicated earlier, it is a bit 

concerning because the present system, certainly if you want to 

carry out an activity in the forest, whether it be grazing or 

hunting or trapping or forest harvesting, you need to go to the 

department and you need to get a licence or a permit to carry 

out such activities. 

 

Well by doing that, then the department officials know, you 

know, who’s in the forest. They know where they’re at and they 

know what activity they’re carrying on. And it makes it, I 

would think, a lot easier for them to be able to supervise those 

activities, to ensure that the individual or group or company are 

carrying out their activities within the regulations as set forward 

within the Act. And I think that’s a fair and reasonable 

approach. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, that forest doesn’t belong to me or to 

you or to any one group. It belongs to all of us. There is a 

opportunity for us to utilize that forest through a permitting 

system where we can explain to the department, we want a 

permit because we want to maybe harvest some firewood or 

maybe we want to harvest some wood for other reasons that is 

not encumbered by some other agreement. 

 

And that we can . . . Or we’d want to maybe have a trapline, 

and we’d purchase a trapline and want to go trapping furs. As 

my colleague tells me, the fur prices are starting to come back. I 

didn’t realize that, but I understand the fur prices or at least 

some of the fur prices are starting to come back where probably 

now it starts to make some economic sense to get back into the 

fur-retrieving business. And if that’s the case, well then there’s 

the opportunity there. 



4306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

But in order to do that under the present system, an individual, 

group, or company would have to approach the department and 

receive permit or permission through a licence or through a 

permit in order to carry out that activity in the forest. That’s 

fine, and I think that’s great because then those people who are 

hired by us, the people of Saskatchewan, to ensure that the 

forests are well looked after and that they are safeguarded 

against misuse or improper use, have the ability to know who’s 

in there and know where they’re at, what activity they’re 

supposed to be carrying on. And be able to go out and then 

gauge their activity, their actions of their activity against their 

permit and to ensure that the forest is not being misused or 

abused or harmed in any manner, shape, or form. 

 

But when we move away from that, we go to a self-regulated 

system. And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that probably in most 

cases that would not be a problem. Probably in most cases the 

individual or the group or the company that might be carrying 

out those activities within that forest would do so in a proper 

manner, would do so in a manner that ensures the safety and 

health, the good health of our forest continues on. 

 

My concern is, Mr. Speaker, is that one that might not, that one 

bad apple in the barrel that can spoil it for the rest of us. And 

without having some mechanism to supervise those activities, 

we won’t know. We won’t know that that bad apple, that one 

particular instance isn’t operating within the regulations of the 

forest and that is in the long run doing some significant damage 

to our forest. That we won’t know that activity is happening 

until it’s too late, until the damage has been done. Until we 

recognize that afterwards, after perhaps the individual or group 

is long gone, then we come upon this problem because the 

regulations were not followed properly and the damage has 

been done. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So that is one of the reasons why I think it’s important that we 

have a management plan in our forest, but a management plan 

that is effective and efficient, that does ensure at the bottom line 

that our forests are protected, that our forests won’t be damaged 

to the point where they’re damaged beyond repair, that we have 

the ability to maintain those forests in a good, healthy condition 

for today’s use, for tomorrow’s use, and for the use of 

generations to come. 

 

I think that, Mr. Speaker, is the bottom line. And I’m concerned 

when I see that this Bill has a tendency to move away from the 

permitting process, move away from the licensing process to a 

more self-regulated process. And that is a concern to me 

because I wonder if that just doesn’t weaken our ability to 

ensure that we maintain on the long term, on the long run, a 

healthy forest — not only for ourselves but for future 

generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on that same line, moving away from licence and 

licensing and permitting for various activities within the forest 

certainly creates a problem. Like who is going to determine 

what activities will be licensed and what activities won’t need 

to be licensed any more? It will be self-regulated. Who is going 

to determine what activities? Who is going to determine 

whether it be the sportsmen? Are we going to say that 

sportsmen will now be able to hunt big game in our forests 

without having to have a licence? If that’s the case, then how 

are we going to be able to regulate the population of our big 

game? We won’t know who is in there. We won’t know what 

has been taken out. 

 

Who is going to regulate the trapping industry? The fur prices 

are coming back and likely that’ll cause a greater interest in 

getting involved in the trapping industry. And if that’s the case, 

then who’s going to regulate that to ensure that the harvest of 

for example beavers is at a level that is sustainable so that the 

population will be sustained over a period of time and not be 

overtrapped and therefore perhaps trapped into extinction? 

 

Who’s going to ensure that the park spaces, the overnight 

camping spaces, the weekend camping spaces that are along 

many of our great lakes are properly used and aren’t abused, 

that the damage isn’t done, that they’re being looked after so 

that it’s a beautiful area, it attracts people who want to come 

there and spend the weekends or perhaps even spend their 

holidays in many of our beautiful, beautiful facilities that are in 

our forests? 

 

Who is going to make that determination, Mr. Speaker? How is 

that going to happen? Who is going to decide what activities 

have to be licensed, what activities have to be permitted, and 

which ones will be just simply left to be self-regulated? Simple 

question, Mr. Speaker, and I would have hoped that the 

government has given some thought to this. I would have hoped 

the government would have had as part of their consultation 

process, one of those items on the agenda to be talked about, 

would be who was going to make these decisions. And I don’t 

see that. I don’t see it in the information they’ve provided us. 

 

I haven’t heard of any of these consultation processes taking 

place from the people across this great province that I’ve had a 

very narrow opportunity to talk to because I just . . . a number 

of responsibilities, and this particular one is one that I haven’t 

been able to get to covering all of the bases. But from those 

people that I’ve talked to, they quite frankly weren’t even aware 

that these changes were about to be brought to this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if audits are going to be the way that the 

government wants to move in this particular Bill — and that’s 

what it seems like — if audits is going to be the way that the 

government wants to move on this issue, then who will do it? 

Who will do the audits on the various activities that take place 

in our forest reserve? Who’s going to make those audits and 

who’s going to pay for them? Will the users have to pay? Will 

the department pay? Will the taxpayers as a whole pay? Who’s 

going to have to pay for these audits that the government is 

talking about implementing? 

 

And if they do an audit, Mr. Speaker, and they find that some 

individual or group or company is breaking the rules as set 

forward, breaking the regulations as set forward, will there be a 

penalty? And if there will be a penalty for not following the 

rules after perhaps a reasonable warning, reasonable 

discussions, certainly ensuring that the individuals are aware 

that what they’re doing is wrong or the group or the company is 

aware that what they are doing is wrong — and if they continue 

to do that and the department has to step in — what will the 

penalties be? What will the penalties be? What will the 

penalties be to those who are not following the guidelines as set 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4307 

forward to protect our forest and to ensure that our forest will 

be looked after in a well and balanced way into the future? 

What will those penalties be, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it looks to me like the government, through this 

Bill, their intention is to move to more of a results-based 

regulations and put some more control in the industry’s hands 

and less control in that of those who supervise and look after 

our forests on our behalf. And if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, 

once again it raises the issue with me as to how can we ensure, 

how can we ensure through this activity that the self-regulated 

industries are doing so with the fundamental principle in mind 

of protecting the forests for future generations? And they are 

willing to do that even if it means a reduced profit for them or 

perhaps increased costs for them. And how can we be assured 

that they are going to put that first and foremost ahead of the 

profits that they perhaps want to make? Or the ability to utilize 

and overutilize a certain aspect of that forest that will do 

long-term damage and significant damage, and maybe damage 

that we won’t be able to recover from and therefore we’ll lose 

that activity or lose that part of the forest for future generations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s just one of the many questions that 

come to mind. And you know, Mr. Speaker, we have seen most 

recently the situation where perhaps the rules and regulations 

weren’t clear enough or weren’t meaningful enough or perhaps 

weren’t enforced enough to ensure that the forest was looked 

after. And we’ve seen instances where, in the past, 

overharvesting of our timber for example caused damage to the 

forest that will take generations for it to recover from. And that 

means there’s generations that will be lost to the usage of that 

particular area of forest. It will be lost to the using of that forest, 

whether it be for economic purposes or recreational purposes. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, since 55 per cent of our province is covered 

with forest, it’s obvious that the forest is a major, major 

important part of our economy, major important part of our 

province, a very important part of the future of our province, 

and a very important part for our future generations to be able 

to utilize. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that when we make 

changes to the Acts that govern the management of our forest, 

we must be careful in making those changes. Those changes can 

only come about after reasonable and extensive consultation 

with those involved in the forest industry and those whose 

livelihood depends on the activity within that forest and for 

those people who simply enjoy the opportunity to get out and 

enjoy the wilderness, enjoy our forest, enjoy the recreational 

opportunities that presents itself within that forest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we have an obligation. We have an obligation as 

elected members of the legislature to ensure that when we do 

make changes to an Act that those changes at the end of the day 

will result in a positive result for Saskatchewan people. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that goes without saying, that we have that 

responsibility.  

 

Now I say, we. I mean members on both sides of the House. It’s 

not isolated just to the government. It’s not just the 

government’s responsibility. It’s also the opposition’s 

responsibility. It’s the opposition’s responsibility to ask the 

questions of the government. It’s the opposition’s responsibility 

to hold the government accountable, to ensure that the 

government has done due diligence, to ensure that the 

government has done its homework, to ensure that the 

government has talked to those people who are the front-line 

people in our industry. And this particular industry is the forest 

industry. 

 

We must make sure that we’ve heard from those folks because, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been my experience throughout life, if you 

want to get the best possible information on an issue, you talk to 

those people who are affected each and every day by that issue. 

As I said before, I had an old high school teacher that used to 

say that if you want an answer to a problem, you look at the 

problem. In other words, Mr. Speaker, if you want an answer to 

the problem, you talk to the people who’ve got the problem. In 

other words, if you want an answer to an issue in regards to the 

forestry, you talk to the people who are involved in the forestry, 

particularly those whose livelihood depends on the activity 

within that forest. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that we hold this 

government accountable. It’s very important that we hold this 

government to task, that we hold this government up to its 

commitment for transparency and accountability, which, Mr. 

Speaker, I have yet to see the action that is reflected in those 

words. I know that during the last election this government 

campaigned on many, many, many promises. Unfortunately 

when you look at the list, Mr. Speaker, you see just as many 

promises not kept. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it concerns me when the government brings 

forward a Bill that has significant changes in it, significant 

changes to the forestry management of our great forests in this 

province, and they do so without having supporting 

documentation that will provide us the information and the 

comfort to know that the government has done due diligence, 

that the government has done its consulting, that the 

government has talked to those people on the front lines, and 

that they have brought forward recommendations of 

management changes that will be positive in the long-run, that 

will cause the forest to be probably even a healthier industry, a 

stronger industry, to cause the forest to continue to be a healthy 

part of our province for many years to come. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of other questions that I could get 

into on this particular Bill. But I do know that I have colleagues 

in this Assembly who wish to enter into this debate and debate 

on other Bills. So I will limit my comments today to what I 

have already outlined and reserve the opportunity to revisit this 

particular issue at some point in time in the future, Mr. Speaker, 

so that if I have even more questions I wish to ask of the 

government, I would have the opportunity to do so. So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Regina Northeast has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 

123, The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 



4308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

Bill No. 119 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 119 — The 

Ticket Sales Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I want to take a few minutes just to familiarize the audience 

with what the important point is on Bill No. 119, The Ticket 

Sales Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s only appropriate that I 

explain to the people that may be listening what is this whole 

notion behind Bill 119 and what is your position as an 

opposition member on what Bill 119 is all about. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to a news release issued 

November 24th, 2009. And the headline of the news release . . . 

And I’m quoting to ensure that we follow the rules properly. I’ll 

read press release so people know exactly what Bill 119 is all 

about. I think it’s important they know what it’s about so we 

could certainly . . . or they can make sense of what we’re trying 

to talk about as an opposition, and what some of the concerns 

are. I think that’s only appropriate. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So I’ll begin, and I quote: 

 

Province introduces legislation to protect consumers by 

regulating ticket sales 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan today introduced The 

Ticket Sales Act, following extensive consultations with 

industry and the public. The Act will ensure that 

Saskatchewan people have a fair chance to purchase 

tickets to an event by limiting the activities of secondary 

ticket sellers, also known as ticket resellers. 

 

"People deserve a fair chance to buy tickets to events and 

entertainment at the time they are offered," Justice 

Minister and Attorney General Don Morgan said. "There 

have been too many situations where tickets have sold 

remarkably quickly and then [they] have been offered for 

resale at extremely high prices. This Act will level the 

playing field and make it fair for Saskatchewan 

consumers." 

 

The legislation will prohibit the primary seller from 

having links on their website to reseller websites, prohibit 

secondary ticket sellers from selling tickets to an event 

that are primarily being sold by a company legally 

associated with them and prohibit advertising the sale of 

tickets by a reseller until 48 hours after the tickets go on 

sale to the public. The Act also makes it illegal [to use a 

computer, or] to use computer software to automatically 

buy tickets. The accompanying regulations will contain 

reporting requirements to allow the Minister of Justice to 

get information from venues about the numbers of tickets 

that were available for public sale. 

 

The Act does not address secondary ticket sales where 

consumers who purchase tickets and are unable to use 

them sell or trade . . . [these tickets.] It also does not limit 

the price that can be asked for a resale ticket. 

 

The Act allows for fines of up to $5,000 for individuals 

and [up to] $100,000 for corporations for a first offence, 

and up to $10,000 and $500,000 respectively for 

subsequent offences, as well as the potential of up to a 

year in jail for a convicted individual. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the intent here would be with the 

Bill, Bill 119, is they’re simply trying to have some sanity about 

how tickets are being sold and how the public has access to 

tickets. And that automatically when a venue is being proposed 

or a concert is being held, that there isn’t this process in place 

where the public don’t have access to it and right away a block 

of tickets is being shipped off to some other company or some 

other corporation that can then turn around and, I’m assuming, 

can sell it a greater price. 

 

So in theory having the regulations around ticket sales and 

making sure this doesn’t become a major problem, I think in 

theory that that’s not a bad concept at all. But we have to really 

be very careful here because while you want to do that and 

ensure the public is not being thwarted in terms of having 

access to these events, you also want to make sure that the 

intent is followed through as sensibly and as thoroughly as you 

can. Because I, like anybody else, you want to have the 

opportunity to attend a Roughrider game or go to a concert or 

go to some venue. And that’s something that’s every family’s 

wishes to do. Absolutely every family wishes to have this 

opportunity. 

 

The anger and the frustration by the public, when a venue’s 

being proposed and they go to buy tickets, all of a sudden all 

the tickets are gone very quickly. And they say, well how does 

that happen? Are people phoning in? Are people calling? Like 

how could you sell that many tickets in that short of a time? 

What was happening is some of the people were getting a bunch 

of tickets and sending it down further down the line to some of 

the resellers. And that’s kind of what the public was quite upset 

about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that we look at the whole 

notion of people that sell tickets to venues legally, responsibly, 

and certainly fairly. That’s not the target of what the Bill’s 

about. The Bill quite frankly is saying that, in those venues, in 

that circumstances, we believe from opposition that there are 

some very responsible people such as Ticketmaster that does 

good work and certainly has helped craft the Act to make sure it 

follows with its intent. 

 

Now one of the things that should be pointed out, and I go to a 

website notice from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

News, and this is dated November 24th, 2009. And the headline 

says, “Saskatchewan has introduced legislation to curb the 

resale of concert tickets.” And again I go back to the quote: 

 

But Joe Freeman, a spokesman for Ticketmaster, says the 

government is targeting his company for something he 

claims it isn’t doing. 

 

“I think it’s predicated on a notion that Ticketmaster is 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4309 

somehow diverting tickets to the reseller or allowing 

brokers preferential access to tickets,” Freeman said. 

“That simply is not the case.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I end the quote there. So on one hand, in the press 

release the minister talks about collaboration, communication, 

and co-operation with Ticketmaster. So we assume, okay fine. 

It is one of the people, one of groups and organizations that 

most people have exposure to. Ticketmaster’s pretty well 

known; they’re a very, very, very professional company. And 

the minister says, well we also have some advice from them. 

And so we assume if he puts it on paper, that the assumption is 

that he did have advice from them. But as the CBC story says, 

Ticketmaster’s saying no, no, no. They are targeting us, and 

we’re telling them we’re not doing this. 

 

So I get a bit confused, Mr. Speaker, as to what’s going down 

here. What’s going on? Because if the intent is to stop, stop this 

practice of having a bunch, a whack of tickets going to resellers 

right now, as opposed to having the public have access to them, 

then obviously we support that notion. And then when the 

government says we’re trying to do this in co-operation with 

some of the bigger names of people that do sell tickets to many, 

many venues, and the name that was mentioned was 

Ticketmaster. And you say, well that’s good. They’re 

collaborating and co-operating and asking advice. 

 

But then we hear from Ticketmaster that it’s not the case, that 

they’re simply not working together. So I’m trying to figure out 

from my perspective is, while the intent is there, why isn’t there 

good collaboration from a very important player called 

Ticketmaster? Why isn’t Ticketmaster part and parcel of the 

successful note that the minister talks about on this Bill? 

Because I don’t believe that the minister actually totally had the 

level of co-operation and collaboration from Ticketmaster that 

he claimed in his press release. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to be very, very careful here. When 

you do things that you tell the public you want to do and you’re 

at odds with one of the biggest players involved in this — in 

this case, in ticket sales, in Ticketmaster — then it becomes a 

bit confusing. Because the public’s saying, good, something’s 

being done about it. And we’re assuming something’s being 

done about it. After all, they’re talking to Ticketmaster. But 

then Ticketmaster’s saying, no, no, no, there’s some problems 

here. We’re being accused of that and that’s not the case. 

 

So then I go down to the Bill. I look through the Bill to try and 

see what exactly are they talking about? Like what’s their 

target? And I’ll just give you a quick notion. There are a bunch 

of definitions that the minister has. And some of the lines in 

this, and I’m quoting from Hansard, it says: 

 

. . . a person, other than a secondary seller, who is 

engaged in the business of making tickets available for 

sale, and includes the owner of the place to which a ticket 

provides admission, the promoter of the event occurring 

at that place and any agent or broker of those persons. 

 

So that’s the definition of a primary seller. That’s the definition 

that the minister has in his Bill. And the second part, again, it 

lays out in this section: 

 

. . . a primary seller and a secondary seller are associated 

if they are associates within the meaning of The Business 

Corporations Act.” 

 

So we understand what a primary seller is. We understand what 

a seller and a reseller is. If they’re connected through The 

Business Corporations Act, then that makes them basically one 

and the same kind of a person or company. 

 

And other codes that are important here is that: 

 

No person, other than a primary seller, may sell, advertise 

or list for sale, in any manner, any tickets to an event in 

Saskatchewan until at least 48 hours after the tickets to 

the same event were made available to the general public 

by a primary seller. 

 

Again makes sense because, obviously, you don’t want to have 

a big block of tickets that — say, 60, 70 per cent of the tickets 

— going out to all these resellers when the concert is 

announced for the first hour. And all of a sudden, all the tickets 

are gone and John Q. Public has no access and opportunity to 

buy those tickets. So the intent is there, and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan want it. 

 

And if you’re going to do something, the only message that we 

have is, do it right. Collaborate with industries. Don’t say you 

have collaboration with industries when Ticketmaster is saying 

there is none. We’re being accused by this government of doing 

that, and we’re not. We’re not doing that. We think it’s a 

responsible way to, responsible position to put that forward. 

 

So in theory, the legislation says you can’t be having tickets and 

doing things in the past . . . that you’ve done in the past in terms 

of hosting events. And you got a big ticket, say for example an 

AC/DC concert. You have a big venue and people want to get 

tickets. You can’t be taking a big block of those tickets as a 

ticket seller or a sponsor of that event and shipping it to a bunch 

of your affiliates and telling them, okay here’s a bunch for you, 

here’s a bunch for you, here’s a bunch for you. You can sell 

them at whatever price you want. And therefore, the people of 

Saskatchewan don’t have any opportunity through us, but they 

can buy it from you guys at a higher price as a reseller. So you 

know, it makes sense in the sense of, you know, that’s not fair 

at all to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So how do we deal with this? How do we stop it? It’s one of the 

ideas the minister says, well we collaborated with Ticketmaster. 

Not so, but we’ll set that argument aside. 

 

But they’re saying that they can’t resell those tickets until 48 

hours after the fact, after the venue has been advertised by the 

primary ticket seller, which in this case could be Ticketmaster. 

Now what’s to stop Ticketmaster from saying, okay 48 hours 

we have to wait. So we’ll give you a whack of tickets now, you 

guys. We’ll give it to you now, but you can’t give those tickets 

out for 48 hours’ notice. Is there provisions within the Act that 

says (a) they can’t specifically do that? Is there a number 

attached to the amount of tickets that these guys can, say for 

example, say to their resellers, we’ll send you a whole bunch 

but don’t sell those tickets until 48 hours have expired. We’ll 

keep some over here and you guys sit on yours because that’s 

the new law, that’s a new rule. So is there legislation to that 



4310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

effect in the Bill? And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t see any of 

that that would preclude that from happening. 

 

Now they’ve identified the fines. And it’s very clear, like fines 

are there to act as a disincentive for that practice to continue, 

and they’re fairly significant fines. You’ve got to make 

absolutely sure that again the intent here is followed. You want 

to stop that activity from occurring, and fines are a good 

disincentive for that to continue. Fair enough. 

 

So they’ve identified the primary seller. They’ve identified how 

a partnership could be viewed as one and the same, whether 

you’re two individual people or two companies. They’ve 

identified the fines. And just to let you know, the first fine 

somebody has is up to 5,000 for an individual and 100,000 for a 

corporation. And then the second offence, the subsequent 

offences may go as high as 10,000 for an individual and 

500,000 for a corporation. So they’ve identified the penalties. 

They’ve identified the business arrangements. They’ve 

identified the practice. 

 

Now to regulation. They want to make sure this is going on and 

the intent is followed. So the minister says, well we still don’t 

know if this is going to work. We still don’t know if it’s going 

to work. He’s told the media that. And we’re trying to figure 

out, okay, you know it’s a work-in-progress because again it 

goes back to the intent. 

 

So my point being on this whole Bill is that if you’re going to 

craft up a Bill, you’re going to advertise it through 

Saskatchewan, you want to be their big hero in stopping 

families from having access to all these great events, these 

concerts, these shows, then you ought to make sure that the 

intent is followed through. You don’t just say it. You actually 

have processes. You have well thought-out strategy. You have 

collaboration by and through industry to make sure that this is 

followed through as best in meeting its intent as possible. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t see any of that in this Bill. I don’t see any 

of it. 

 

What is to stop Ticketmaster from saying, okay you guys 

wanted to put a lid on what we’re doing. Fine, we will. And the 

people from North Battleford or northern Saskatchewan or 

Weyburn, they have just as much opportunity as somebody 

from Saskatoon, Regina, where these events may be hosted, as 

having access to a ticket. I don’t believe this legislation’s going 

to solve that problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I really don’t 

believe it’s going to solve the problem because quite frankly 

there’s ways and means you can work around these rules and 

regulations. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So right away the minister puts up these huge fines and said, 

this is the deterrent, and here is the information on the 

definition of a seller and a reseller. And here’s how we’re going 

to view whether they’re connected or not. And oh you can’t use 

technology or computers to have any kind of connection with 

these two entities to allow reselling. And you have to wait 48 

hours before you’re allowed to have resellers sell those tickets 

at a, I’m assuming, a greater price. But your still allowed to sell 

tickets on an individual basis, either through Kijiji or through 

the newspapers or whatever the case may be. 

Say for example I buy a ticket and — normally purchased 

through the normal practice and through the proper channels — 

and I can’t go. Say I can’t go to a certain event because I’m 

going to go to a huge NDP fundraiser, let’s use that as an 

example, and so I want to give my ticket up. Nothing’s stopping 

me from advertising on Kijiji or at a newspaper that I want to 

sell this ticket that I have. They’re not going after those people, 

which is fine and that’s fair. But what’s to stop this thing from 

turning around and having individuals buy a whack of tickets 

and doing this at a greater price? 

 

So the resellers would lose the opportunity attached to the 

profits of those tickets, and all of a sudden it becomes more 

individual, from a thousand people as opposed to one or two 

main companies that do their reselling now. So there’s a lot of 

things that I look at, and I think to myself, you know, you’ve 

got to make sure that when you propose a legislation or you 

want Acts in this Assembly passed that you’re very thorough in 

your work. And as I mentioned at the outset, I see the 

definitions of a seller, reseller. I see the fines. I see the supposed 

collaboration with Ticketmaster. I see the press release. I see all 

the fanfare with the intent of the Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve got to make sure, you’ve got 

to make sure that it is hitting the right target, its intent is 

followed through. And that quite frankly when it comes to 

curbing this practice and backing up the families or the people 

who want to go to these events, and having them the fair 

opportunity for them to buy tickets, then you’ve got to do your 

work. You’ve got to do your work and make sure that’s what 

you want to do. 

 

And I see this Bill, it is absolutely full of holes in terms of how 

they’re going to deal with the issue. There is opportunities left 

and right for people to manipulate the process. And at the end 

of the day, at the end of the day you’re simply going to have 

people that are going to get around the rules and regulations, 

and the intent is not going to be followed. There’s still going to 

be people that are going to be circumvented when they’re trying 

to buy tickets to a major concert or to a major event. 

 

I want to pick up a bit on the whole notion of my colleague who 

spoke about the court system and how important is the process 

to get these bad guys that are doing this and how much money 

will that cost to go after them. How much time in the court 

system can you actually commit to dealing with the issues? And 

how will you determine who is doing things wrong? Who are 

the people that are guilty? Because people are not going to 

simply sit back and say, okay, I’m guilty of reselling before 48 

hours. Oh yes, my company’s connected somehow. Yes, go 

ahead and charge me. They’re going to fight this all the way 

through because the Bill is not thorough enough and some of 

the potential problems that could occur. 

 

And that’s exactly my point. You’ve made the press release — 

which is typical of the Saskatchewan Party government — 

saying, oh we’re going to take care of this problem for you. But 

in theory and truth, the Bill is very, very weak. It is very, very 

weak. And you can put as much fanfare as you want on 

definitions, on the fines and the intent, but if you don’t have the 

proper rules and regulations, you don’t have the proper process 

and collaboration by industry, you are running yourself into a 

major problem. 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4311 

And yet already the minister’s out there telling folks, oh we 

took care of that problem for you. Aren’t we a wonderful, 

wonderful government to do this? Well quite frankly, if you’re 

going to do something, then you ought to follow through 100 

per cent with the intent of the Bill. And I see right from looking 

at this Bill and looking at it thoroughly that there are some 

significant, some significant problems. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, some of the other things that people talk 

about was the intent of the Bill is the reselling practice, the 

notion of all the scalping that happens at some of these events. 

You and I know that you can go to any event and you’re going 

to bump into scalpers no matter what. And I see as an example 

here that this is not going to prevent scalping in any way, shape, 

or form. I don’t see any evidence whatsoever that it would curb 

it. In fact I believe that given the nature of the opportunity 

attached with reselling tickets, valuable tickets, that I think this 

will only enhance the scalping opportunity that we see 

happening around many of these major venues throughout our 

province. 

 

So this in a sense, I think, helps scalpers if they’re individual 

people that are outside of these events. They’re outside the 

facilities. And it’s the same notion. Either you get it from a 

reseller or you get it from a scalper, but either way the public is 

not going to be protected. 

 

So they dress up the Bill 119 to make it appear that they’re 

going to deal with the problem, when absolutely everybody that 

I know and everybody involved with the industry says this is 

not going to work. It is not going to work. They’re simply doing 

this to window dress because how in the heck could you control 

all the possibilities around ticket reselling? You simply cannot 

do it because either Ticketmaster sells it as a primary seller or 

they transfer a block of tickets to the reseller. Or if the reseller 

doesn’t do it, then a bunch of individuals can buy it individually 

and they resell basically without having to follow the 48-hour 

rule. Or scalpers could buy a whole whack at the time that the 

event is announced, and they could make the money. 

 

So the choices quite frankly are clear. You either have the 

process individually with Ticketmaster and the resellers or you 

simply go push it underground and have people individually 

buy these tickets and resell at a greater price. Because I could 

claim I’m going to go to Timbuktu. And I have four tickets for 

sale, so I put it on Kijiji and say, look, I’ve got four tickets. I 

can’t make it. 

 

What’s stopping 100 other people from doing that, or 1,000 

other people from doing that? Because if I’ve got four tickets 

and I want to make an extra 50 bucks off them, I can go on 

Kijiji saying, look, I’ve got these tickets for sale. So can I get an 

extra 50 bucks for them because I can’t make it? That practice 

will flourish. And since the Act itself says we won’t do 

anything to stop that, then you begin to really wonder, well 

what the heck’s going on here? I thought this whole exercise 

was to stop that activity from happening. 

 

So all the minister is doing is taking the legitimate operation of 

Ticketmaster and then penalizing them for the reselling 

opportunity that they at one time had, and turning that and 

saying, okay, resellers, you can’t get these block of tickets. But 

it’s open to the public. It’s open to scalpers who might want to 

go on Kijiji or outside the venues that these events are 

happening, and they will make the profit. But there is no 

charges against them. It’ll only be charged against Ticketmaster 

or the resellers if they don’t follow the rules or if they’re 

connected by the Internet or if they’re connected through the 

business corporation branch or if they do this before 48 hours. 

 

And the penalties are fairly severe — half a million dollars for 

the second offence. And again do the courts have time for all 

these other activities that Ticketmaster’s industry’s involved 

with? I don’t think so. The courts are fairly busy. So you look at 

all the notion, everything from the process of definition, which 

are just deflections of what the Bill hasn’t been able to do. 

They’re good at putting in definitions and we look at that and 

we understand what the definitions are. They’re good at 

identifying the penalties, but boy, in terms of trying to follow 

through with the intent of the Bill, there are some significant, 

significant problems with the structure of this Bill. 

 

Now the minister, give him his due in a sense saying, well it’s a 

work-in-progress. We can’t figure this out on our own. We’ve 

got all these things that we want to make sure happens. Well my 

point to him is, well why did you go with great fanfare to make 

a press release saying that you’re going stop this problem? And 

then a month later after you make this announcement and the 

public says, good, good, he’s doing something about it, then all 

of a sudden we find out, well it’s a work-in-progress. He still 

can’t figure it out. 

 

So that’s kind of what I think the whole notion around the ticket 

sales issue is that the minister, in his haste to appear to be doing 

public good and to try and look his party look good, didn’t do 

the proper homework, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Didn’t do the 

homework because based on what I see from the Act itself, all 

you’re simply doing is driving the ticket sales to these events 

underground. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Ask for leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Yorkton has the floor. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 

and through you to all the members of the Assembly, I thank 

the hon. member for taking a seat for the introduction. In your 

gallery is another, a person very special to me that has been 

here many times, but I always feel the need to introduce her — 

my wife, Leone. I’d ask all members to make her welcome to 

this Assembly. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 



4312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And certainly I take 

every opportunity to work with the member from Yorkton and 

at the quick moment there I thought that was his daughter, but I 

stand corrected. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, getting back to the notion of the Bill, we 

look at the whole intent. And I want to shift my gears a bit on 

the actual court system itself because we know that the court 

system itself is overworked. And I want to pick up on that 

point. 

 

If there ’s clear fines attached to the Bill, which is . . . They’re 

clear. If they’re meant to really act as a deterrent, then you’d 

better have the penalties handed out and the collection of those 

fines undertaken. 

 

Now what happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if some lawyer comes 

along and some of the companies or one of the entities or the 

resellers is being charged, and the reseller or the primary seller 

comes up with the arguments that we’re making in the 

Assembly in relation to this Bill? If they say no, no, what 

you’ve done is you have displaced legitimate businesses, 

business practices that we’ve done over time, just to look 

politically attractive to a lot of people, and you’ve driven that 

particular practice of reselling to the individual basis or 

underground to the scalpers. 

 

And how is this going to affect the whole notion of the court 

system? I think any judge or any sharp lawyer is going to 

debase the argument. So once again what’s going to happen is I 

think at something as simple as trying to stop the reselling of 

tickets, if you don’t do the fundamental work, you don’t put the 

proper intent in place to make sure the intent is very clear, then 

obviously the Bill itself is not well thought out of. But since the 

minister has made all the announcements already with great 

fanfare and the public is saying good, somebody’s doing 

something about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the practice is going to continue 

whether Ticketmaster or the resellers do it or whether the 

scalpers do it or whether individuals do it. The practice will 

continue. And the whole notion of 48 hours that they have to 

hold back on any selling of tickets to the same venue if they’re 

connected, well that’s not going to be much of a deterrent. 

When you go to court and you get these fines, well that’s not 

going to be much of a deterrent as well. 

 

All you’re doing is you’re exacerbating the challenge that the 

legal system have in dealing with all these other issues. And we 

all know that the justice system itself is overworked, 

overbooked, and just stressed to a point where it’s going to 

create many, many, more problems in the future if you keep 

adding penalties and offences and charges that this Bill has 

identified. 

 

So again I would point out that there are many families out 

there — and I appreciate this, I appreciate the intent — but the 

work has to be done if you want to protect what the people of 

Saskatchewan want. And that’s the primary difference, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that I see from an inexperienced government, 

from a very inexperienced government, because you do the 

fanfare, you do the announcement, you do all these things, but 

underneath is the work being done? Is the base of the intent of 

the legislation, is that solid? Is that thorough? Has that been 

vetted through a number of processes? Has that been built from 

the ground up? And the answer that I see from this Bill, and 

many other Bills, the answer is, quite frankly, no. The answer is 

no. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And for them to drag the people along, believing that this is 

done with this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s not a 

very fair practice of any government. I think the government 

ought to realize that they made a mistake on this, they ought to 

rejig what they’re trying to, and really look at what they’re 

trying to do. If they want to get the people of Saskatchewan’s 

support on this then they ought to really look at this whole Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, because it does not follow through what the intent 

and the desire of the people of Saskatchewan to curb the 

activity of not having access to tickets. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I looked at some of the other things 

that may occur in relation to this Bill. You know, you’re going 

to have junior sports events. You’re going to have rodeo events. 

You’re going to have all these other events. And a lot of people 

use these events for fundraisers, and it’s just a phenomenal 

amount of activity that people have in their home communities. 

And it’s not just big venues and big-name bands. It’s a lot of 

local organizations that do a lot of really good events and big 

events. Are they going to be monitored and are they going to be 

looked at with a magnifying glass when they have to do some 

of these events? Are they now worried about what’s going to 

happen with this particular Bill? 

 

And I can remember a number of years ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, with the hockey draft, the Kenaston super hockey 

draft. You know, people know in Kenaston they raised a lot of 

money. They’d done this online hockey draft and people would 

be buying tickets, or be putting in their team names in with their 

money to try and win a fairly big, significant prize with 

Kenaston. And we know that the NHL [National Hockey 

League] may have complained. There may have been other 

groups that had complained about the Kenaston Super Draft. 

 

And what happened was they made a lot of good money. 

There’s a very good cause, and they had done everything on the 

up and up and everything was . . . Actually, Kenaston Super 

Draft was getting pretty famous, and they were doing really 

good work. But somewhere along the line, there was a rule and 

a process that had to be followed and there was that breakdown. 

There was a breakdown. And had there been some good 

collaboration at the time with the government, then perhaps the 

Kenaston Super Draft might have continued. Now I’m 

assuming that there is some NHL problems with how Kenaston 

was doing their draft, because obviously there’s a connection 

there. 

 

So I go back to that point, is that there is a good idea, a good 



March 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4313 

example of how that draft was making money for the 

community of Kenaston, the fine community of Kenaston, and 

somewhere along the line a rule or regulation that was not well 

thought out nor intended actually put a demise to that program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think The Ticket Sales Act, Bill 119, is just 

fraught with a lot of problems. There are a lot of problems. And 

we have to make sure that we look thoroughly at these Bills, to 

make sure as an opposition that you do two things: do the work 

right; do it as thorough as you can. And if you have an intent on 

a Bill, make sure you have the rules, regulations, procedures, 

collaboration — everything in place. Because if you don’t do it 

right, you’re going to create more problems. 

 

And before you get it right, before you figure this thing out, 

don’t go out to the radio and TV stations and say, look we 

solved a great problem for you. Because the fact of the matter is 

from our perspective, from the opposition’s perspective, they 

have not, they have not done their work. They have not figured 

out that base of rules and that good design of this Bill because 

quite frankly they don’t have the experience. They don’t have 

the experience. 

 

And what happens now is the minister says we solved the 

problem, but it’s a work-in-progress. Well how does that work? 

How do you solve a problem and yet you say still have a work 

in progress? Because what’s going to happen now is you pretty 

much made the move to drive the reselling of these tickets 

underground. That’s going to be more individualistic in terms 

of people buying up tickets and selling them on Kijiji, and it’s 

going to be more of the scalpers that will benefit from this Act. 

 

And the people that actually will follow the rules, will submit to 

your provincial sales tax, will forward the information to our 

provincial revenue agency, and they’ll do all the different 

reporting that is required of them. But now they’re going to 

stand by and they’re going to watch all this activity happening 

in their communities and their cities and maybe even around 

their venues, and not being able to do a darn thing about it 

because in the Bill there’s been nothing to address scalpers and 

it doesn’t do anything to address individual sales of some of 

these tickets. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out that there are 

people out there that really, truly want to follow the rules. There 

are people out there that really, truly are committed to their 

community. There are organizations that count on venues and 

big concerts and community events for their fundraising. 

There’s a huge pile of people out there, they’re as committed as 

heck, and the only problem is, is they want to follow the rules to 

make sure that there’s good accountability, transparency, and 

that the money that they generate from these events is going to 

a good cause. All that is pure. That’s good. Some solid, pure 

arguments that the people of Saskatchewan have. 

 

Now the government comes along through this Bill 119 to talk 

about ticket sales. And it’s confusing, not just to Ticketmaster, 

but to the resellers, to the scalpers it helps, and to the 

individuals’ ticket sales, that people that might want to sell their 

tickets, that will help them as well. 

 

So these people have to make sure they follow the rules, the 

good groups and the good people. And if they’re one step out of 

line — they make some mistake somewhere, an unknowing 

mistake somewhere — and then, bang, the big hand of justice 

will come along and slap them with a $10,000 fine or a 

$100,000 fine. And then what do they do there as a group, as an 

organization? And that’s why I use the example of Kenaston. 

They’re doing good work. Now as a Super Draft, it’s not as 

super as it once was because all of a sudden there’s all these 

rules in place. 

 

Now is that going to happen with some of the venues that we 

hold in our communities as a result of this Bill? Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think it is. I think it is. You’re going to take 

the hard work and good intent of people on some of these 

venues and some of these events to try and make a good, solid 

amount of profit for their community, for their cause or for their 

project, and you’re going to make them do a report, report what 

they’ve done and how they’re going to sell their tickets. And if 

they make one small, innocent mistake, not to the benefit of 

anybody individually, bang, the $10,000 fine. Or if you’re a 

group or an organization, a $100,000 fine. 

 

Now if you look at that and you translate all that information 

and all those rules and regulations and fines right across the 

board to every single community, every single municipality, 

every single group in every corner of this province, you can see 

how this Bill 119 was not well thought out. 

 

Again the minister admits — and it’s been an admission that 

we’ve been seeing pretty steady from the Saskatchewan Party 

government — it’s a work-in-progress. We haven’t figured this 

thing out yet. Well if you haven’t figured it out, why go 

announce it? Why go announce it? Aren’t you putting the horse 

before the cart? You know, if you haven’t figured this thing out 

yet, why are you going out to the public and saying hey, the 

great hero, the great new government, has solved this problem 

for you? 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this whole 

ticket sales Act, Bill 119, has not been well thought out. The 

research is poor. The intent is not going to be followed through. 

It’s not going to help the people of Saskatchewan or their 

families that want to buy tickets to these venues and these 

events. It’s not going to do what the minister said three or four 

months ago to stop this practice. In fact it’s going to be done in 

such a way that scalpers and people that want to individually 

profit from some of these events, simply buying up these tickets 

at a rapid pace and reselling those tickets at a tidy little profit 

for the individual, Mr. Speaker, that is going to occur as a result 

of the Bill and how it has not been properly thought out. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we in opposition certainly see that time and 

time again. We have a government across the way that can’t 

manage a two-car parade, and they’re running our finances. 

And, Mr. Speaker, well they’re only a billion, $1.05 billion off. 

You know, that was the mistake they made. Okay. And now 

we’re finding out, not only from the financial prospective 

they’re not thinking things through, but Bill 119’s another 

example. So no matter how small the issue or how grand the 

financial plan is, they’re making mistake after mistake after 

mistake. And that’s why we on this side of the Assembly say, 

these guys don’t know what they’re doing. 

 

So Bill 119, despite the bravado of the minister and the great 



4314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2010 

amount of explaining he’s been doing to the public that he 

solved the problem, there’s nothing in this Bill that would solve 

the problem of people not being able to access tickets to an 

event in a timely, fair way. There is simply no way that this Bill 

can be implemented. There’s no way this Bill could be 

followed. There’s no way this Bill could hold up the 

prosecution of people that continue to do this. 

 

All they’ve done is they put Ticketmaster and the resellers on 

notice, and that’s not going to do anything to curb the activity. 

They have in a sense empowered the scalpers and empowered 

individual ticket sales. And that, I think in the long run, is why I 

think they got no collaboration publicly from Ticketmaster even 

though the minister identified in his speech, in his presentation 

that Ticketmaster collaborated with him. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s quite clear that this 

minister needs to rethink what he has said to the public. He 

needs to get up and he’s got to say, yes we had this thing 

figured out, but I didn’t have it figured out. It’s like that story in 

the one commercial, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the referee 

goes in the middle of the rink and turns to the public and says, I 

missed that call and I’m sorry. It’s my fault. I’m not going to 

give the other team a penalty to make up for that call I missed. 

I’m sure we all seen that commercial. 

 

The minister ought to do the same thing. He ought to get up and 

take a mulligan on this Bill because he’s not properly thought 

this out. But yet he’s gone out and he said, he said he is going to 

solve the problem. What he ought to say is . . . What he ought to 

do is same thing as a referee, go in some venue and say, look, I 

had this intent and I told you guys I was going to take care of 

the problem, but I can’t. I didn’t think this through. I’m sorry. I 

just wasn’t thorough enough in my job as minister, and yet I 

already made the call and said we were going to do all these 

wonderful things. 

 

So I think the minister ought to get up and take a mulligan on 

this one and say, yes we made a mistake. We empowered 

scalpers. We empowered individual sales. We penalized 

Ticketmaster and the resellers. And at the end of the day, there 

aren’t going to be anybody in the province of Saskatchewan are 

going to get better treatment as a result of this Bill when it 

comes to trying to buy tickets at certain venues and certain 

events. 

 

So I think the minister ought to do that and stand up and say he 

made a mistake. He didn’t think this thing through and he ought 

to do so. And if he doesn’t, I think he should resign, Mr. Deputy 

Chair. I think one of the things that he has to admit is that his 

work has not been thorough enough and that he’s taking credit 

for something that the Bill is in no way, shape, or form ever 

going to be able to achieve. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out again in terms of what the 

other provinces are doing. has the minister at least gone to other 

provinces and said, what are you guys doing to curb this 

activity? And I think what’s happening is that the minister has 

not. The minister has not. 

 

And there’s an old phrase that I often use and I used many times 

on my own, is that half of being intelligent is knowing what 

you’re dumb at. So I’ll always ask for people’s advice because 

there’s a lot of things that I’m dumb at. But I want to point out 

that the best thing to do is, when you’re in trouble, you’re not 

sure what you’re doing, then seek advice from those that are 

much more advanced in certain areas or much more 

knowledgeable in certain issues than you are. And that makes 

you a very smart person if you do that. 

 

So I would encourage the minister to see what the other 

jurisdictions are doing and to see what they can do to help him 

out because he needs help. And something as simple as this, not 

thought out thoroughly, not developed properly can have some 

negative ramifications. And as much as they want to spout off 

about solving the problem of ticket reselling and hurting the 

public, Mr. Deputy Chair, he has not achieved any one of those 

objectives. 

 

This Bill is contrary to common sense. It’s contrary to the intent 

of what he said he is going to do and it’s fraught with problems. 

And it’s wide open for any and many legal challenges that I 

think people in Saskatchewan will see through and will not see 

the purpose and the intent of this Bill being followed through. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It now being 5 o’clock 

p.m., the House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow 

morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4283 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4283 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4283 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4283 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4283 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4283 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4305 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4311 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4284 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4285 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4285 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4285 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4287 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................ 4287 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4287 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4288 

 Canadian Red Cross Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4287 

 Saskatchewan’s Economy 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4287 

 North Saskatoon Business Awards 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4288 

 St. Patrick’s Day Luck 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4288 

 Rural Saskatchewan 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4289 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 School System Funding 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4289 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4289 

 First Nations University of Canada 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4291 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4291 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4292 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Provincial Cultural Policy 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4293 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4294 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4294 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4294 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4294 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4295 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4301 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4308 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


