




















































Hansard: November 22, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 14A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6131 

 November 22, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are a number of people, and 

I’m going to introduce two of the individuals seated up there. 

First gentleman that I’m going to introduce has been in the 

legislature a number of times. Mr. Speaker, we are honoured 

today in the province of Saskatchewan to have the ambassador 

from Ukraine to Canada. His Excellency Ihor Ostash is here 

representing Ukraine, and we’ve already had the opportunity to 

meet once and we’re going to be doing that in the course of 

today and tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but the other gentleman who’s seated next to the 

ambassador is the deputy governor of the oblast Zhytomyr. 

Zhytomyr, as many who would know the geography of 

Ukraine, is a province, and oblast is equivalent to a province. 

And the deputy governor, Mr. Mykola Deysan, is here. I had 

the privilege . . . and I can honestly tell everyone that Mykola 

treated us royally in September in his province, in his oblast. 

We were able to visit industries. We were able to see so much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, in their booklet about Zhytomyr 

region, they have one sentence, and I’m going to just say it. It 

says, “The economic potential of Zhytomyr region offers 

opportunities for different kinds of business partnerships.” And 

that’s what the vice-governor is here to do. He’s going to be 

signing a memorandum with the province of Saskatchewan for 

expanded trade and agriculture — that’s where we’re going to 

start — and then potentially to expand into so many different 

regions. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

And I hope that you have a great stay here in this province for 

the next two days. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the 

Deputy Premier in welcoming . . . [inaudible] . . . to the 

province of Saskatchewan, Ihor Ostash and particularly the 

deputy from the Zhytomyr region, Mykola Deyson. But we’d 

also like to mention that we have . . . This week Agribition is 

on here, something that you might be very interested in 

attending. And so welcome you to our province and I hope your 

stay is enjoyable. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services, the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce 12 individuals and their guests who were recognized 

this morning for their service with the housing authority. Some 

of them have 25 years of services, and three individuals have 35 

years of service. Together there’s 400 years of volunteerism in 

the Assembly this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to introduce Evelyn Baxter from the Codette Housing 

Authority with 25 years; Betty Edworthy from the Weekes 

Housing Authority for 25 years; Geraldine Peppler from the 

Yorkton Housing Authority, 25 years; Grace Strobel, Waldheim 

Housing Authority, 25 years; John Hendricks, Milden Housing 

Authority, 25 years; Robert Piercy, Milden Housing Authority, 

25 years; Walter Gardiner, Bethune Housing Authority, 25 

years; Ernest Millar, Bethune Housing Authority, 25 years; and 

Melvin Kozlowski from the Battleford Housing Authority for 

25 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also have two people here on 30 years: 

Jean Babiuk from the Sturgis Housing Authority and Lloyd 

Hunchak from the Blaine Lake Housing Authority. 

 

I’d also like to recognize some people who were unable to be 

with us. Yvonne Wilson from the Lashburn Housing Authority, 

Dianne Epp from the Laird Housing Authority, and Leanne 

McDonald from the Sturgis Housing Authority. Mr. Speaker, I 

also would like to recognize a number of the officials who are 

with us today who have worked very hard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking 

these people, not only for the work they do in the housing 

authority but for the many hours of volunteerism in other parts 

of their life as well. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join in with the minister in welcoming these very 

special guests that do tireless work for communities right across 

the province. And that is a very impressive number, over 400 

hours. So I know, on behalf of the opposition, I too would like 

to join the minister in welcoming those folks. 

 

And while I’m on my feet . . . But we should give them a round 

of applause right now. While I’m on my feet, I would like to 

ask permission, leave from the House if I could make an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

asked for leave to do an extended introduction. Are the 

members agreeable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thanks 

to the government for agreeing. This is a very special day for 

many members of our society who have service animals who 

help them out daily in their work, both in a private setting and a 



6132 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

public setting. And so they have travelled to Regina, to their 

legislature, to hear first reading of the Bill, the service animals 

protection Act. 

 

And I’d like to take a moment and introduce all the people. And 

I think that they’re here on the main floor. And first I’d like to 

introduce Robin East who has been introduced in this House 

before. He’s a stalwart advocate for those people living with 

disabilities. Robin is here with his guide dog, Seinfeld, and he’s 

the national president of the Alliance for Equality of Blind 

Canadians and also the national Guide Dog Users of Canada. 

And he pointed out as we were coming in today that he’s never 

seen a situation in the House where we’ve had so many guide 

dogs in the House. So this truly is a first and they’re doing very, 

very well. 

 

I’d also like to introduce John Bishop and his guide dog Bliss, 

Shan Noy with guide dog Danson; Summer Hartzfeld with 

guide dog Lake, Michelle Busch with guide dog Jimmy, Blaine 

Deutscher with guide dog Dewey, Richard Letourneau with 

guide dog Oswin, Bernie Nielsen with guide dog Emma, 

Darlene Smith — and her husband Dan; Dan’s up there — with 

guide dog Duffy, and Marlene Hoce is . . . actually Marlene is 

between guide dogs right now. And she feels very privileged to 

be here because she believes very firmly in the good work that 

guide dogs do. 

 

These folks represent different organizations too, to make sure 

their voice is heard — Alliance for Equality of Blind 

Canadians, blind sports Canada, Canadian Council of the Blind, 

the Canadian National Society of the Deaf-Blind. And I know 

that they met together in the spring to form a new allegiance 

called the equality for blind Canadians. And actually Robin is 

the national president for that. And they’re working hard to 

make sure their issues are heard. 

 

Now we might be joined up in the gallery. I’m not sure if we 

have folks from CNIB [Canadian National Institute for the 

Blind]. Selene Daniel-Whyte and Lisa Telfer, also from CNIB, 

were going to be here today, but I’m not sure if they got here. 

But I do want to introduce . . . Oh up there? Okay, they are 

here. Great, good to see you. 

 

As well we have some folks from the canine police units here in 

Saskatoon and Regina because this is also an important Bill for 

them because service animals are not only a private issue but a 

public issue. And we’ve heard about that recently in the last 

couple of weeks. I want to take a moment. 

 

Up in your gallery is Sergeant Steve Kaye, canine unit 

supervisor in Saskatoon, but also with Steve is the president of 

the Canadian Police Canine Association. So this is something 

that’s happening right across Canada. Also joining him from 

Saskatoon is Constable Todd Horsley and Constable Chad 

Malanowich. From Regina, we have Constable Jason 

Gunderson, Constable J.R. Tunison, and Sergeant William 

Hayden; he’s the coordinator of the Regina canine police unit. I 

should tell you that Jason, Constable Gunderson and Sergeant 

Hayden were in Manitoba actually when they passed their 

legislation. So it’s very impressive that they could be here today 

to be part of this. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, they’re here to witness the first 

reading of the service animal protection Act, and they’re hoping 

for good things to come out of that. So I would ask all members 

of this House to give them a warm welcome to their legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with members opposite in welcoming these people to the 

legislature today. I think it’s commendable that people come 

forward and take a position on things that are important in their 

own lives. I think we should as well take a moment just to 

reflect on the good work that’s provided by guide dogs and the 

service that’s provided to the people that use them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In particular I’m familiar with Robin East who’s been here 

before, and I’ve done fundraising work with him for retinitis 

pigmentosa, and certainly specifically welcome him. 

 

And also Sergeant Steve Kaye in the gallery, who is from 

Saskatoon, as the member opposite had indicated, he is with the 

police service in Saskatoon. My personal experience with him 

is that I’ve done a ride along with him and know him from 

Saskatoon, and we certainly spent an interesting and 

educational evening. But probably more important, one of the 

greater challenges that he had in his life was that he was a 

police driving instructor and taught the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton police driving. And in any event, it appears to 

have worked well enough. He is with us today, which speaks 

volumes about the effectiveness of the training that was given. 

 

In any event, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the government 

members, I’d like to welcome these people to the legislature 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and, through you, to all members of the 

Assembly three very important guests seated in your gallery. 

They’re coming here today from Sacred Heart Community 

School, and I’m speaking of teacher-librarian Carolyn 

Yaskowich, teacher Angie Sazynski, and reading star Monica 

Trinh. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sacred Heart Community School is a school that 

takes literacy and reading very seriously, and they’ve been very 

active participants in the accelerated reading program. Last 

year, when Monica was in grade 6, she scored 1,001 points in 

the program, reading a total of 109 books. You know, to put 

this in some context, Mr. Speaker, the points are assigned for 

the varying degrees of difficulty for the books. But that Monica 

won with 1,001 points wasn’t enough for her. This year she’s in 

grade 7, and she set her sights on 1,300 points for the program. 

And to give you some idea about that, Mr. Speaker, Sacred 

Heart has displayed out front 10,574 books read this year to 

date, and that means about a total of 9,137.5 points. 

 

So Sacred Heart is a school that champions literacy and 

reading. Certainly Ms. Yaskowich and Ms. Sazynski are the 

people that are helping the students to really take up that 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6133 

challenge. And today, Mr. Speaker, we have Monica Trinh here 

with us who is a champion in that regard. So please join with 

me in welcoming these very important people to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to welcoming all the visitors to the Assembly today, I 

do want to specifically and expressly welcome His Excellency 

Ambassador Ostash, to the Legislative Assembly today and the 

vice-governor visiting from Ukraine, Mr. Speaker. And so the 

House knows, the governor was going to be here as well, but 

the president of Ukraine is visiting that region. 

 

And so as has been mentioned, we’re very honoured to be able 

to be signing the agreement with this region of Ukraine, to have 

the ambassador here. And I think it’s important for all of us to 

very formally welcome His Excellency the ambassador to this 

Legislative Assembly today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and, through you, to all members of the 

legislature a group of 17 students in grades 1 to 9 at 

Curtis-Horne Christian School which is located on Hill Avenue 

here in Regina Lakeview. And they’re accompanied by their 

teachers, Jeff Mathieson and Amy Mathieson and Alina 

Boutilier, as well as chaperones Stew and Joan Mathieson, 

Gloria Radomsky, and Debbie Ashworth. I ask all members to 

welcome them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to single out 

and to introduce to you and, through you, to all members of this 

honourable Assembly two of my constituents from the long list 

of great Sask Housing volunteers introduced by the Minister of 

Social Services: Walter Gardiner and T. Ernest Millar. If you 

gentlemen will give a wave, there you are, thank you. Both for 

25 years have dedicated volunteer service to the Bethune 

Housing Authority. On behalf of the people of Thunder Creek 

particularly, I wish to thank you both and hope that all members 

of this honourable Assembly will extend a warm welcome to 

Walter and Ernest. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly, I’d like to recognize a couple of people in 

the east gallery: Larry Hubich, president of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour, and Jim Britton who is working on issues 

surrounding saving our services in the Crowns in the province. 

And also seated with them is Heath Smith from the SFL 

[Saskatchewan Federation of Labour], a staff member there. I’d 

ask all members to welcome them and give them a hand for all 

the work they do for working people in this province. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming these people to the legislature. I 

know this a recurring introduction from the member, but I think 

it’s only appropriate considering the necessary work and the 

interrelationship that those particular individuals have with the 

Assembly. So on behalf of all members, I would like to 

welcome them to the Assembly today.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps close to last 

— but certainly not last in my books — I’d like to introduce 

two guests seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Today in the 

Assembly is my wife, Ruth Eliason, who is in Regina for a day 

or two, and our new daughter, Ingrid Louise Broten, who is a 

few days over five months. So this is Ingrid’s first trip to the 

legislature, so it’s been fun to show her around. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Immigration.  

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, three 

individuals I’d like to highlight within your gallery . . . Mr. 

Kyle Addison is here, the president of the University of Regina 

Students’ Union, who does such impressive work for the 

university. As well a couple of individuals who you’ll be 

familiar with, that is Ms. Katie Colhoun and Chelsea 

Laskowski, both former Pages here within the Assembly, both 

University of Regina students. To all three, I hope all members 

would join me in welcoming them to their Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 

some friends and constituents in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re also here for the event that the Minister of Social 

Services described a little while ago. Bob and Faye Piercy, Ted 

and Margaret Herd, and John and Marlene Hendricks — I look 

forward to speaking to you folks after question period. And I’d 

ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to their 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the deterioration of our highways. This 

particular petition applies to Highway 310 which, according to 

the petition, is significantly deteriorated to the point that it is 

becoming a potential safety hazard for those residents who have 

to travel on this highway each and every day. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 



6134 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

so need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

citizens, more specifically Saskatchewan renters who are facing 

a combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in many 

communities and that many of these renters have suffered 

increases of hundreds of dollars each — whether in large 

communities or small, it’s pretty common across the province 

— and that the argument that private market would deliver 

sufficient affordable housing in the absence of rent control has 

proven to be false. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of citizens who are concerned that many Saskatchewan 

seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, 

emotional, and financial abuse, and that seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty, and also that seniors have a right to protection from 

abuse, neglect, and exploitation: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

I present these petitions on behalf of over 70 people from 

Colonsay, Saskatoon, Bethune, Lashburn, Allan, Meacham, and 

Elfros. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And 

people living in poverty have long identified solutions such as 

the Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty, Dignity for All campaign. All call for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy including income, food, and 

housing security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the 

communities of Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, Lanigan, Loon 

Lake, Drake, and Guernsey. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of hospice and palliative care in 

Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system including residential 

hospices would increase end-of-life options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Furdale residents. The 

government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies 

of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. The same 

government ministry has directed that customers may no longer 

treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as 

for livestock irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

referred to by the government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6135 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Corman Park in Saskatoon. I so present.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude with concern to the two consecutive deficit 

budgets, Mr. Speaker, all at a time where this government has 

been granted revenues at all-time historic highs, Mr. Speaker. 

That shameful mismanagement is costing Saskatchewan people, 

and in fact we see debt mounting to the tune of $4.2 billion over 

the next four years, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned 

citizens and good folks of Regina Rosemont. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Another Step Towards the 2010 Grey Cup 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Riders 

showed once again that they thrive in pressure situations. And 

once again the Rider nation was there to cheer our team to 

victory and a Western Division title over the Calgary 

Stampeders. 

 

The Riders beat the Stampeders 20-16. The Rider fans were a 

little quiet at the start of the game due to the Stampeders taking 

an early 11-0 lead. Rider momentum came back as Darian 

Durant found his game late in the second quarter and marched 

the offence down the field, finishing off with the Getzlaf 

touchdown. The Calgary Stampeders were posed to go into the 

half with the lead, but ball hawk James Patrick picked off 

Burris, ran the ball back, and set up the go-ahead touchdown. 

There is no doubt that the play of the game came with three 

minutes left in the game when Jerrell Freeman recovered the 

ball in the Riders’ end zone to negate a potential Calgary 

touchdown. Whew. 

 

The Riders have now taken another step towards the 2010 Grey 

Cup. Unbeknownst to the rest of the House, I predicted the 

Saskatchewan-Montreal Grey Cup back in the spring. On behalf 

of all members of this House, I want to congratulate the Riders 

on their victory. And as they move on to the Grey Cup, just 

remember one thing: the 13th man should be in the stands, not 

on the field. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Western Division Champions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise today to 

congratulate the Saskatchewan Roughriders, the 2010 CFL 

[Canadian Football League] Western Division Champions. The 

entire province was watching yesterday as the Riders prevailed 

over the Calgary Stampeders for the second consecutive year, 

winning 20 to 16 over our rivals to the west. 

 

In front of thousands of Rider fans in attendance at Calgary’s 

McMahon Stadium, Rider nation now has an opportunity for 

redemption. The team will set their sights on avenging last 

year’s championship loss to Montreal. 

 

After the game, an army of green took over the Green Mile on 

Albert Street in Regina. With horns blaring, fans whooped and 

hollered and waved flags, jerseys, and anything green that they 

could find. They braved the cold for a few more hours just to 

show their support for our team. Hundreds of fans were waiting 

for the team as they arrived home last night, staying warm 

inside the airport and excited to congratulate their team. And 

today, Mr. Speaker, at 4 o’clock, fans are going to be gathering 

at City Hall to do one more celebration. 

 

And now we’re off to the Grey Cup, Mr. Speaker, for the third 

time in four years. Rider fans are optimistic, enthusiastic, and 

ready for a win next weekend. Rider fans will no doubt brave 

the bitter cold in Edmonton this coming weekend in support for 

the fourth Rider championship. Next weekend, fans will be out 

in full force at the game in Edmonton, and when we bring home 

the Grey Cup the province will be ready to celebrate again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Saskatchewan Roughriders, the 

2010 CFL Western Division Champions and soon to be the 

2010 Grey Cup champions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Movember 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I bring to 

the attention of the Assembly a worthy cause that is of interest 

to many Saskatchewan men. Mr. Speaker, this month is 

becoming increasingly known as Movember, a month dedicated 

to raising awareness and funds for prostate cancer. 

 

Prostate cancer is a highly treatable disease. Ninety per cent of 

the time it is completely curable when diagnosed early. Mr. 



6136 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

Speaker, one in seven men will be diagnosed with prostate 

cancer. In 2009 almost 900 Saskatchewan men were diagnosed, 

and 230 died from the disease. Almost all prostate cancer, about 

98 per cent, occurs in men over the age of 50. 

 

One way we can show our support for patients and families is 

by growing a moustache this month and collecting pledges — a 

visible reminder that we care and are taking action. Proceeds go 

to Prostate Cancer Canada, which supports research, patient 

support, education, and awareness. Last year Movember raised 

$7.8 million across Canada. 

 

The Ministry of Health’s website provides patients with clear, 

interactive information on screening, diagnosis, and treatment. 

A provincial prostate cancer pathway is now being developed to 

help patients on their journey. It will provide timelier access to 

services and improve patient care and satisfaction. 

 

I thank health providers and prostate cancer support groups who 

do such good work throughout Saskatchewan, and I encourage 

participation in Movember. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Agribition Celebrates 40th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

recognize a true institution, the Canadian Western Agribition. 

The burning of the brand takes on special meaning this year, 

Mr. Speaker, as Agribition celebrates its 40th anniversary as the 

premier cattle and livestock show here in the province. 

 

People from across Canada and from 70 countries around the 

world are coming to Regina this week, Mr. Speaker, to see the 

livestock, take in the trade show, watch the rodeo, and 

experience all the colourful sights and sounds that make this a 

truly Canadian and Saskatchewan event. 

 

Some people have been coming for years, Mr. Speaker, even 

decades, and for them this will also be a chance to catch up 

with old friends and keep up with the latest developments in 

their industry. That’s been the secret of Agribition’s success, 

Mr. Speaker — staying true to the vision and the solid 

grassroots principle of its founders while responding to the 

changing world and the changing marketplace by creating a 

showcase for modern developments in the agricultural industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to create an event like this with 1,000 exhibits, 

and it’s possible to do with only hundreds of volunteers and 

staff, to produce . . . with the realization that many people who 

work so hard to carry on this Saskatchewan tradition. So I ask 

all members to join with me in congratulating Agribition on its 

40th anniversary. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Everyday Heroes Recognized 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, four residents from my constituency of Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley were honoured yesterday, November 21, 

with the Rescue Recognition Award from Lifesaving Society 

during a ceremony at Government House. They are everyday 

heroes whose selfless acts of bravery helped others. They 

showed true Saskatchewan spirit in helping those in need. 

 

The Kapell family — Ron, Nancy, and Brandi — were 

honoured with Rescue Recognition Awards for their heroic 

efforts on November the 14th. A boy and a man and their dog 

had fallen through the thin ice on Rochdale Lake. While Nancy 

was on the phone with 911, Ron and Brandi took off towards 

the lake. They used an extension cord to pull the father out of 

the icy water. The boy had managed to pull himself on to the 

thin ice and crawled back to safety. The group went back to the 

Kapell house and waited as EMS [emergency medical services] 

arrived to help. The dog did not survive, but the man and the 

boy are fine. 

 

Irma Molnar also was rewarded on Sunday. Two years ago, Ms. 

Molnar came across a very similar event that the Kapell family 

faced on November 14th. While out on her daily walk, Ms. 

Molnar witnessed Randy Durovick, who had fallen into the lake 

when he went to retrieve one of his dogs that had taken after a 

flock of geese. Ms. Molnar rushed to the shore and by chance 

found a piece of PVC [polyvinyl chloride], and used it to pull 

both Mr. Durovick and his dog to safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join us in 

recognizing the Kapell family and Ms. Molnar for their heroic 

efforts. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Service Animal Protection 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know there is no current provincial legislation that protects 

service animals here in Saskatchewan, but yet it is a 

well-established fact that service animals provide important and 

unique services to people living with disabilities and to peace 

officers in carrying out their duties. We need only to think back 

a few short weeks ago when the Saskatoon police canine unit 

was used in the tragic search for a missing baby’s body in the 

Saskatoon landfill. 

 

Service animals often do their jobs in public, and in the case of 

police service animals, in dangerous circumstances at risk to 

themselves, such as police service dog Icon, who was stabbed 

in early November 2009. But after receiving a blood 

transfusion, he is now fully recovered and Icon is back on the 

job. But we can also recall Steve Kaye’s canine partner, police 

service dog Cyr, who was shot and killed in the line of duty in 

2001. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Washington state’s Layla’s Law was the first to 

protect service animals. And now Manitoba, Ontario, British 

Columbia have followed the lead to protect service animals. In 

Manitoba, the need for such legislation came to light when a 

guide dog belonging to a visually impaired woman was 

attacked by another dog. As a result, the traumatized guide dog 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6137 

could no longer perform his duties, and the owner had to take 

the dog to New York for costly retraining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

contributions of service animals here in Saskatchewan and that 

we commit ourselves to doing all we can to help them do their 

jobs safely and without harassment. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Economic Update 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leading economic 

indicators show that Saskatchewan continues to do well under 

our government. Here are but a few. Our population is now at 

an all-time high, 1,045,622. It has grown by 16,498 people in 

the past year, making Saskatchewan the fastest growing 

province in Canada. Saskatchewan’s population has now grown 

by more than 50,000 people since the start of 2007 — the 

fastest and most sustained period of population growth in 

decades. 

 

New employment numbers for October show 5,200 more 

people working in Saskatchewan than one year ago, setting an 

employment record for the month of October. Full-time jobs are 

up by 11,300. Private sector jobs increased by 11,200. October 

marks the ninth consecutive month of year-over-year 

employment increases for Saskatchewan. 

 

The number of Saskatchewan people receiving regular 

employment insurance benefits declined again in August, down 

740 or 5.6 per cent year over year. 

 

To quote Scotiabank’s latest macro outlook for this province: 

 

Saskatchewan is expected to be one of the country’s 

strongest performers in 2011, with real GDP growth of 3.3 

per cent. The recovery is being led by a resurging potash 

industry, investment in the resource sector, and continued 

expansion of the province’s service sector — feeding off 

strong immigration. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, this province is moving forward. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier and deals with the discussions around the Prince Albert 

pulp mill and the negotiations that are apparently going on at 

the present time. My question to the Premier deals with the 

responsibility for the environmental liabilities associated with 

the P.A. [Prince Albert] pulp mill. 

 

Is it true, Mr. Premier, that the responsibility for the costs of the 

liability around environmental damage, that should be the 

responsibility of Domtar, are being shifted to the taxpayers of 

the province? Is that true? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government has never 

stopped working with respect to reanimating, reopening the 

pulp mill. The government has been facilitating meetings 

between the current owner, brought into the province by the 

failed deal of the previous government, and potentially future 

owners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that, you know, there’s been some 

progress lately, but that meetings are still under way. Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that the liability split that existed 

between the government and Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, 

would remain unchanged should there be a new deal that would 

reopen the mill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in asking the question again 

to the Premier, I want to make it clear that these negotiations, 

so-called, have been going on now for three years since the 

present government took over. And in fact it wasn’t a failed 

deal, but a cancelled deal by the Premier and his government 

back three years ago. 

 

But my question to the Premier is this: can he guarantee the 

taxpayers . . . And I want to make this clear because there’s 

liability in the hundreds of millions of dollars, potentially, 

around the cleanup that Domtar is presently responsible for. 

Can the Premier guarantee that there will be no shift to the 

taxpayers of the province outside of what already exists in the 

present formula? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the previous deal that the 

member references would have involved 100 million taxpayers’ 

dollars being risked in this particular pulp mill. It wasn’t the 

government that cancelled the deal. It was the voters of Prince 

Albert and the voters of the province of Saskatchewan that said 

no to that deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that since that deal was 

cancelled, we have been working with potential new 

participants in the industry, Mr. Speaker. We continue to work 

with those participants. What we do need in this case though is 

a willing seller, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the opposition can assist in 

this regard because they worked very carefully with the 

company that currently owns the assets — that we do need to 

be a willing seller. And I repeat again, the liabilities that existed 

prior to the mill closing in 2006 under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] watch, those liabilities — the split between 

the government and the new company, if there is to be a new 

company — remains unchanged. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the evidence is mounting that 



6138 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

the Sask Party is using taxpayers’ money for an insider deal that 

benefits Sask Party donors and immediate family members of a 

Sask Party cabinet minister. Miner’s Construction and its 

president, Michael Stensrud, donated nearly $19,000 to the 

Sask Party, some of that directly to the Minister of Justice, and 

they’ve been awarded an untendered building contract worth 

$27 million. Bridge City Electric, a company that has also 

donated almost $8,000 to the Sask Party and is owned by the 

Minister of Justice’s brother, now has the electrical contract. 

 

To the Premier: why is the Sask Party using taxpayers’ money 

for an insider deal that benefits Sask Party donors, cronies, and 

family members? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 

from the truth. She comes into the House day in and day out 

and makes these accusations that are absolutely unfounded, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, she talks about a contract for electrical 

work being done at Amicus. This contract was tendered, Mr. 

Speaker. The tender that came in was $140,000 less than any of 

the competitors, Mr. Speaker. In fact if she would like, I’ve got 

the other tenders here in my hand, Mr. Speaker. I’d be glad to 

put them across the floor to the member opposite so she could 

start apologizing to some of the strongest, best-grounded 

families in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for a government that 

says it had nothing to do with it, they now seem to have quite a 

bit of information. Maybe they can give us the information that 

they had blacked out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the list of eight major 

contractors displayed on the sign at the Amicus construction 

site — located in the Minister of Justice’s riding, by the way — 

you find that the major contractors are either Sask Party donors 

or they’re from Alberta. Miner’s Construction gave the Sask 

Party $9,000; Bridge City Electric, $8,000; North Ridge, 

$1,300; RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], the banker, gave them 

$30,000; Interwest Mechanical, $2,000 — in total, over 

$70,000 in donations to the Sask Party. 

 

Does that minister and that Sask Party really expect us to 

believe that it’s a coincidence that all of the major in-province 

contractors on the Amicus project are Sask Party donors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if that member would 

like to go further, I’m sure she could take the rest of question 

period with the number of companies that have donated to the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says that it’s a, you know, it 

should have been tendered, Mr. Speaker. But under their watch, 

there were a number of projects that went sole source, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Last Thursday the member stood in her place, Mr. Speaker, and 

talked about how, under NDP land, it would have never ever 

happened. Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely false. All you have to 

do is look at the sound stage. How many tenders went out for 

that, Mr. Speaker? Did they tender phase 1? No. Did they 

tender phase 2? No. Did they tender phase 3? No, they didn’t, 

Mr. Speaker. They sole sourced the whole operation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously the Sask 

Party’s a bit nervous about this because they were going to sole 

source some schools in Regina, and now they’re going to be 

tendered. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps saying this is a matter 

between the Saskatoon Health Region and Amicus, that they 

have nothing to do with this. But the Saskatoon Health Region 

didn’t find out about this until January. And even their heavily 

censored FOI [freedom of information] request reveals that the 

minister was in discussions about this deal last October. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deal was cooked up in the Premier’s office. 

The lawyer that put the deal together, Mr. Donlevy, is the 

brother to the Premier’s chief of staff. The Minister of Justice’s 

brother is the electrical contractor. It simply isn’t credible that 

no one in the Premier’s office, no one from cabinet, knew 

nothing about this project involving family members. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a fully funded taxpayer project. 

When is that government going to accept responsibility for this 

insider deal with Sask Party donors and cronies, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, all I can say is, for 16 

years under the NDP, none of this discussion happened because 

they didn’t build one new long-term care bed in this province 

for 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are getting it done. We are making sure that 

seniors have appropriate housing, Mr. Speaker, not in acute 

care centres like City Hospital, but in appropriate long-term 

care facilities, Mr. Speaker. And we will partner with credible 

organizations like the Catholic Health Ministry any time, Mr. 

Speaker, on something that government never did because they 

didn’t build a new long-term care bed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Health Care Workers’ Contracts and Health 

Region Funding 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, that’s simply not true. Oliver 

Lodge, Balcarres — I can think of many places that we have 

built new facilities. That’s simply not true. And the minister 

talks about 16 years of what we did. He’s had three years and 

he’s done nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, contract talks with doctors are going nowhere; 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6139 

with residents and interns, going nowhere; and now contract 

talks have broken off with 3,000 health professionals 

represented by Health Sciences. 

 

To the minister: where is the money in this year’s budget to 

settle all of these outstanding health service contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try and correct the 

inaccuracy at the start of her question. I said not a new 

long-term care bed was built. They replaced beds, Mr. Speaker, 

but they didn’t add to the complement of long-term care. 

 

As far as negotiations, Mr. Speaker, as far as negotiations 

between the number of health care professionals that have 

contracts outstanding, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in past 

negotiations, whether it was with the service providers, whether 

it was with SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], it wouldn’t 

be appropriate for me to get into those negotiations on the floor 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. But I will say is that the health care 

provider unions have settled; so has SUN; and I think there will 

be a settlement soon for the outstanding contracts, Mr. Speaker, 

as we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Finance has told all ministries to submit a zero growth budget 

for 2011. The last budget forced health regions to cut services. 

Sunrise Health Region had to find $2.8 million worth of 

savings. Kelsey Trail was told to find 1 million in savings, 

Saskatoon 25 million worth of savings, and Regina 11 million 

worth of savings, to just name a few. Mr. Speaker, the cuts 

came in lab services, long-term care beds, ambulance services, 

therapy reductions, therapist reductions, and staffing reductions. 

Every cut affects the health care services Saskatchewan people 

receive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: we have outstanding, unsettled 

contracts with doctors, residents, interns, and over 3,000 health 

care professionals. Where is the money coming from in the 

2011 zero growth budget that the Sask Party’s putting together? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that the 

health regions throughout this province have done a marvellous 

job with the budgets that they’ve been allocated, Mr. Speaker, 

because what they have done is they’ve looked at many 

outstanding issues such as premium time pay. There are health 

regions in the first six months have cut the premium time pay 

that they’re paying out by over 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That 

is astonishing, Mr. Speaker. It saves the system millions of 

dollars. So that’s where they’re finding the efficiencies. 

 

They’re also finding efficiencies around sick time where 

they’ve reduced the amount of sick time that we see in the 

system by 5 and 7 per cent in the first six months of this year, 

fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. Health regions are doing a very good 

job managing within their budgets. 

 

As far as the contract negotiations, like I said, they will proceed 

along a timeline, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t an event; it is a process, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re well into that process, and I think we’ll see 

agreements in the near future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a disturbing pattern 

forming with the Sask Party. They’ve left 300 residents and 

interns without a contract for almost two years. They’ve been 

dragging their feet since April of 2009 to negotiate a contract 

with the doctors. They negotiated a contract with chiropractors 

and tore it up. And now they are refusing to negotiate a contract 

with over 3,000 specialized health care professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the minister’s refusal to negotiate contracts with 

doctors, resident physicians, chiropractors, health care 

professionals because he doesn’t care about the health services 

that people in Saskatchewan get, or has he run out of money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the accomplishments of 

this government in the first three years in health care are really 

quite astonishing, Mr. Speaker. We have increased the number 

of nurses working in the system by 830. 

 

Now they’re hollering across the floor. I know they don’t 

understand targets and they don’t like to set targets because 

they won’t meet targets, Mr. Speaker. Our government has set a 

target, and it has met and surpassed that target. We’re setting 

targets for health regions on overtime, on sick time. Health 

regions are meeting those targets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We understand there’s a physician recruitment issue in this 

province. Under the NDP, they would have stuck their heads in 

the sand, Mr. Speaker. Our government is addressing it, Mr. 

Speaker. I will not take any advice from that opposition at the 

way they handled health care for the last 16 years compared to 

what we’ve done in the first three. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the minister 

talks about the health districts finding efficiencies in the 

overtime, what I’m hearing is that those shifts aren’t being 

replaced. If somebody is sick, nobody’s being called in. So you 

may be artificially saving money, but you’re putting people at 

risk — not only patients, but the workers. And then you pay for 

it in other places because you simply can’t overwork the 

workforce continually like it’s happening. So this is an artificial 

saving. 

 

And that’s what I’m hearing. The vacancies, the shifts are not 

being replaced. So it’s not going to in the end save us any 

money because we’re damaging the system, we’re damaging 

the workers, and we’re certainly damaging patient care. 

 

And I think the minister talked about 16 years. Three years and 

we’ve seen nothing with this government except settling the 

nurses’ contracts. And he seems to ride all of his apples in one 



6140 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

basket on that one. And even the nurses are saying they’re still 

understaffed and overworked, so he’s won nothing. 

 

So to the minister: where’s the money going to come from, 

from these contracts? There is no money anywhere. And now 

there’s zero growth for next year. There’s no money next year. 

What’s his message to people waiting for contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I’m not quite sure what the question 

was there, Mr. Speaker. But I will say that health regions have 

worked very hard to reduce the premium time pay. She says 

that the staff is being overworked, Mr. Speaker. Well I can’t 

imagine what would’ve been the situation in the hospitals if it 

still was under the NDP where they wouldn’t have recruited 

any more nurses, Mr. Speaker. We have more health care 

professionals now working in the system than any time before 

— more positions, more nurses, and more service providers, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health regions have done a great job in 

addressing the overtime, the sick time, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

more work to be done. There’s lean processes going through the 

Health ministry and the regions, Mr. Speaker, that will find 

more efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. I believe that yes, there is more 

work to be done in the health care system, but I think we’re on 

the right track. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Protection for Service Animals 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Manitoba 

and Ontario have legislation to protect service animals but 

despite this, the Sask Party government has so far refused to do 

so. Following question period, I will introduce The Protection 

of Service Animals Act, and this Bill would establish the offence 

of harming service animals with significant fines and allowing 

for the courts to provide for compensation and, if necessary, 

obedience training orders. To the minister: will the Sask Party 

government commit today to pass this legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done 

media on this earlier and we’ve instructed our officials to have 

a look at the legislation that’s been introduced in other places. I 

can advise the members opposite and the people from the 

public that are in the House today that our government has 

expressed concern over this issue before. We currently have a 

Bill before the House, The Animal Protection Act, which has 

increased fines from 5,000 to $25,000 and jail penalties from 

six months to 24 months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Manitoba Bill, which I’ve seen, has got a 

maximum fine of $10,000. We’re somewhat ahead of the 

Manitoba legislation. So what we’ll want to be looking at Mr. 

Speaker, specifically, is whether there’s things in the other 

legislation that is not already caught either in the Criminal 

Code, in our human rights legislation, or in The Animal 

Protection Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I can advise you that the 

officials are working on this right now, Mr. Speaker, and if 

appropriate we will pass this type of legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know 

the legislation that’s before the House now largely addresses 

animals of production, animals on the farm, and even though 

the minister did go on about pets and different kinds of animals. 

This is a very specific piece of legislation talking about service 

animals. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: many people living with 

disabilities who use service animals value the work that they 

do, and this is an important piece of legislation. In fact they felt 

very heartened by the work that was done in Washington state 

many years ago by Layla’s Law named after a dog, Layla, that 

was traumatized by harassment. Will the minister today make a 

commitment in this House to do all she can to make sure this 

legislation is passed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I had indicated that we 

have officials looking at this legislation. We will want to make 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that we do not have any gaps that exist in 

our existing legislation and whether there is anything that can 

or should be increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing legislation, The Animal Protection 

Act, does cover all types of animals. Dogs, cats, service 

animals, pets, and a variety of any type of animal, Mr. Speaker, 

is caught by this. So, Mr. Speaker, it is not that we are without 

concern for this. And we are looking at it to determine whether 

there are other things that should be done as well. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can advise you that the officials within our 

government are actively looking at this and will continue to do 

so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Housing Issues 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am looking for more 

decisive action on that Bill. 

 

But I want to talk about the government’s inaction on housing. 

It’s beginning to have dire consequences for homeless people in 

Saskatoon. You know, the average cost of a two-bedroom 

apartment in Saskatoon has soared to more than $900 a month 

under this government. Vacancy rates remain low, and the 

number of rental units in this province is falling. 

 

Last Friday the Saskatoon Salvation Army announced that their 

men’s shelter was full and they had to turn people away. To the 

Premier: people’s lives are at risk. When is this government 

going to stop failing families in need and get serious about 

addressing the housing crisis? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6141 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, and to the members 

opposite, we all know that it is regrettable when anybody finds 

himself without a place to stay, especially in this kind of 

weather. And I think the members opposite know that there’s a 

policy that’s still in place from when they were government 

that’ll put people up in hotels to ensure that they have a roof 

over their heads at night. In terms of the situation in Saskatoon, 

we are looking into it, but I understand that all requests were 

handled without using hotels. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have done a lot since we’ve become 

government. There were 16 years of inaction by those 

government. But we have raised emergency shelter rates for 

single individuals and for families to 80 per cent more than the 

NDP had. We’ve increased shelter spaces in Regina and 

Saskatoon and Lloydminster and Prince Albert. 

 

We’ve almost doubled the funding for mobile crisis centres, 

and that’s in addition to the 13.3 per cent increase that all CBOs 

[community-based organization] have received. Mr. Speaker, 

this is not an issue we’re taking lightly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, sadly this is not the 

first time people in crisis have been turned away because of this 

government’s failure to act. Last fall the YWCA [Young 

Women’s Christian Association] shelter in Saskatoon 

announced that they have been forced to turn more than 3,000 

women and children away in the previous year, and things have 

not got much better. 

 

A study by PATHS [Provincial Association of Transition 

Houses Saskatchewan] revealed that many women fleeing 

domestic violence are afraid that, if they try to leave an abusive 

home, they won’t be able to afford a roof over their head. 

Front-line workers tell us that they are spending more and more 

time helping people in crisis find an affordable place to live, 

often at the expense of helping them to address other issues. 

 

To the Premier: why is this government failing women living 

with abuse by failing to provide affordable rental housing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that we are 

looking at seriously. And I think the members opposite should 

remember that they failed to increase shelter rates for 13 out of 

16 years, and in that time inflation went up 30 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been working on this issue. We’ve 

increased funding for housing programs by 45 per cent. We’ve 

worked with the federal government to make sure we have 

$161 million that’s in place for new housing and renovating 

houses. We have 700 new affordable housing units and 1,250 

more on the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also increased the shelter rates and the 

Saskatchewan rental housing supplement four times, and 

they’re indexed both to the cost of living. And we’ve increased 

the income threshold for seniors to qualify for social housing. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a huge issue. We know there is. And we’re 

in discussions with people all the time. We also know that 

we’ve had the cost of living influences and we’re dealing with 

them as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to acknowledge the 

minister acknowledging the role of the federal government. I 

found it interesting last week the federal government in one of 

its committees, parliament, released some work around housing 

or a poverty reduction strategy. Is the minister starting to think 

along those lines? I hope so because the issue is much bigger 

than finding housing for people. It’s keeping them housed. It’s 

addressing all of the issues that keep people from moving from 

place to place and making them unable to provide stability for 

themselves and their children. 

 

[14:30] 

 

They need support like counselling, addiction services, and 

child protection services. They need predictable rent and clean, 

safe housing conditions. And this government has done very 

little to provide for any of those things. 

 

To the Premier: when will this government come forward with 

a comprehensive strategy for more affordable housing and 

address the factors that give rise to homelessness? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite 

are asking for is a strategy. What we have is action, Mr. 

Speaker. The action since we became government has given 

$40 million worth of enhancements to our income assistance 

program. We’ve taken 80,000 people off the tax rolls in this 

province. We’ve doubled the low-income tax credit. We’ve 

nearly doubled the number of seniors eligible for benefits. 

We’ve increased the amount of money . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the members to 

allow the minister to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why the 

members opposite aren’t worried about things like disability tax 

credits. We introduced a low-income seniors’ prescription drug 

plan. We’ve increased the minimum wage three times since 

January of 2008 to 9.25 an hour. We’ve increased the funding 

to CBOs by 13.3 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is there more work to do? Yes, there is. Are we 

working on it, Mr. Speaker? Yes, we are. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 617 — The Protection of Service Animals Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 



6142 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 617, The 

Protection of Service Animals Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Saskatoon Centre that Bill No. 617, The Protection of Service 

Animals Act be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table 

answers to questions 240 through 374. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 240 through 374 are 

tabled. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Priority of Debate 

 

The Speaker: — Before government orders, I wish to inform 

the Assembly that a notice regarding a proposed matter for 

priority of debate was received in the Clerk’s office at 11:25 

a.m. today, for which I thank the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Pursuant to rule 27(5), it is my duty to determine whether or not 

the matter should have urgent consideration with regard to the 

extent it concerns the administrative responsibilities of the 

government, could come within the scope of ministerial action, 

and the probability of the issue being brought before the 

Assembly within a reasonable time by other means. 

 

The fundamental principle underlying rule 27 was to provide 

the opportunity within a proper framework of parliamentary 

procedure, where none existed, for the immediate discussion of 

any matter deemed to be of such urgency and importance that 

the business of the Assembly should be put aside in order to 

discuss one specific, particular subject. 

 

I’ve considered this matter carefully in the context of my 

responsibilities under rule 27. The motion proposed does not 

contravene any of the restrictions outlined in subsection (6) of 

the rule. However by the information presented by the member 

for Regina Dewdney, it is not apparent that the operation of the 

Salvation Army shelter is within the administrative jurisdiction 

of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I agree with the member that the matter raised is of public 

importance. The broader scope of the matter is perhaps within 

the scope of some sort of ministerial action. But from the 

information presented by the member, I do not find it evident 

that the situation would change appreciably if the matter came 

under debate utilizing the regular notice provisions of our rules. 

 

In the immediate future, there will be an opportunity for this 

matter to be placed on the order paper. The member can 

provide notice as early as tomorrow to debate this matter on 

Thursday. According to the rotation, the Opposition House 

Leader may designate this motion as his priority item to be 

debated on Thursday. For this reason, the decision of the 

Speaker is to deny the request for priority of debate. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of a Bill, Bill No. 156, which 

repeals The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act and 

replaces it with The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 

2010. This legislation is being amended along with the 

companion legislation, Bill 157, The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, oil and gas and indeed all of Saskatchewan’s vast 

natural resources continue to drive this province forward. The 

contribution of the oil and gas industry to Saskatchewan, its 

people, and its communities has meant a strong economy, job 

opportunities, and the delivery of important social programs 

and infrastructure. The province has earned a reputation with 

industry for creating a positive business environment for 

resource development. Our royalty and tax regimes have earned 

praise from the industry for their certainty and for their 

stability. 

 

Ensuring resource industries continue to invest in Saskatchewan 

requires our government to provide those industries with the 

best possible support services we can. And that’s one of the 

reasons why the Ministry of Energy and Resources has 

undertaken a significant modernization of our oil and gas 

business processes and computer systems. Many of the systems 

the ministry uses for oil and gas, legislative requirements, 

business processes, and supporting information technology 

systems were developed more than 20 years ago. Clearly, 

change was required. It was a change that our ministry’s staff 

and other staff throughout the government indeed identified, 

certainly. But it was also a change that the oil and gas industry, 

through their companies and associations that we regularly deal 

with, saw as necessary. 

 

The industry has grown significantly in the last 20 years, and 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6143 

the processes it uses and the services it expects have grown as 

well in terms of size and complexity. And combine that with 

growth, with changes in technology and business requirements, 

and we needed systems in government that were more 

responsive. In modernizing our systems, we have consulted 

with the industry throughout, and we have certainly done so 

with this legislation. And I’ll speak more with the consultation 

process a little bit later in my remarks. 

 

The centrepiece of our efforts is our process renewal and 

infrastructure management enhancement projects, more 

commonly known as PRIME. Through PRIME we are 

dramatically transforming how our government and the oil 

industry interact, and we are improving our ministry’s overall 

efficiency and service. 

 

One of our PRIME projects, which was announced in 

November of 2009, was the province becoming a full partner in 

the Petroleum Registry of Alberta. The registry is a joint 

government and industry strategic alliance that enables 

Canadian upstream oil and gas producers to carry out their 

complex business and regulatory activities in an efficient and 

seamless manner. The registry uses a single-window, 

web-based information management system. That system will 

enable the collection, validation, and dissemination of 

volumetric, infrastructure, valuation, and royalty information. 

And all that information will be in a central, secure, and 

shareable digital format. 

 

Becoming a regulatory partner was one of the government’s 

early deliverables out of the New West Partnership. However in 

order for PRIME projects to be implemented — including the 

registry — and to realize anticipated benefits, we needed to 

make significant legislative and regulatory changes to The 

Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes necessitated the repeal of the old 

Act and the development of a new one, The Freehold Oil and 

Gas Production Tax Act, 2010. Members will have the 

section-by-section detailed explanations in their legislative 

packages. But briefly let me note that the replacement Act will 

enable the ministry to conduct its business and communicate 

with industry through electronic means. The ministry will be 

able to electronically receive and disseminate and approve 

industry forms, reports, plans, surveys, maps, applications, 

records, statistics, and other information. 

 

The new Act, which is better organized and easier to follow, 

will bring consistency to the way taxes are being administered, 

enabling efficiencies in the taxation system and allowing more 

timely payment of industries’ payment of taxes. 

 

The new Act will remove the specific due date for paying 

freehold production taxes from the legislation and add 

regulation-making power, instead, to prescribe the due date in 

The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Regulations 1995, as 

done in other energy and resources statutes. 

 

The Act will ensure that crude oil recovered from waste 

processing facilities will only be subject to recovered crude oil 

tax if the oil cannot be allocated back to the wells it was 

originally produced from. 

 

The new Act will clarify audit provisions and make them 

similar to those within The Revenue and Financial Services Act 

which governs the collection of taxes by the Ministry of 

Finance. It will move penalty amounts to the regulations to 

make it easier to keep them at a more modern level where they 

will be more of an effective deterrent than they are currently. It 

will modernize the wording of the offence provisions in the Act 

and increase the maximum fine to the level where you’ll have a 

greater deterrent effect. It will modernize, expand, and clarify 

regulation-making powers. And finally, the new Act will 

include a number of other housekeeping amendments to update 

the overall legislation. 

 

The relevant regulations will be revised as part of PRIME’s 

modernization process. The revisions that necessitated the new 

Act were made in consultation with stakeholders in the industry 

who are fully supportive of the ministry’s PRIME project. 

These stakeholders have included companies and officials with 

the industry’s two major organizations, the Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers and the small exporters and 

producers association of Canada. The feedback from both 

CAPP [Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers] and 

SEPAC [Small Explorers and Producers of Canada] received 

over the summer was positive with respect to the new 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the advanced business processes and renewable 

technology that PRIME will deliver are part of an ongoing 

effort to provide better service to our key industries and to keep 

our province competitive and strong. Saskatchewan is a great 

place for the oil and gas industry to invest. The PRIME 

enhancements we’re undertaking will make it even more so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move the second reading of Bill 

156, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 156, The Freehold Oil and 

Gas Production Tax Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and speak on this very 

important issue. Mr. Speaker, as we all in this Assembly follow 

the oil and gas industry in our province, it is an integral part of 

our economy, and it’s an important driver of our economy, Mr. 

Speaker, and employs literally tens of thousands of people 

across Saskatchewan and Western Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of issues that have been 

raised by the oil industry about orphan wells and the freehold 

oil and gas production areas, Mr. Speaker, with members on 

both sides of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it’s very important as 

we look at legislation and revitalize legislation, renew 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that we take the time to consult with 

those in the industry to see whether or not that the changes 

being made are those that they actually would like to have 

made. In many cases there are significant changes that the 

industry would like to see. 

 

One particular company, Mr. Speaker, may want one set of 

changes, where another may want something slightly different. 

So in those consultations, rarely would you find unanimous 



6144 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

opinion on a direction of a change, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 

necessary for us as members of the opposition to also take some 

time to consult with the industry in detail about the very 

changes that are made through this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at a time when we’re actually seeing a 

reduction in oil production, Mr. Speaker, a reduction in gas 

production in the province of Saskatchewan from 2007, we also 

have a reduction in the total number of wells being drilled each 

year from 2007, Mr. Speaker. It’s a time when the industry is in 

a contraction because of the rules and the operation of the 

current government. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it becomes important then to examine the 

rules as they are and see what changes need to be made to help 

the industry. Because from 2007, Mr. Speaker, the members 

can say that everything’s rosy in the oil and gas industry, but, 

Mr. Speaker, the reality is in 2007 oil production is greater than 

it is today. And the reality is in 2007 gas production is greater 

than it is today. And, Mr. Speaker, in 2007 more wells were 

drilled than they are in this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are all important issues to the industry. 

And we need to do what we can to encourage the development 

of the oil industry so that it continues to expand and provide 

meaningful jobs in our communities and meaningful jobs in our 

province, Mr. Speaker, but also is able to expend where they 

need to to extend the life of wells and to extend the production 

cycle for wells in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And modernization of the legislation is one way to make 

changes that are helpful to the industry, Mr. Speaker. There are 

always concerns that get raised when you make changes, 

though, to legislation, Mr. Speaker, including some of the 

electronic information that’s now going to be used instead of 

the previous paper registry of information, Mr. Speaker. It does 

open up some additional concerns around both security of that 

information, Mr. Speaker, and privacy issues that come with 

that increased threat, potential threat to the security of that 

information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are all things that in one hand may benefit 

the industry by speeding things up but on the other hand may 

cause some concerns for some companies in the oil and gas 

industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it’s incumbent upon us to take the time to meet with 

companies, to check with representatives of the companies to 

ensure that the changes being made benefit both the company 

and the government — not just the government, Mr. Speaker — 

and that these particular changes being made may impact fairly 

all of the players in the oil and gas industry in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, not just maybe the big companies or the small 

companies but all of the players in the industry, Mr. Speaker, so 

that as we move forward with this new legislation and the 

regulations that will follow, the oil and natural gas industries in 

our province are better off. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister I’m sure has done some 

consultations with the industry. You wouldn’t put forward this 

comprehensive a Bill without some consultation. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to ensure that the voices of those out there 

who may have a dissenting opinion or may have a different 

view from the majority are heard at least and are fully 

understood as we move forward with this legislation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, without doubt, we have heard some of the same 

concerns I’m sure the minister heard in his consultations as we 

travelled about the province. Companies have raised various 

concerns with us and various members of the opposition about 

how to improve, Mr. Speaker, the freehold oil and gas industry 

in our province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a very comprehensive Bill, a very 

complex Bill. Some of the changes are simply updating 

wording and words used, Mr. Speaker. But in some cases, 

there’s significant changes in direction of policy. And, Mr. 

Speaker, for those very reasons, we are going to need to take 

some considerable time to examine this Bill at length, consult 

others. And, Mr. Speaker, so at this time I would adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 156. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Energy and Resources. 

 

Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill 157, An Act to amend 

the Oil and Gas Conservation Act, henceforth known as The 

Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. This 

legislation is being done in concert with the amendments to the 

companion legislation, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 

Tax Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s people have 

benefited from the province’s diversity and wealth of our 

natural resources. Indeed our current status as a have province 

in Canada is due in large part to the strong performance of our 

resource sector. Investments made in our resource industries 

have created job opportunities for our growing population, 

strengthened the prosperity of our communities, and provided 

revenue for important social programs and infrastructure. 

 

Ensuring that resource industries continue to invest in our 

province requires our government to provide those industries 

with the best support services possible. We need to be 

continually seeking new and innovative ways to make our 

processes more efficient and effective for the industry. By 

doing that, we contribute to Saskatchewan’s reputation as a 

great place for the oil and gas industry to invest in and do 

business. And the benefits to our province and communities 

flow from that. 

 

That’s why our ministry is modernizing its business and 

regulatory systems targeted to the energy and resource 

industries. We are doing so not just by what we are doing in 

this Act but in the other one as well, the one I previously spoke 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6145 

to. They want to be able to interact with government — the 

industry does — on a pretty much a 24-7 basis for their 

information needs. Industry has become flexible and adaptable 

in the way it receives and sends information. We in government 

can do no less. 

 

Accordingly we have undertaken as a major component of our 

modernization process a complete redevelopment of our oil and 

gas business processes and computer systems. This 

redevelopment is occurring through our process renewal and 

infrastructure management enhancement project, the PRIME 

for short. This initiative, to be completed in 2012-13, will use 

technological advances to transform how the industry files and 

obtains data with and from the ministry. And PRIME will make 

information more readily accessible to the industry for future 

economic development plans in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while much of our ministry’s efforts are focused 

on oil and gas processes and data system redevelopment, we 

require amendments to The Oil and Gas Conservation Act to 

provide the ministry with the legal authority to implement 

PRIME initiatives and improve and streamline Saskatchewan’s 

oil and gas regulatory processes. 

 

The first PRIME project announced in November of last year 

was Saskatchewan becoming a full partner in the Petroleum 

Registry of Alberta. The registry is a joint government and 

industry strategic alliance that enables Canadian upstream oil 

and gas producers to carry out their complex business and 

regulatory activities in an efficient and seamless manner. The 

registry uses a single-window, web-based information 

management system. That system will enable a collection, 

validation, and dissemination of volumetric infrastructure, 

valuation, and royalty information. And all that information 

will be stored in a central, secure, shareable digital format. 

Becoming a registry partner was one of the government’s early 

deliverables out of the New West Partnership. 

 

Members of this House will have the section-by-section 

detailed explanations of the amendments in their legislative 

packages. But briefly let me state that the amendments we’re 

bringing forward in this Bill are necessary to enable the 

government to conduct its business and communicate with the 

industry through electronic means by implementing the registry 

and other PRIME-related electronic information submission 

and access systems. Through the amendments, the ministry will 

be able to electronically receive, disseminate, and approve 

industry forms, reports, plans, surveys, maps, applications for 

records, statistics, and other information. 

 

These amendments will develop more efficient, transparent, and 

consistent compliance assurance and enforcement processes. 

They will expand the authority to license, approve, and permit 

the drilling and operation of wells and other facilities. They will 

streamline the legislative requirements required in the issuance 

of licences, approvals, and permits. They will expand the scope 

of the Saskatchewan orphan well and facility liability 

management program to match Alberta’s, including other key 

oil and gas industry initiatives such as mid-stream, 

non-producer, and oil field waste management facilities. 

 

They will consolidate legislative requirements related to the 

issuance and transfer of licences in a logical order. They will 

modernize the wording of offence provisions, increase the 

maximum fine to a level where it will have a much greater 

deterrent effect. They will modernize, expand, and clarify 

regulation-making powers. And finally, the provisions in this 

Bill will implement various housekeeping amendments to 

modernize and update the Act. Among these are clarification 

that the legislative purposes of the Act include regulation of 

wells for the other non-renewable resource management 

purposes as defined within The Mineral Resources Act of 1985 

and management of wastes such as carbon dioxide through 

wells licensed under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments are part of an ongoing effort to 

keep our province competitive, strong, and a great place for the 

oil and gas industry to invest. The amendments are a result of 

consultation with the industry which is very supportive of these 

changes and in particular is very excited to see Saskatchewan 

partner with the petroleum registry. 

 

I note the consultation ministry officials had over the summer 

on amendments to this Act, with companies and officials 

representing the two main industry associations: the Canadian 

Association of Petroleum Producers and the Small Exporters 

and Producers Association of Canada. Ministry officials have 

consulted with the Surface Rights Arbitration Board and 

representatives of the Saskatchewan Mining Association and 

the Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the electronic changes that this Bill 

enables — in particular, the petroleum registry — our 

government will be able to provide companies self-service 

anytime, anywhere from data entry and information for access 

to those systems. And it’s important to an industry that’s 

constantly on the move and in the field. Anything our ministry 

can do to help the industry players reduce administration, 

reporting, and fixing errors, the more likely they’ll want to 

expand their operations in our province long-term. And that 

will benefit the people of Saskatchewan in the form of jobs, 

social programs, and investment in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move the second reading of Bill 

157, The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

encouraged by the enthusiasm by the members opposite to 

immediately move this forward. But like the previous Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a complex Bill with implications in a number of 

levels for both the industry, Mr. Speaker, and for industry 

players. And, Mr. Speaker, it will take some time to review and 

consult with the various stakeholders across the province and 

the associations responsible to see whether or not they truly 

agree with the changes being made, Mr. Speaker, and if they 

help the industry to move forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important today to help the 

industry move forward because, as I noted earlier in the 

previous Bill, Mr. Speaker, today we see a reduction in oil 

production from 2007, at the time of change of government. We 



6146 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

see a reduction in gas production from 2007, at the time of 

change of government, Mr. Speaker. And we actually see a 

reduction in the amount wells being drilled in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, from 2007. 

 

On top of that, we saw a general reduction or contraction of the 

economy last year, Mr. Speaker, in the range of 3.9 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, after being adjusted when the final numbers came 

in, Mr. Speaker. And we saw a situation where the Sask Trends 

Monitor, Mr. Speaker, said that Saskatchewan really has had no 

economic growth since the change of government. The 

improvements in 2008 were really as a result of the inflationary 

cost of items that consumers had to pay. And in fact since then, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a contraction in the economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been a very bright situation for our 

province despite the members opposite cheerleading out there 

saying that everything is going wonderful. But, Mr. Speaker, so 

positive changes being made to help the oil and gas industry 

will be viewed by them as both positive and viewed by us as 

well, because we all share a view of wanting to have the most 

prosperous province that we can. We like to see the economy 

grow and prosper because, Mr. Speaker, all of us understand 

without doubt that it’s a strong economy that allows the 

prosperity that our province would feel and the advancement of 

programs for the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. So in 

order to advance the programs or the agenda of the people, you 

need to have a strong economy returning good returns to the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, any changes that result in a positive 

improvement in the economy, something we haven’t been able 

to see in the last three years, Mr. Speaker, would be positive. It 

would be positive for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And any real positive change would help the government afford 

to be able to move forward in helping the people of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, with issues like health care, education, 

affordable housing, and many, many priorities of the people of 

our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I did note in the minister’s second reading 

speech that some of the changes are a result of the New West 

Partnership. Mr. Speaker, it’s about moving our rules to those 

of Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and moving our regulations to be 

compatible and comparable to those of Alberta. That in and of 

itself isn’t necessarily a negative, but that requires some 

in-depth studying of the issues and talking to the industry to 

make sure that they are in favour of moving to the Alberta rules 

and regulations, Mr. Speaker, instead of, in a partnership, 

having Alberta move to ours. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are all things that require consultation 

and time in order to check with those individuals, Mr. Speaker, 

with the industries and with the stakeholders, with their 

associations, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the changes being 

made are in fact ones that we would like to have made and that 

they would like to have made on their behalf. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we also have some concerns about the one 

. . . And it may just be not fully understanding what the 

minister’s intent was in a second reading speech, but the talk 

about some of the recordings being less recordings of activity 

by the industry, Mr. Speaker . . . Now that just may be a 

misunderstanding of how it’s being interpreted by us or by how 

the minister brought it forward. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s also an 

area of concern that we’d like to . . . And we’ll have to have the 

opportunity to ask the minister what that will actually mean and 

how the industry will benefit and also ask the industry whether 

or not they’re in favour of that change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time that you’re moving to consolidation or 

an amalgamation of rules in an industry, whether they be with 

Alberta and Saskatchewan or any other jurisdiction, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important to understand the impact because the 

impact can be both negative and positive. And we need to fully 

understand the impact on our province, on our producers and 

the net result that comes about of those changes to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with the complexity of this legislation, the 

breadth and depth of the changes, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to 

take us some time to do the required consultations — meetings 

with individuals and associations, Mr. Speaker — to get the 

feedback we need to be comfortable, one, that proper 

consultations were done, industry was appropriately listened to, 

the net benefit is there for the province of Saskatchewan, for the 

well-being of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

for those very reasons, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to 

adjourn debate on this Bill to give us adequate time to consult 

with the stakeholders across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 157. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks today, I will move the 

second reading of Bill No. 158, The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, Bill 158 proposes 

amendments to the existing corrections services Act to enable 

corrections officials to listen to suspicious telephone calls made 

by inmates in its four secure correctional centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know from experience and anecdotal past and 

statements that have come out of our institutions that there has 

been activities conducted from within of unacceptable acts and 

behaviours. As recent as a few months ago, the paper outlined 

the gang activity and drug dealings that had gone on within the 

institutions, and this was actually stated by some of the 

members that were within the institutions. 

 

The only way previously, Mr. Speaker, to combat this situation 

was to get a court order, so one could then listen to the 

conversations between inmates or between inmates and the 

general public. Now if you look at the time element involved, if 

you have somebody that you figure is making a suspicious 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6147 

phone call and you need to go and get a court order, by the time 

you come back with a court order, chances of that call being 

conducted in the same manner is basically very, very negligible. 

So Mr. Speaker, something had to be done within the system. 

And this was identified early on in our mandate, and actually it 

was a recommendation in The Road Ahead, our plan for the 

future in the correctional systems in the province. 

 

So what was done, Mr. Speaker? A request for proposal was 

submitted and a process resulted with a company called synergy 

inmate telephone solutions of San Antonio, Texas, winning the 

contract to install phone monitoring systems within our 

institutions. And, Mr. Speaker, the inmate telephone monitoring 

system was installed in all four secure provincial correction 

centres in June of 2010. 

 

Now as I’ve just briefly spoke about, the purpose of the system 

is to reduce the ability of inmates to conduct organized criminal 

activities inside the correctional centres and in the community. 

The system also assists in protecting victims and the public 

from unwanted and harassing phone calls from inmates. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, we understand that this has happened on 

various occasions where people from within the facilities are 

calling witnesses, for an example, and harassing witnesses, 

those that are on remand getting a hold of the witnesses which 

is totally unacceptable. And there’s been other cases of just 

straight harassing phone calls to the general public. 

 

And again one can realize, if you’re looking at gang and drug 

activities, how this could be conducted from within a facility if 

you have unlimited access to a telephone and not be monitored, 

where you can actually conduct your gang activities from 

within a facility. And this has been known to have happened. 

And what’s surprising, Mr. Speaker, is this has been going on 

anecdotally for many, many years, and it’s kind of a surprise 

that this has not been addressed prior to now to have phone 

monitoring systems within our facilities. 

 

And just as an aside, with the selection of synergy inmate 

telephone solutions, it should be noted that this company which 

won the RFP [request for proposal] is well known for its ability 

to do this service. And also within Canada and Alberta’s 

correctional systems, this company has the contract for a 

similar phone system in that province. 

 

Now just to talk about the operation of the system and the 

administration of the system, Mr. Speaker. The system is 

provided to Corrections at no cost. This is a no-cost solution to 

what we had wanted. Now in exchange for the no-cost solution, 

the company receives a commission of the gross revenue 

generated by a fee per call charged to inmates. And yes, 

inmates do pay for calls now. And previously a lot of the calls 

that were conducted from our institutions was at taxpayer 

expense. 

 

Now a percentage of the commission will be retained within 

CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing], and that will 

be used for enhancing leisure materials within the institutions. 

That’s where a portion of that money will go, to such things as 

board games and cards, etc. 

 

Now talking about the fee for the phone calls, sentenced 

inmates pay for most local and long-distance calls. They’ll pay 

$1.35 for local calls and $1.85 for long-distance calls. Free calls 

can be made to lawyers, Provincial Ombudsman, and the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. That’s an example. 

To government agencies, the calls will be free. Remanded 

offenders receive three free local calls a day as well as their 

privileged calls. However they will be charged a fee for 

long-distance calls. Now within the system, inmates can make 

collect calls. The recipient is charged 30 cents a minute plus 

whatever additional charges the telephone service provider 

bills. 

 

Now the system itself, Mr. Speaker. Call data is stored on a 

secure website in Canada and can be retained indefinitely, 

except for recorded conversations which are purged after 90 

days. Calls that are used as evidence in court are retained. 

 

And how it works, Mr. Speaker. All inmates are assigned a PIN 

[personal identification number] number and a voice 

recognition to validate their identity when accessing the phone 

system. This will minimize the ability of offenders to make 

harassing phone calls to others. The system is user-friendly. 

Each inmate is assigned a voice mail inbox that provides a 

series of options. These include notification of how much has 

been deposited into their phone account or setting a time for a 

future call. Inmates in all four secure adult corrections facilities 

complete around 80,000 calls a month on 200 phones installed 

across the province. Inmates’ friends and family can deposit 

money for prepaid phone calls into kiosks in correctional centre 

lobbies or through a secure online web page. 

 

TeleMate customer service is provided to inmates by Synergy 

to help inmates who have phone problems. Inmates call 

TeleMate directly. The system can restrict an inmate’s calling. 

For an example, Corrections might limit an inmate’s calling 

privileges to one completed call per hour or four attempts per 

hour. This limits excessive use. To minimize harassing calls to 

witnesses or to the public, staff can block an inmate from 

calling any given phone number while still allowing other 

inmates to dial the same number. On being admitted, inmates 

will be informed that all telephone calls are being recorded and 

subject to interception within the requirements of the law. 

 

Now to speak to the legislative amendments. The system is 

currently being operated on a limited basis to comply with the 

legal authority provided in the existing regulations and 

legislation. To fully utilize all features of the new telephone 

system and to ensure that offender rights are respected, adult 

corrections is working with Justice to make the revisions to The 

Correctional Services Act as well as The Correctional Services 

Administration, Discipline and Security Regulations. 

 

Without these amendments, monitoring telephone calls infringe 

on specific rights under the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. It should be noted, however, that a number of 

judicial rulings have established that telephone monitoring is 

legal if the infringements are prescribed by law. Courts in other 

jurisdictions have ruled that inmates have a diminished 

expectation of privacy. The courts have also ruled that similar 

established systems do not violate privacy laws. Other 

provinces have amended their own legislation, and a Bill is 

before parliament to amend federal legislation. 

 

CPSP sought a privacy assessment through the Information and 



6148 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

Privacy Commissioner, actively seeking their advice on privacy 

issues related to the phone system. Phone conversations 

continued to be recorded but to comply with Charter principles, 

adult corrections has turned off the ability to listen to phone 

conversations until the regulations and Act have been amended. 

The ability to listen to existing recorded calls will be retroactive 

to the date stated in the Act. No one other than police with a 

court order is currently able to listen to recorded telephone 

conversations. 

 

When the amendments are passed, the facility director will be 

able to approve listening to the calls if they have grounds to 

show risk to the public, other inmates, or staff. Only two 

employees at each correctional centre will receive training in 

listening to the calls, and passwords are required to do this. 

 

It should be noted also, Mr. Speaker, because there’s been 

questions about monitoring calls to legal counsel, all lawyers on 

file with the Saskatchewan Law Society have their phone 

numbers programmed into the system. When an inmate calls 

any of these numbers, the record feature does not activate, so 

those calls remain private. The system has a built-in audit 

system that will provide an inventory to all listeners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 be read a second time. Thank you. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections and Public Safety that Bill No. 

158, The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 

pleasure to rise and add some comments to Bill 158, An Act to 

amend The Correctional Services Act, Bill 158. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s comments were fairly thorough, and 

he talked about the Bill giving employees of the Ministry of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing the authority to listen to 

calls being recorded by its new inmate telephone system. And 

as the minister said, this new telephone system has been in 

place at the four secure adult correctional facilities since June 

of this year — that’s June 2010 — but that the function that 

allows the calls to be replayed and recorded or listened in has 

not been activated yet, and that the legislation will allow a 

facility director or authorized corrections personnel to listen to 

what is considered suspicious calls. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is supportive of any 

measures that will enhance public safety and the safety of 

corrections workers and the safety of inmates, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s good to see, after listening to the previous minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton, when he said that he was unaware that 

there was any gang problems in our jails, I can speak on behalf 

of all of my colleagues that we’re very pleased to see that the 

new minister is more on top of things, at least at this one aspect 

anyway. So we’re pleased to see that there is some action being 

taken. 

 

I don’t think anyone would disagree that gangs aren’t a serious 

problem in our jails. And they pose a risk not only to the safety 

of inmates but the safety of the guards and the workers in the 

institutions. And I mean there is intimidation of inmates who 

are making an honest effort to rehabilitate themselves. And they 

are a threat to the public safety and a scourge in our society, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s good to see the minister acknowledging 

this and taking some steps to alleviate the issues where he can. 

 

Now the government has indicated that the system will have the 

ability to block telephone numbers and promises that the 

victims and the general public will be protected from harassing 

phone calls. This is an extremely important measure, Mr. 

Speaker. There have been many instances in the past where 

potential witnesses have been intimidated and where victims 

have been re-victimized by inmates making threatening, 

intimidating, and harassing phone calls. So anything that we 

can do to reduce that happening is, for sure, welcome. 

 

Now that said, Mr. Speaker, this legislation does raise a number 

of questions, questions which we are not sure have been 

adequately answered. Will outside parties with whom inmates 

communicate be aware that their conversations are being 

recorded? Will this legislation withstand potential court 

challenges? I know the minister spoke to a number of issues 

that he feels have been addressed and that they’re within the 

means or within the boundaries of the law. So that will be good 

to get a little more detailed responses on that. And who will 

decide that an inmate’s conversation is suspicious and should 

be monitored? What will raise those suspicions? What will 

qualify as being considered suspicious in the guidelines and 

regulations that are put forward? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all remember what happened in a case 

reviewed last year by the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner when a pharmacist accessed the personal health 

information of a former client inappropriately. What safeguards 

are in place to prevent corrections workers from monitoring 

calls out of simple curiosity? There are a number of questions. 

 

And also in the Bill, subsection 56.1(3), it clarifies that nothing 

in section 56(1) applies to privileged communications. And 

examples of privileged communications are those between an 

inmate and his or her legal counsel or the Office of the 

Ombudsman. The regulations will contain a list of persons, 

officers, and entities that shall be considered privileged. 

 

So I know the minister referred to a couple, and there is of 

course legal counsel and Office of the Ombudsman that are 

referred to in the explanatory notes that accompanied the 

legislation when it was tabled. So it will see if there’s any 

further . . . I’ll be anxious to see what further clarification there 

will be when we get into more detailed questioning on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the things that I should comment 

on, in the explanatory notes it says that this Act will allow 

regulations to be made retroactive to January 1, 2011. So the 

minister had also made comments talking about different cases 

and the work that had been done to look to see if this type of 

activity was approved and how it operated in other provinces 

and states. And the minister made the comment that it was legal 

if prescribed by law, which is fine, Mr. Speaker. I understand 

that. But here what we have is obviously the department is 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6149 

looking at or the ministry is looking at enacting this process on 

January 1st, 2011, and is covering the possibility that the 

regulations may not be in place by then. So the legislation is 

going to be . . . The regulations and legislation will be 

retroactive and will obviously come into effect on January 1st, 

2011. 

 

So it raises a number of concerns in that the phone system was 

put in place in June of this year. So we’re five months later. The 

legislation is here in front of the House. I would assume that the 

ministry has put some consideration into regulations and that 

they could be fairly quickly enacted. Now obviously the 

minister is looking to next spring for this legislation to be 

passed and making it all retroactive to January ’11. 

 

So it’s kind of no matter what happens in this legislature, if 

there was a need to fast track this legislation, the ministry has 

made allowance for this whole process to kick in and begin, 

whether or not the legislation has been passed or whether the 

regulations have been put in place; that even though it won’t be 

prescribed by law, it will be in place in the province of 

Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, that raises a number of 

concerns, and there are questions that will need to be asked as 

we continue to work our way through this legislation. 

 

The minister also spent a bit of time talking about fees and the 

costs of this system and that the company who installed the 

phone system last June — well previous to June because it was 

installed by June — earns a commission and there is fees 

charged on each call that go to the company with a portion of 

that commission coming back to CCSP. 

 

Now the government said and the minister made in his 

comments today, announced that inmates making outgoing 

telephone calls will pay between $1.35 per call and $1.85 per 

call, plus long-distance calls, to pay for the system’s operation. 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we have people that may be struggling to 

keep in contact with family and looking for rehabilitation. And 

I would say, not everyone, but there are many people that are in 

institutions that are looking for rehabilitation and being able to 

start their life. They are being charged and asked to finance a 

new phone system in the correction system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So when we look at these charges, it doesn’t sound like a great 

deal. But when you don’t have any money and when many of 

these inmates who communicate with their family members 

will often reverse the charges — so they’re calling collect — so 

this new fee will actually be borne by family members in many, 

many cases across this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to 

question whether that’s the best route to go. 

 

The minister also talked about 30 cents a minute. Now I missed 

if that was a long-distance fee or what exactly the 30 cents a 

minute . . . But if you were being charged a fee of $1.85 per call 

plus 30 cents a minute . . . Mr. Speaker, you can call anywhere 

in the world and not be charged 30 cents a minute. That is 

absolutely outrageous in this day and age. When we look at the 

competition in the phone systems, when we look at the 

connectivity around the world, I would venture to say that there 

are very few new residents to the province of Saskatchewan 

that came from other countries, other continents, that would pay 

30 cents a minute to phone home and be able to stay connected 

with family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a bit of an outrageous cost when we 

look at it. It’s unheard of. It’s absolutely unheard of — 30 cents 

a minute — anywhere in the world. Now maybe on these 

systems . . . But when many of those calls are being called 

collect to family members, those family members are going to 

have a real shock when they start paying 30 cents a minute for a 

collect call plus the fees on top of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, moreover I think the government is leading people 

to believe that this fee is being put in place to operate a system 

that is designed to enhance public safety, but it’s really not. I 

mean this fee is being put in place to pay for the government’s 

privatization of the inmate telephone service in the province of 

Saskatchewan to a company in Texas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that raises many other questions. And yes, this 

company may have expertise, but, Mr. Speaker, in this world of 

technology and connectivity, I would really question if this was 

the best system to put in place in Saskatchewan corrections 

facilities and if there were no other options that were available 

to them that could provide the same system, same support a 

little more cost effectively for the members that are actually 

paying for that and the family members that are actually paying 

for this system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see that family members of inmates, 

the support system — I mean, really the only support system 

that many of these inmates have is family members — now 

they’re being put in really a difficult position to have to pay for 

this, which, I mean, we don’t know what their financial 

situation is at home. We don’t know if they’re able to. It could 

cause more problems down the way and in other areas. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be inmates and inmates’ 

families who are subsidizing privatization, this government’s 

privatization agenda, this kind of a phone system that is 

supposedly there for inmates to be able to access 

communication to family members. 

 

No comment, you know, no disagreement with being able to 

provide that safety and enhanced public safety and safety inside 

institutions. But, Mr. Speaker, we need to be clear about what’s 

happening here. And it’s inmates and inmates’ families who are 

subsidizing this government’s privatization of the phone 

system, starting with the corrections facilities in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues are anxious to 

be able to make comments on this Bill, and with that, I would 

adjourn debate on Bill 158. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 158, The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:30] 



6150 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise and offer a few comments on the Bill 144. And 

for those that did have the opportunity and may be interested in 

this particular legislative piece, I just want to basically bring 

about some of the issues surrounding the Bill 144. 

 

And first of all I guess — for those that are paying attention — 

the existing legislation allows the government to increase or 

decrease both environmental handling charges and refundable 

deposits. The proposed Bill that we’re talking about today lays 

out a schedule of new environmental handling charges for a 

variety of containers and takes away the government’s ability to 

set environmental handling charges outside the legislature. It 

does however allow the government to continue to set the 

refundable deposit by cabinet order. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the same time the Bill allows or 

introduces provisions which prevent anyone from suing the 

government to recover environmental handling charges paid 

after April 1st, 1998. The minister indicated the changes are 

intended to address a current lawsuit and to prevent the 

province from being liable for up to $1 million or more in other 

potential legal actions. 

 

And certainly one would ask, as a result of the lawsuit, what 

were some of the challenges with The Litter Control Act? And 

obviously the Supreme Court of Canada made a decision in the 

1990s which required that service fees collected for a specific 

purpose could not exceed the cost to government of delivering 

that service. Otherwise it would be . . . This would be 

considered a tax. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s always a concern. It’s always a serious 

matter when you change a law retroactively and to try and limit 

people’s right to take legal action. However we realize there 

may be a legitimate goal to be achieved here, and obviously the 

opposition needs a bit more time to carefully consider the 

implications of these retroactivity provisions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, there’s a lot of different groups 

out there that do a lot of fine work. And one of them is SARC 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres], the 

Association of Rehabilitation Centres, and SARC has always 

worked very closely with every government and every existing 

government for a long time. And it should be noted that they 

are the ones that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank you 

to the member for yielding the floor. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in the west gallery 30 grade 4 

students from the Punnichy Elementary School. They’re here 

today to observe the proceedings in the House. I understand 

that, at least I was told that they were at Agribition earlier 

today, and I believe this is their last stop before they head back 

home. 

 

They’re accompanied today by teachers Sherry Lesser, Andrea 

Wiens; educational assistants Lenora Kay, Lori Mountstephen; 

chaperones Jerry Lee Roszell, Billy Joe Pratt, Wilfred Isaac, 

Sheldon Pratt, Gerda Schultz, Clifford Hunter, and Tyler 

Arnold. I’d ask all members to give these grade 4 students a 

hearty welcome to their legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I too want to welcome the students, and I certainly hope that 

their stay at the legislature is both informative and also 

entertaining if possible. But certainly I would like to join the 

member in welcoming his students. And obviously it’s always 

nice to see all peoples of Saskatchewan — the Aboriginal 

people in particular — come to the Assembly and learn how the 

Assembly works. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly talking about the amendment 

to The Litter Control Act. And as I was mentioning earlier, just 

a few minutes earlier before I gave way to the member in his 

introduction, that SARC is one of the organizations that takes 

advantage of some of the opportunities when you talk about 

dealing with a lot of the refundable deposits that we have on 

our cans and so on and so forth. 

 

And as I understand the Act here, what the Act is trying to do 

here is to try and limit the amount of openings that people 

might have to try and sue the government. As I understand the 

Act and the information that was shared with me, that there is a 

lawsuit right now. And the lawsuit’s alleging that The Litter 

Control Act is actually . . . If you don’t use the amount of 

money that you collect from all the deposits that people pay out 

through the levies — the environmental handling charges — if 

they don’t use all that money to do all the programs that SARC 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6151 

takes advantage of, if you exceed that money, it’s considered a 

tax. 

 

And people are trying to use some of the loopholes within the 

environmental . . . or The Litter Control Act to try and lay a 

lawsuit to the government saying, well some of these actual 

containers that are being looked at in terms of getting a refund 

on it, in true form some of them don’t get handled properly. 

Some of them there is no use for them, and they simply go into 

the landfill. And I think there’s some grounds there in terms of 

some of the points that they want to raise. 

 

And that’s why I think it’s important that we pay attention to 

some of these Bills because there are implications on this 

legally, but certainly financially, if we don’t pay attention to a 

lot of these Bills. And what you don’t want to do as a 

government is certainly compromise some of the work being 

done by SARC. So it is a very interesting point of information 

that the minister’s trying to propose here, in terms of the 

amendment. 

 

Obviously The Litter Control Act, there’s a lot of premise 

attached to how we want to govern Saskatchewan when we talk 

about the environmental handling charge, also the notion of 

polluter pays. And we’re seeing evidence of that, that as some 

of these streams come on board — I’m talking about some of 

the waste streams, whether it’s refundable bottles or whether 

it’s used batteries or whether it’s used computer parts — there’s 

always the notion people have out there that, if people that 

produce these goods and services that eventually . . . that you 

dispose of, there should be a mechanism in which you look at 

how you dispose them and how you properly dispose them. 

And that’s why you have all these environmental handling 

charges. 

 

And certainly you want to make sure that people out there are 

aware of some of the organizations that do good work in trying 

to deal with these streams of . . . I don’t want to use the word 

garbage, but for lack of a better word, some of these streams of 

garbage. 

 

And I think one of the organizations I’ve always maintained, 

certainly I think other ministers and other folks in both parties, 

can certainly maintain and allude to the fact that SARC is one 

terrific organization. They do a lot of powerful human resource 

building. They work with a lot of different groups and 

organizations. They take out tons and tons of garbage or things 

that people would traditionally throw away and they recycle 

that. And that of course is always a win-win situation for any 

person and certainly for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So when we look at the Act itself, The Litter Control Act, and 

you look at the amendment being brought forward by the 

minister, it’s very simple that he just wants to have some 

retroactive legislation that deals with some of the minor details 

that may open up the government to other lawsuits — as I’m 

assuming that there is a lawsuit pending — and that this Act 

and this amendment would certainly make some provisions in 

there that would protect the government somewhat. 

 

So I would say, Mr. Speaker, that while it is an important part 

of being government, the retroactivity issue, though, we have to 

look at as an opposition party to make sure that there is no 

complicating factors. But at the outset, we want to make sure 

people out there know that we are very supportive, we’re very 

co-operative, and we’re very aware of how SARC operates. 

And that’s one of the primary focuses that we as an opposition 

are going to look at when it comes to any kind of amendment in 

relation to The Litter Control Act. 

 

So I would again re-emphasize that SARC is one of the 

organizations that we don’t want to see impeded, we don’t want 

to see hurt in any way, shape, or form. And any time we have 

Acts or legislations or amendments from the environmental 

department or from the environmental ministry, we want to 

make sure that we examine them very thoroughly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again, to the folks that may be listening out 

here, paying attention and following what the Act’s all about — 

this is again simply an amendment on The Litter Control Act. 

And what it does is it certainly introduces provisions which 

prevent anyone from suing the government to recover 

environmental handling charge paid after April 1st, 1998. 

 

And of course, it is . . . There is a current lawsuit, as the notes 

indicated. And we want to make sure that we look at all the 

aspects of this and to make sure everything is fine. At the 

outset, as we’ve indicated by number of other speakers, that it 

isn’t something that we’re going to . . . It’s not a hill we’re 

going to die on. We just want to make sure we know exactly 

what’s going on. 

 

And this certainly, at the end of the day, doesn’t compromise 

what has been done in the years and years of work in building 

up SARC and making sure we have all these different streams 

that our landfill is certainly getting from the public in general, 

that we’re able to recycle and reuse some of those streams of 

product as best we can. And certainly that’s something that we 

share in terms of the visionary aspect attached with reusing, 

recycling, and reducing a lot of the things that we as a province 

do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I would point out that the Bill 

144, The Litter Control Amendment Act, that we are looking at 

it and we’ll take our time to see what’s going on. And when the 

appropriate time comes, we will certainly move as quickly as 

we can to make sure that there is efficiency in what we’re doing 

here. But to also point out that the organizations like SARC are 

not hurt or impeded and that the general public out there, the 

interests of the general public, which preventing lawsuits 

against the government certainly is, I would assume, part of that 

interest, but to make sure that they know that any 

environmental handling charges that they pay for, that it is 

going to meet the needs of what they’re paying for. So that’s 

pretty important to do. 

 

So in relation to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that 

we adjourn debate on Bill 144, The Litter Control Amendment 

Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 144, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



6152 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 

today to enter the debate on Bill 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act. I certainly want to say at the outset that we do 

support, as a caucus and opposition, the purpose of the Bill. 

 

We have seen the Bill in different forms, a Bill something like 

this, a whistle-blower Act, protection, over the years, and would 

be really quite excited if this was what it said it was going to be. 

And it would give security and protection to workers in the 

workplace across the province because the Sask Party 

government came into government promising people more 

transparency and more accountability, and frankly we’ve seen 

none of that. 

 

And I think people in the public service who deliver a service to 

the whole province, deliver services to the whole province, that 

I don’t think we quite appreciate how far and wide the public 

service extends into our lives and what service they do for us. 

And I think it’s extremely important that people that work in 

government have a way to point out things that they find are 

wrong. And I don’t think we have that, and we don’t have it 

here. 

 

I was reading through the Bill, and I see that there’s exemptions 

for health districts, health regions, and they’re going to fall still 

under The Labour Standards Act. Well I know that some health 

regions are actually telling their employees they are not allowed 

to speak about anything. Now that to me does not sound like a 

system where we have people that can feel comfortable in their 

work, making sure that the work is safe, that the work 

environment is safe, and that they and the people that they serve 

are safe. 

 

This isn’t a statement that I think says much to our system 

when public workers, public employees like nurses and 

maintenance workers and housekeeping and dietary and LPNs 

[licensed practical nurse] and RNs [registered nurse] and the 

wide variety of people that work in the health system are told 

that they can’t speak to anybody about anything, that there will 

be repercussions. 

 

And I think we’ve seen in this very legislature last session, 

when we were not told . . . The public was not told about an 

inmate being at large, and the Sask Party government wrongly 

accused a member, a man working in the system and fired him 

with no proof whatsoever. They had the wrong person. But the 

message it sends out when you do that to somebody, when you 

go on a witch hunt and then actually fire somebody without 

proof that that’s the right person even — I mean, that’s a huge 

mistake in itself — but the whole process of allowing a 

government to go after an employee because they disclosed 

something as vital to the public interest as having a criminal at 

large, that sends a message that this Bill clearly does not fix. 

And if the government is truly interested in sending a message 

to the public servants and the people of Saskatchewan that they 

are interested in transparency and accountability, they’re going 

to have to do a lot to regain that trust because at the moment 

that trust is not there. 

 

[15:45] 

 

If we’re going to see an integrity commissioner, the 

commissioner would have its first job looking at the Amicus 

deal. There is no integrity in that deal. And my colleague from 

Nutana has pointed that out in many, many, many ways. And it 

just continues to unfold like an onion. The more you peel back, 

the more you find, the more you see. And it doesn’t get any 

better. There is no integrity in that. And if we’re looking at an 

integrity commissioner, that would be the first thing the 

commissioner would want to look at. 

 

And somebody would probably point that out from a 

department. And what would happen to that person? I don’t 

think that that person would be protected by this Act. I think 

that there would be repercussions because that would be a very 

black mark against the government and I don’t think . . . For 

one thing for sure, the Amicus deal is not over. The scrutiny of 

Amicus is not finished. And I think the public is waiting to see 

what’s next. 

 

And I know there’s different iterations of the Amicus deal 

being planned with government and the school boards for 

construction of school facilities and other long-term care 

facilities. People are waiting to see exactly how it’s going to be 

done. Where will be the integrity? How will the government 

come forward and explain itself to the public when they have 

this as a benchmark? Amicus is their benchmark for a new way 

of funding, a new financial arrangement, the Minister of Health 

said. 

 

Well it’s interesting. We have to lose our integrity to have 

something new. I don’t think so. I think people in 

Saskatchewan can understand new, moving forward, something 

different, something that works better, but they certainly don’t 

want to see our integrity gone, and they certainly don’t want to 

see their money wasted or their money compromised. We now 

as a province have a liability for this facility without any 

tendering and with all kinds of tentacles that reach into the 

cronyism and basically what looks like corruption. 

 

So I think the people of Saskatchewan don’t have a lot of faith 

in putting together a commission or a commissioner that will 

protect your rights. I think we have to get back to the basics and 

say that this government needs to re-establish a trust within the 

Saskatchewan people. And they don’t have it. The people in 

Saskatchewan that I visited over the summer, they think the 

government has abandoned them. And that’s just on health 

issues. 

 

They haven’t even heard of the Amicus deal when I talked to 

them. Why are you out there raising money in your 10 

communities or 13 communities, 10 that I actually visited? 

Why are you out raising money when you don’t have to? 

There’s a new financial arrangement in town and the minister 

said so. How come you don’t have it? What’s the integrity in 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6153 

that? Why does one organization get the deal offered to them 

and not the other 13? What’s so different? So people are going 

to ask that question. And the more they find out . . . 

 

I know it’s interesting that the member from Lloydminster 

thought that I was out scaring people silly during the summer. 

But basically people were getting scared silly by what I was 

telling them that was out there from the Sask Party, that they 

didn’t know. And I think they were more angry than they were 

scared. They did not like to hear that there’s things that are 

happening that they don’t know and that aren’t fair. 

 

And in fact, they were saying that rural Saskatchewan is paying 

twice for health care. They have to pay for their own doctors 

and their nurse practitioners. They have to pay for it themselves 

out of the municipal tax base where they also pay into the 

regular General Revenue Fund that funds the general health 

care system. So they have to pay twice. They have to pay that, 

and then they have to dig into their municipal funds to pay. 

 

So I don’t think people are quite certain about this assertion 

from the Sask Party that there’s going to be more accountability 

and more transparency. No. It’s a big secret. The Amicus deal 

is a big secret. Thirteen communities don’t know about it. And 

if we start telling them, then we get accused of scaring them 

silly. 

 

Well that’s sort of like whistle-blowing, isn’t it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? We pointed out something and you get nothing but 

vilified and accused of scaring people silly. That’s the same sort 

of thing. If people need to be assured that they will get the truth 

and they will get up front . . . And if you’re going to talk about 

accountability and transparency, then you’d better deliver it and 

not just print it in a document and think that you can live on 

that. Printed word isn’t going to do you any good if your 

actions don’t. 

 

And it’s funny with essential services. Many people were 

designated as essential services, many more than were actually 

appearing on a shift daily. So the things that the government 

has done in the public and to people working in public services 

has not engendered a great deal of confidence in the decisions 

or the integrity of the decisions that are made. 

 

I think the essential services legislation has damaged the public 

service and damaged public employees, in particular those in 

health, in ways we don’t even know yet. The damage that’s 

been done into collective bargaining will take years to undo. 

There is such an atmosphere in bargaining and in workplaces 

that it’s going to take a long time to undo that. And that’s what 

. . . When I speak to the issue of trust, I don’t think the public 

servants and the public service do trust this government to have 

their best interests at heart. I’ve seen nothing in the actions of 

this government that would let me believe that they would like 

to see things that are wrong actually exposed. I think if they see 

something wrong that’s exposed, they want to smack the person 

who’s exposed it. I don’t think there’s any indication that this 

will protect you or that there is any intent to protect you. And I 

think that’s the part that the people of Saskatchewan will 

clearly say. 

 

And when we look at what do we want to see from this, we do 

want to see people protected. If there’s something in your 

workplace that you know of that’s wrong, either it’s against the 

law, against policy, against your person, you should have the 

right to say and speak up without repercussions, without the 

thought of losing your job or being punished in any way. There 

should be no reprisals. And yet I don’t think we have that trust 

or that confidence that this will do this. 

 

And I know that many of my colleagues have quite a passionate 

interest in this Bill and really do want to speak about it, and I 

think that the speeches that I have read in Hansard show a great 

deal of interest from all of us. And I think when we talk to the 

public about what does this mean to you, I think that’s the 

message we’re going to be getting. It doesn’t mean that I will 

be safe especially if you put the commissioner into the 

Ombudsman’s office which has been mentioned. 

 

And if that’s so, right now we’re looking at decisions or 

recommendations made by the Ombudsman; no one has to do 

any of them. There’s no teeth in it. So the Ombudsman can 

review things, make recommendations, and the minister just 

gets to say no, we’re not going to do it for whatever reason. 

And we’ve seen that with health issues many, many, many 

times. So I think that if this is going to be in the Ombudsman’s 

office or be part of the Ombudsman’s job, then there has to be 

teeth so that the recommendations from the Ombudsman are 

actually followed by the minister and followed by the 

government. 

 

So I’m thinking that there’s going to be lots more, lots more 

discussion on this and a lot of more people from our side, from 

the opposition, who want to speak to this and talk about what it 

means to the public and to public servants. And I don’t think 

that anybody, at this point, has any assurance that the 

government has their best interest at heart or that this will in 

fact protect them if they bring forward something that they find 

is lacking or significantly wrong in their workplace. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that in the interest of giving 

other colleagues the chance to talk to this and other Bills, I will 

now adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Eastview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 147, The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It certainly 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to have the opportunity to 

enter into this debate, the debate on Bill 149, An Act to Amend 



6154 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

The Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in general I want to start out by saying — it’s no 

surprise to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I’m not an accountant 

and therefore probably not an expert on this particular file. But 

I’ve had the opportunity to do some reading on it, and I do find 

it of some interest. Basically what this particular Bill will set up 

is the ability for the government to implement a five-year tax 

holiday for mining corporations that are making an investment 

of at least $125 million and will maintain at least a workforce 

of 75 full-time employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at first glance one would say well this is probably 

a good move in principle. I think you would say the opposition 

likely would support it. It’s a very broad and blanket statement 

to make, Mr. Speaker. One has to be very careful of what the 

details are around such initiatives and around such deals. 

 

One would hope, one would hope that a corporation that is 

setting up an operation in this province and making a 

significant investment of 125 million or more would also be 

looking at setting up a significant office, if not the head office, 

certainly a subsidiary office in our great province here, that it 

would not only employ the workers in, first of all, in the 

development of the mine but later stages after the mine is 

developed and operating. It would include the employees 

working in the mine doing the extraction of the minerals but 

would also include a good contingency of head office or 

subsidiary office staff that would be available to continue to do 

the work here in the province. So, Mr. Speaker, I suppose it’s 

fair to say that in principle it’s a broad statement to make, and 

in principle this would be supported I think by most people. 

 

But the devil is in the details, as the saying goes. And this is 

where we have to be quite careful about the details of a deal 

that would be put together that would allow the tax-free holiday 

to take place. If it is the initiative it takes to attract the 

investment, that would be great as long as it’s not re-interpreted 

some point in time into the future. 

 

We always have to be careful about that, Mr. Speaker, is that 

one’s commitment can be open to different interpretations. For 

example a pledge of full-time jobs or new investment might 

mean different things to different people. And this is why it is 

so very important that when a government enters into that type 

of an arrangement that it be detailed out. It would detailed out 

in writing so that both parties or all parties involved, including 

the people of this great province, understand what the 

commitment really is, what the commitment is from the 

government, but also what the commitment is from the 

corporation that is making the investment and in return going to 

benefit from the implementation of a tax-free holiday as well as 

the investment, but the commitment to the number of full-time 

workers. And do the . . . You know, for example, would 75 

full-time workers, would that be isolated strictly to the mine 

itself, to where the mineral is being extracted? Would that mean 

75 or more full-time workers on a consistent basis? Or would 

that also include any office staff that might be there to support 

the operation? 

 

Those are the questions, Mr. Speaker, that would have to be 

ironed out in the details of an agreement. That I think is 

important. I think those are the important things that the people 

of Saskatchewan should be made aware of. 

 

We would not want to see a situation where the government 

ends up very similar to its experience in the potash industry 

here, most recently, in that allowing a corporation to make 

pledges and commitments to the people of this great province 

without doing so in writing and without doing so in a way that 

would tie them to that commitment and would allow them to 

revisit, in the future, revisit that commitment and to change the 

level of that commitment. 

 

It, Mr. Speaker, would be not fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan who are putting the money on the line, putting 

the tax money on the line of a tax-free holiday of five years in 

return for an investment of 125 million or more . . . and having 

commitments made but having not a clear understanding of 

what those commitments are or the responsibilities that go 

along with those commitments to ensure that those 

commitments are upheld and those responsibilities are fulfilled. 

 

Those would be the interesting things, Mr. Speaker. As the 

saying goes, the devil is in the details. It’s one thing to make the 

broad statement, but it’s another thing to make sure that you 

have the mechanisms in place to ensure that those commitments 

are kept and are honoured and are fulfilled by both parties — 

both the government as well as the mining company making the 

investments. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we haven’t yet seen, fleshed 

out in this Bill, any suggestions of what that mechanism would 

be that would . . . how far the government would go with a 

company making that commitment to ensure that there is a 

transparent process here, that the company would be fully 

aware of, when they’re making their commitment, of what it 

means, what that commitment actually means in real dollars 

and in real sense and real activity and what it means to the 

government to be able to stand up to the people of 

Saskatchewan and say here’s the commitment we have from the 

mining company in return for the tax-free holiday that they’re 

going to enjoy and the investment they’re going to make. When 

in return for that . . . we also have a commitment for 75 

full-time jobs more. We also have a commitment of other 

activities within our society and within our economy that would 

be something that we would be able to stand up to 

Saskatchewan people and present it to them in a straightforward 

way that we would be all very, I think, very happy with and 

very proud of. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the questions that we have to answer, that 

need to be answered in relationship to this particular Bill, is 

quite simply put. Who benefits? Who benefits from this Bill? If 

this Bill was passed and enacted into law, who benefits? Who is 

going to be the winners, and who is going to be the losers? Are 

there going to be winners, and are there going to be losers? And 

if this is the case, then what do we need to do to make sure that 

the people of Saskatchewan win and that nobody loses, that we 

all could benefit in a productive way, whether it would be the 

mining company investing or whether it would be the personnel 

working for that mining company. 

 

Those are the things that this Bill is short of. It’s short of those 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6155 

kind of details. It’s short of giving us the answers, I guess you 

would say, as to what are the effects, what are the effects of this 

Bill if it’s passed. Who wins? Who loses? What’s the benefit of 

the winners, and what would be the downside to the losers? 

Those are the things that are being missed, Mr. Speaker. 

Questions that are not being answered, Mr. Speaker, is for 

example is, what’s the impact? What’s the impact upon the 

people of Saskatchewan if this Act was to be passed and 

implemented? Who would benefit from it? But more 

importantly, would there be losers? Would the people of 

Saskatchewan be those who’d be losing in the long run? Those 

are the questions that need to be answered. 

 

And yet this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, from my perusal of it, 

doesn’t seem to have that information in it. Certainly it doesn’t 

seem to give us the opportunity — us in the opposition — the 

opportunity to go through this Bill and to be able to answer 

those kinds of questions. Because I think that’s what’s really 

important here, Mr. Speaker, is the ability to answer the 

questions that Saskatchewan people have on this particular Bill 

as to what is the impact. What is the impact to the economy? 

What is the impact to the job force, the workforce? And most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, what’s the impact to the 

Saskatchewan treasury? Does it have an impact and what would 

that impact be? 

 

One would assume it would have an impact if there’s a tax-free 

holiday for five years. That means it’s five years the people of 

Saskatchewan will not enjoy a tax revenue from that particular 

operation. This is not necessarily a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, if 

over the long run it could be shown that it is going to have a 

positive effect for the Saskatchewan economy and for this great 

province of ours, but that has to be demonstrated, Mr. Speaker. 

It has to be shown fairly clearly and fairly simply. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, in this legislation we just simply don’t 

see that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that we haven’t been able to 

identify anywhere in here any suggestions, even in the broadest 

of sense, of what that impact might be on Saskatchewan people 

and on Saskatchewan’s treasury. And it’s unfortunate because 

one would have to assume that that is a very, very big part of 

being able to provide Saskatchewan people the ongoing 

services that we, I think we all elected people here, would like 

to see Saskatchewan people enjoy, but on an ongoing basis. 

 

To me it’s the role of government; it’s the role of elected people 

to work at developing a society and an economy in this great 

province of ours that will allow the services to be available to 

those people in this great province who need them, in a timely 

fashion. And I’m thinking, Mr. Speaker, the ability of 

government to continue to finance health care, for example, in a 

way that is suitable and meets the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And health care is just one of the many services, but I think it’s 

such an important service. And I believe you would agree with 

me that — I’m sure all of my colleagues would — it’s probably 

the issue that is the most important issue to Saskatchewan 

people. When you ask them what the issues are, and they all 

have different issues — whether it be highways or whether it 

would be agriculture or whether it’d be, you know, the flooding 

or the environment — but health care will always be right up 

there amongst the top half a dozen or top maybe even three or 

four issues in Saskatchewan people’s minds. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s because for those of us who are 

presently and throughout most of our life enjoying good health, 

we consider ourselves quite fortunate. And we like to have 

comfort in the knowledge that, if required, if the medical 

situation requires that we need to draw on those services, we 

know that those services are there in our time of need. 

 

As importantly, Mr. Speaker, I think you can apply the same to 

maybe our family members who haven’t had the good fortune 

to enjoy as much good health as some of us, and have had the 

need in the past to draw on our medical services and to know 

that they receive the services that they needed in a timely 

fashion, when they needed it. And that’s very important. 

 

But I believe it’s our role in government here, I believe it’s our 

role to continue to provide those services and to provide our 

good folks of this great province the comfort and the 

knowledge that those services, those health care services are 

there in the event we need them or in the event one of our 

family members may need the health care services — that 

they’re there. 

 

And that has to be a responsibility not only of ours today, but 

for those who will come after us, whether they be in this 

legislature, developing a system, an economy that will be able 

to continue to afford to be able to provide those services to 

Saskatchewan people, to provide services such as adequate 

transportation mechanisms, infrastructure for our highway 

systems, whether it be highways or grid roads or whatever it 

may be, a transportation system that will meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It’s just so important that we have the ability to continue to 

finance this, Mr. Speaker. We don’t want to see misguided 

promises made that certainly inhibit the ability of government 

to be able to fund such programs as this. Certainly don’t want to 

see a situation where a government enters into an agreement for 

a tax-free holiday and doesn’t have a clear understanding of 

what they can expect to get in return for that granting of a 

tax-free holiday. 

 

And that is why it’s so important, Mr. Speaker, that we have the 

ability to extract from any deal which would be supported by 

this Bill the ability to understand what the commitments are by 

the corporations that are making it and what time frame in 

which that commitment will be kept. And not just an 

open-ended commitment that at some point in time in the future 

we will do X, Y, or Z, but we need to know that would happen 

within a reasonable time frame, so to be able to support the 

people of Saskatchewan in a way which I believe that they are 

entitled to. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the question that would have to be 

asked of this Bill is, who is eligible for the refund? If there’s 

going to be a refund as a result of a tax-free holiday being 

granted, then what are the conditions around that? What are the 

conditions would qualify a corporation for that refund? What is 

it that they would have to do? What is it that they would have to 

. . . What commitments would they have to make? But more 



6156 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

importantly, what commitments would they have to make and 

honour before they could qualify for that refund so that there’s 

some mechanism of give-and-take here, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned a little earlier about the need to be 

able to, in a meaningful way, finance our health care and our 

health care services here. And I think we also have to be in a 

position to react in times of emergency and react in times of 

need. Most recently we’ve seen this happen with this, most 

recently this year, in 2010. We’ve seen the budget that came 

down in the springtime. It slashed some $100 million out of the 

agricultural budget in a year that — and at that time of course 

nobody knew this was going to happen — but in a year that 

we’ve experienced probably the wettest year on record. Wettest 

year on record which, as a result of that, caused certainly a lot 

of pressure on our agricultural producers. 

 

As I understand it, about half the seeded acres only in 

Saskatchewan got seeded. The rest was too wet to be seeded. 

Therefore that acreage isn’t going to be producing any revenue 

for our farmers. So there’s a need, a real need for a meaningful 

support program for our agricultural producers. 

 

Now the government did announce a $12 an acre I think was 

their share, a $30 an acre altogether with the funding from the 

feds, from the federal government, to offset the unseeded acres. 

But, Mr. Speaker, $30 an acre falls far short of what is needed 

to be a meaningful program to reflect the true costs of that land 

standing idle. 

 

I had the opportunity this summer to visit a number of farmers 

across this great province of ours. And there was a kind of a 

general theme when I was talking to farmers particularly about 

the program, the $30 an acre. There was those who were 

saying, well you know, certainly it was welcomed; $30 an acre 

was welcomed, but it wasn’t enough. It didn’t represent 

anywhere near enough. They were suggesting that $30 an acre 

didn’t cover much more than the cost of chemical and the cost 

of applying that chemical to the unseeded acres in order to 

control the weeds. It certainly left them short of the revenue 

that was normally generated off that property to support their 

farming operations and to be able to continue their ability to 

farm into the future. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to find ourselves in a 

situation where the government, because of its granting of 

tax-free holidays and its giving away of money it didn’t have, 

to find itself at some point in time in the future not being able to 

provide funding and financial support for programs that are 

very, very important, particularly those who come up, those 

programs that are of an emergency nature such as the wet year 

and the negative effect that has had on our agricultural 

producers and their ability to only seed half the acres. 

 

I think the same can be said for unusual flooding in this great 

province of ours and those people who were impacted by floods 

that normally, you know, that wouldn’t be the case. But this 

was certainly a very unusual year. And we certainly have a lot 

of those cases where an emergency nature certainly causes a 

need for the government to step forward and to take a 

leadership role in providing support for those individuals out 

there who find themselves very negatively impacted. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is certainly a lot on this particular Bill 

that needs to be looked into. And certainly there is a need for 

the opposition to have the time to further flesh out the 

shortcomings of this Bill by talking to the stakeholders and 

those who are directly affected by this Bill or may be directly 

affected by this Bill. So to do that, of course the opposition will 

need some time to contact the stakeholders and have the 

opportunity to sit down and discuss the various aspects of this 

Bill with them and to get input from them as to what the impact 

may be on their operation, may be on — as they see it — on the 

province as a whole and in general. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, we will need a little further time to 

look at the various aspects of this Bill, and as well as giving my 

colleagues the opportunity to express their concerns on this 

particular Bill. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to speak to Bill No. 150, the superannuation amendment Act. 

And this Bill does a couple of things, one of which causes 

significant question and even concern to us, not because it may 

not . . . Some of the provisions might in fact work out well, but 

some of it sets a dangerous precedent. And the provision I’m 

speaking of is the provision to withhold some information, to 

not publicly disclose all of the pension that goes out. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because as members will be 

well aware, I’ve a significant history in this legislature. And I 

know, and I know that many of the members opposite have a 

fairly significant history in this place as well. And I heard 

members of the now government calling for full public 

disclosure of everything, of everything when they were in 

opposition and the New Democrats were in government. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Sask Party wanted contracts all disclosed. They wanted 

salaries fully disclosed, pensions fully disclosed. After all, the 

argument goes, it’s public money. It’s taxpayers’ money. And 

the member for Cannington is smiling. He was probably the 

biggest proponent of that. And I recall many eloquent speeches 

from that member, eloquent speeches speaking to the need for 

full public disclosure of everything. 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6157 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it in this legislature before, what a 

difference a day will make, especially if that’s election day for 

a Sask Party government. And I say, shame. It doesn’t have to 

be that way. It shouldn’t ought to be that way, Mr. Speaker. 

Parties and members should get elected for their good proposals 

and for what they believe in. But things shouldn’t just flip 

because it happens to be an election day, and you go from 

opposition to government. You should be able to have the 

courage of your convictions and make the good ideas happen, 

particularly when you’re in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concern with this . . . I have a new twist on my 

concern that I’ve not seen elsewhere. One person asked me 

earlier whether it was accurate, whether it’s true that the Sask 

Party cabinet was going to increase salary or benefits, thereby 

increasing their pension and not having to report it. It’s an 

interesting question. That wasn’t the new question that I had. 

 

The question I have is, we’ve got to be careful what it is we 

allow to happen because the argument I’m going to make is that 

with this proposal, double-dipping can continue unabated. 

Double-dipping is a situation where someone working in a 

position retires and then gets hired back to do essentially the 

same job, often the very same job, and they receive pension 

from that job and at the same time collect a salary from that job. 

 

But here’s the twist, Mr. Speaker. What if a government ran 

massive deficits for years in a row? Sounds a bit familiar, 

doesn’t it? What if governments ran massive deficits and then 

woke up and realized, whoa, we’ve got a problem. We’ve got a 

problem — they might say, Mr. Speaker — a problem. How do 

we fix the problem? Well it’s easy. We can cause a number of 

civil servants to superannuate, to retire, and they can retire from 

their . . . Let’s use an example of a $60,000 a year job. They 

can superannuate from a $60,000 a year job, and we’ll hire 

them back for — let’s say — $36,000 a year to do essentially 

the same job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But because they’re now collecting their superannuation — 

whatever that has amounted to, built up over the years — plus 

the salary of $36,000, the person who’s both superannuated and 

working might in fact in a short term be financially better off. 

But the government is significantly better off because in our 

system here, since the late ’70s, pension here accumulates in a 

money purchase plan, not a defined benefit but a money 

purchase. So it’s fully funded. It’s fully funded. 

 

The superannuate, the worker pays their share. The government 

pays their share. And it goes into the pot, and it collects and 

grows or shrinks as has happened a couple of times in the last 

20 years. I’ve got to confess, as someone who watches their 

pension plan, Mr. Speaker, I like it when it grows as opposed to 

the years of contraction. But the reality is it’ll grow or shrink. 

But usually it’ll grow, the pension. 

 

So we have a situation as I’ve just described, Mr. Speaker, 

where you might have a government in a severe financial 

problem, having run a billion or more dollar deficits for 

successive years in a row, a government that has balanced 

budget legislation — say, that we introduced when we were in 

government — forcing a government to balance the budget in 

the four-year term. You might have a government say, holy 

smokes, how can we? How can we achieve a balance? And of 

course governments of all stripes want to achieve what they 

need to achieve with the minimum of complaint from the public 

or the minimum of complaint from public service. 

 

So I’ve just outlined a scenario where this Bill . . . I hope I 

didn’t give ideas, Mr. Speaker, to the government because it 

would be a shame, it would be a shame if this superannuation 

plan were utilized for what I’m saying it might be utilized if, if 

we allow the non-disclosure to take place. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a reason why I have some concern about 

potential non-disclosure going on. 

 

And it’s not because I care particularly what Mr. Jones or Ms. 

Smith might be getting in their superannuation. On a personal 

level, none of my business, quite frankly. But we do need to see 

if there are changes going on that are significant. You need to 

have that in a public planning policy way. And you need to 

make sure that the government isn’t forcing people to 

superannuate so they can lower their salary, saving the frontal 

costs in the budget for the government, saving that budget item 

expenditure at the expense of working people. 

 

Now of course I haven’t entered into the fray of what a job is 

worth, and that’s an entirely different discussion. There is pay 

plans that are in place. Government would want as, frankly, so 

would the opposition want to make sure, as far as we can, that 

any tax expenditure for salary is getting the equal value, if I can 

describe it that way, not to be confused with equal pay for work 

of equal value. But the point is, if you’re paying someone 

$60,000, you should be getting 60,000 or more dollars worth of 

value back from them. 

 

And this is an important thing that employers everywhere . . . 

whether it be government or non-government, whether it’s 

NGOs [non-governmental organization] or private sector or 

co-operatives or whatever the situation is. We have to make 

sure that we’re getting reasonable value for the pay that we’re 

doing. 

 

And I’m concerned that, in the superannuation Bill 150, the 

superannuation proposals, that there can be coercion on 

workers, and it’s a fear. I worry any time we allow the Sask 

Party government off the hook respecting reporting, Mr. 

Speaker. I worry that if we enshrine the ability to not report, as 

is being proposed in this Bill 150, that situations like the 

Amicus situation, a $27 million untendered contract, that those 

situations simply are allowed to go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very disconcerting to me to know that under a 

freedom of information request, there was some 6 to 700 pages 

of information on that very same $27 million untendered 

contract to Amicus. 

 

There was more black in those pages than the ice storm that 

covered Quebec and eastern Ontario in 1998. There was more 

blackout in that freedom of information request than was 

caused by the ice storm in 1998 in eastern Canada. And I 

remember it well. Power lines and major transmission lines 

were down. And the blackout lasted for weeks in many cases. It 

may have even been months, but certainly weeks. People were 

without power. People were blacked out. This Amicus deal is 

seemingly a permanent blackout. And of course the job of the 

opposition is to make sure that that blackout is lifted and that 



6158 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

the light of day is shed on this $27 million untendered contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the superannuation provision similarly is . . . Only 

in this case, the superannuation, Bill 150, legitimizes the 

non-reporting. And that’s the concern that I have and that we in 

the opposition have, is that it legitimizes the ability of the Sask 

Party government to not report at their leisure. And we of 

course have always had the view that the more you report the 

less likely you are to get into any serious trouble. Open and 

honest communication is the best way to operate anything. It’s 

certainly the case with the government. It’s certainly the case 

with any business. It’s the case with any relationships that I’ve 

ever had. You want to be as open and as honest and as 

transparent as you possibly can be. And then you’re not likely 

to get into trouble. 

 

If you can go home and say, mom, this is what happened . . . for 

those who are fortunate enough to still have their mother. Or in 

my case, if I can go home and say, honey, this is the situation 

and this is what happened, and as open and honest as I can, it 

tends to lead to better relationship. 

 

And if I can just, on that little side note, if I can just keep 

pushing that for a little while longer, you know, next month my 

wife and I will be celebrating our 35th wedding anniversary. 

I’m very much looking forward to that as long as Lorna doesn’t 

get smart and chase the member for Athabasca or something 

like that. She might decide she wants to take up with a hockey 

player. I say this with a smile, Mr. Speaker, because if that’s the 

way it is, I know nothing of it. But anyway I’m looking forward 

to next month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the superannuation Bill allows the non-reporting 

of expenditures that we’ve always argued are public 

expenditures. We need to have as much transparent reporting as 

we possibly can. We don’t need to look very far to see a 

government that ducks and rolls and hides from reporting. We 

look at last year’s $2.2 billion error on the potash revenue, you 

know, where instead of collecting 2 billion they wound up 

writing a cheque back for 200 million to the potash companies. 

You know that transparency isn’t an integral part of the 

government members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was recently down at Big Beaver, portal of Big 

Beaver, and they were a little bit upset with their government, 

both provincially and federally because the situation there is the 

American federal government is spending 7 or $8 million 

upgrading the portal at that border crossing, and the Harper 

government in Ottawa is closing the Canadian side, closing it. 

So we have this rather silly situation where an upgrade is 

warranted on the American side, and a closure is warranted on 

this side. 

 

And the good people of Big Beaver and area were pointing out 

the benefits of commerce and the benefits of their ability to visit 

their relatives handily because over the years they’ve married, 

both sides of the border, you know, you have . . . It’s not 

unusual to have — I’ll describe it as — mixed marriages, one 

being a Canadian and one being an American but families 

certainly living on both sides. And they think of themselves as 

one community. But the reporting hasn’t happened here. It’s 

just one more example of a government not wanting to report 

things. 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that Bill 150 does, the 

superannuation plan . . . And this actually sounds like it has 

some promise although we have some question around it. But 

it’s to clarify how spousal survivor benefits are to be calculated 

particularly as it relates to when a person, employee, has been 

married more than once because survivor benefits are . . . You 

know, you want to get it right. You don’t get a whole lot of 

opportunities to disburse the payment to one spouse when in 

fact the former spouse might be entitled to something or vice 

versa. You want to get it right. You want to make sure that any 

spousal benefits are properly taken care of. And I think it’s 

pretty safe to say that most of us would want that to be the 

situation because we would want to have made whatever legal 

provisions or moral or ethical provisions we felt we should 

during our lifetime. And this should be fairly transparent, what 

the spousal survivor benefits are and how they’d be calculated. 

It shouldn’t, Mr. Speaker, change, you know, for me versus 

someone else. It should be again fairly straightforward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got some real concerns, particularly 

around the non-reporting, the non-public disclosure under this 

Act. We have some real concerns that we have a Sask Party 

government that is not always . . . in fact is often, all too often 

not willing to disclose information. And now we have a 

proposal by the same Sask Party government to initiate, 

legitimize the non-public disclosure of pension assets. 

 

And I’ve tried to point out in my speech several areas where 

I’m concerned about it, where it can be a negative, both for 

working people . . . It can be a negative for pensioners, and in 

the long run I argue it can be a negative for government 

because the government should want to be open, accountable, 

honest, you know, the sorts of things that the Sask Party 

campaigned on prior to the last election. A government should 

want to be all of those things and more. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, knowing that we have some more questions 

on the Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act, Bill No. 150, and knowing we need a little 

more time to talk to a few more people, maybe do a little bit of 

further research, at this point I move to adjourn this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to get 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6159 

up again to speak to this Bill. The other day I had just got 

started when we had to adjourn for the day, so I’m very happy 

to have the opportunity to wade into the debate on Bill No. 153, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, once again. 

 

So there are a few changes that are being proposed by this Bill. 

And actually there are some of these changes that seem to be 

quite logical and worthy of support and have been requested by 

bodies that are directly impacted by the Bill currently in force. 

 

However there are a couple of changes that the opposition will 

need to examine a bit more closely. We need to seek some more 

information from government and what its intentions with this 

Bill are and from individuals and organizations outside of 

government on their perspectives as well. One of my colleagues 

— actually the former minister of Justice and the member from 

Lakeview — pointed out that, particularly when the executive 

body of government is making changes around the Provincial 

Court or any of the courts for that matter, we need to be 

especially vigilant when enacting changes to make sure that 

there are no unintended consequences and that the intentions of 

the Bill are very clear too. So the opposition will be doing its 

due diligence to make sure that we fully understand this Bill 

and any of its intended and unintended consequences. 

 

So what does this Bill set out to do? Well the Minister of 

Justice says it will allow Provincial Court judges from other 

provinces to be appointed as temporary judges in Saskatchewan 

when required to deal with a file where all Saskatchewan 

Provincial Court judges are in conflict or appear to be in 

conflict. So this is something that’s currently . . . Other 

jurisdictions actually already allow this, and we support them in 

their work. So this actually seems to be a fairly logical change. 

 

This Bill will set out to reduce the waiting period for disability 

benefits for judges from one year to three months. It will 

require the Judicial Council hearing committee which deals 

with complaints regarding the conduct or capacity of a judge to 

disclose the report following an investigation with certain 

exceptions allowed. 

 

This Bill, Bill No. 153 also clarifies how the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan appoints a replacement representative to the 

Judicial Council if the president of the Law Society is unable to 

attend. And it amends The Small Claims Act to allow justices of 

the peace to hear small claims matters. So that’s what this Bill 

looks like it sets out to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when looking at changes to law and the process, particularly 

the opposition’s process of accessing these changes, you need 

to ask yourself what is the problem you’re addressing and who 

will benefit from these changes, Mr. Speaker. So in reviewing 

the minister’s second reading comments, he does indicate that 

some of these changes were requested by groups outside of 

government to assist them in the work that they do. So for 

example, with respect to lowering the waiting period for 

disability benefits for judges from one year to three months, the 

Provincial Court compensation commission recommended this 

change. This simply puts judges in the same position as other 

provincial government employees as it pertains to disability 

benefits. So this is totally logical and is a fairly easy point to 

support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other changes comes from the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan in order to help maintain consistent 

representation on the Judicial Council. The Law Society had 

been concerned that the existing appointment process to the 

Judicial Council would lead to annual changes in 

representation. So the Law Society was asking for this change, 

and it seems to make sense. Continuity on a decision-making 

body can be a very beneficial thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are, though, a couple parts of this legislation that are 

interesting, to say the least, coming from this particular 

government with its less than stellar track record on issues of 

both transparency and consultation. For example in the 

minister’s second reading comments, he discusses the more 

transparent way complaints against Provincial Court judges will 

now be resolved upon the passing of this piece of legislation, 

Bill No. 153. 

 

Currently complaints against Provincial Court judges may be 

resolved either through an informal review by the Judicial 

Council or the Judicial Council may recommend that a formal 

hearing may be constituted. Currently the less formal process is 

not open to the public, and the results are not made public when 

it wraps up. So if there is a hearing, it will be public unless the 

committee orders otherwise and the committee provides a 

report to the Judicial Council, minister, defendant, and 

complainants. Although this process is public, the report is not, 

unless the report recommends and the Judicial Council agrees 

to issue an order that the judge be removed or retired from 

office. 

 

So this is the case, Mr. Speaker. The report and order are filed 

with the legislature and only then become accessible by the 

public. With these changes, this is moving in the direction of 

other . . . The proposed changes move us in the direction of 

other provinces of a much more transparent process that 

requires the release of the report in a broader range of 

circumstances. The report, in order of the Judicial Council, will 

be made public in all circumstances except where its release 

would disclose personal health information, the identity of the 

complainant in circumstances of sexual harassment or assault, 

or in other cases where it’s contrary to the public interest. 

 

So this seems like a fairly reasonable . . . This seems like a 

good move or a move in the right direction and a direction that 

other jurisdictions have already taken. So by making this order 

public in most cases, it offers the Judicial Council an 

opportunity to publicly renounce inappropriate behaviour by a 

judge, to clear the name of a judge found not to have acted 

improperly, and also to enhance public confidence in the 

disciplinary process under the Act. 

 

So accountability and transparency are good. Increased 

transparency is a very good thing, Mr. Speaker. So in the 

minister’s own words, I’d like to quote him: “Integrity and 

transparency are fundamental to public confidence in the court 

and the administration of justice in this province.” I couldn’t 

agree more. I couldn’t agree more and more wholeheartedly 

with the Minister of Justice about the need for transparency. 

 

But I would also extend his quote to say that integrity and 

transparency are also fundamental to public confidence in 

governance, not just in the court system but in governance, Mr. 



6160 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

Speaker. This is where there’s a healthy dose of irony in the 

minister’s comments. It is this government that’s bringing 

forward a Bill mandating that other organizations remain 

transparent, something at which this government has failed 

abysmally. 

 

When it comes to transparency and integrity, this is the 

government that recently blacked out 900 pages of a freedom of 

information request pertaining to the Amicus deal, a new way 

of doing things, as the government likes to say. This new way 

of doing things, or this new road as we heard in the Throne 

Speech, is all about not tendering projects that involve public 

money and about passing on contracts to your political 

supporters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new road on which this government has set 

out seems to be taking us back to the days of the 1980s where 

the government of the day racked up huge amounts of debt that 

hamstrung future governments for years and years to come. 

And just a note, we have to remember this is where our Premier 

learned his governing style and his management skills. It was at 

this time of fiscal mismanagement in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I too agree with transparency and believe citizens 

expect this of their legislators and of their government. After all 

it is their money, and they deserve to know how it’s being spent 

and that the process to spend that money is clear, fair, and 

transparent, that we know how it works, that across the board 

we know how government is going to spend money and how 

organizations will be treated. So I do still think it’s ironic that 

this government is holding others to a higher standard than it’s 

willing to meet itself. 

 

Although we’ve heard from the minister how some of these 

amendments have come forward, why these changes are being 

proposed, and how they will impact people, there are a couple 

parts of this legislation that will definitely have to be more 

carefully reviewed. The minister has given no indication as to 

where some of these legislative changes have come from. We 

did hear where a couple of them came from, but there’s a 

couple key pieces that the minister hasn’t given any indication 

where his guidance or direction has come from on this. 

 

So call me a bit of a cynic, but in my short time in this 

Legislative Chamber . . . I’ve only been here about a year, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ve seen this government fail to consult on too 

many occasions to count. A lack of consultation seems to be the 

rule rather than the exception. 

 

They failed to consult when they brought in The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. They failed to consult with anyone who 

knew anything about SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network] or the film industry in this province when they 

privatized SCN. They failed to consult when they ended the 

domestic violence program in Saskatoon, a program that was 

working incredibly well for the people who had the opportunity 

to use it, Mr. Speaker. This list of lack of consultation goes on 

and on and on. 

 

So I have a few concerns that some of these changes that this 

government is proposing with respect to Bill 153 . . . 

particularly the changes around small claims court. And what 

will happen now is justices of the peace will be able to hear 

cases in small claims court as well as Provincial Court judges. 

So my concern about this . . . and it may be a valid change, but 

my concern comes from wondering if this government is 

choosing to do this to save money. 

 

Is this to deal with their own fiscal mismanagement, Mr. 

Speaker? This government spent the $2.3 billion they inherited 

from the NDP in 2007, and once this money was gone, they’ve 

racked up deficits two years in a row, and they’ve projected 

debt to increase by 55 per cent or more than $4 billion by 2014, 

Mr. Speaker. So I’m sure you can understand how the 

opposition could be concerned that they may be motivated to 

make changes simply to try to find a little bit of money here and 

there because they don’t seem to have a whole lot of money 

left, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for me, meaningful consultation is absolutely critical to 

ensure legislation works and does what it needs to do for all the 

people impacted by it. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So these changes may be beneficial. They may be necessary, 

but the opposition will need to connect with individuals and 

organizations to ensure these changes will not have negative 

consequences or unintended consequences, consequences that 

haven’t been thought about yet. 

 

So again a key rule to think about when you look at a piece of 

legislation is, who requested the changes and what are these 

changes? What is the problem, the issue, that these proposed 

changes are meant to address? So the opposition will be taking 

some time and, as I said, connecting with individuals and 

groups who know something about these areas, Mr. Speaker, to 

make sure that the whole of the Bill does what it needs to do for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I know that I have colleagues who are also interested in 

discussing this Bill, so with that, I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill 153. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 154, The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act. My comments 

flow very much out of what I’ve just spoken to in Bill 153. 



November 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6161 

Again I think the big piece that we will be examining and 

discussing with people is this government’s move to, with 

respect to small claims court, having justices of the peace be 

able to hear small claims court as well as Provincial Court 

justices. Again I think some of the concerns are around . . . this 

may or may not be a valid decision, but we need more time to 

discuss this with people. 

 

And I just actually would like to refer to some comments that 

one of my colleagues, again the former minister of Justice and 

the member from Lakeview, pointed out around this. So my 

colleague from Lakeview, a quote: 

 

And one of the points made is that small claims cases 

obviously would be handled not by a Provincial Court 

judge in all cases, but by a Justice of the Peace. And this is 

a change. It’s like contracting out work, I suppose, to 

another group of workers. It is important that the minister 

tell us if this is a request that is actually coming from the 

Provincial Court judges, the chief judge and their group, 

or if this is something that is being done as a 

administrative financial solution to the situation. 

 

And that situation would be this government’s fiscal 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. So again, my comments for Bill 

154 are very much along the line of my comments for 153. So 

with that, I know that I’ll have colleagues who want to speak to 

154 as well. So with that, I adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 154. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 — be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to enter the debate on Bill 155, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, 2010. I’m pleased for a couple of reasons. 

One, most of us in Saskatchewan have had the great 

opportunity to enjoy the outdoors, whether it be through fishing 

or hunting or simply enjoying some of the amazing scenery 

canoeing. But, you know, there’s thousands of different ways to 

enjoy the outdoors in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so with the history that we’ve got of fishing and trapping 

and hunting, and with the amount of tourism dollars that flow 

into Saskatchewan through these industries or through the 

tourism industry, it’s exceedingly important that we look very 

carefully at legislation that comes in that affects the tourism 

industry indirectly, and some of the activities of tourism more 

directly. 

I have myself on many occasions been able to enjoy an 

opportunity to fish in northern Saskatchewan, whether it’s at 

Jim’s Camp at Jan Lake or Jim’s Camp at Nistowiak Falls or 

whether it’s at different camps, Jan Lake, outside of Missinipe, 

north of La Ronge, I had great opportunity in my life to do 

these things. I’ve also been able to enjoy doing some hunting in 

the South, whether it’s goose or deer or what have you, with my 

relatives, my grandparents, and uncles. And so it’s through 

some personal experience that I can speak on some of these 

issues. 

 

And so we have here a Bill before us that at first blush appears 

to be somewhat innocuous because it has implications on the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and the role that’s played 

by the advisory council to that fund. 

 

Now it’s interesting to note a few things with respect to this 

Bill. One that’s very interesting is, if you remember back to the 

spring where the Sask Party government passed legislation to 

remove up to three and a half million acres or so of wildlife 

habitat protection land, if you remember back to that time, they 

removed land from control and the ability of government to 

scrutinize what happens on those lands. And what we’re 

looking at here is unbelievably ironic because in the minister’s 

speech on November 15th of 2010, he says this, and I quote: 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund provides the 

money necessary to secure habitat to support a diversity of 

fish and wildlife species. To date the fund has acquired, 

through purchase or donation, approximately 212,000 

acres of land for wildlife habitat purposes, with many 

acres under joint title with various partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at legislation right now that 

provides funding to a Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, 

that provides dollars to that fund, that will purchase back some 

land to be used for wildlife habitat purposes. We just spent 

hours and hours in this Assembly this spring ensuring that the 

government would transfer out up to three and a half million 

acres in The Wildlife Habitation Protection Act. This fall they 

come here with a Bill that’s to provide funds to a group who 

wants to purchase land back. It’s unbelievable to me that we 

would have that dichotomy here. 

 

And I’m not sure if they understand what the implications of 

this are. But they defended that Bill this spring vehemently, a 

Bill that they said in the minister’s second reading speech that 

they consulted with people. They named specific groups that 

they said that they’d consulted with. It was at that time Ducks 

Unlimited, the Nature Conservancy, the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, and the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations]. 

 

Now the minister in this case, where we’re putting away money 

or allocating money on behalf of the taxpayers to buy back land 

that seemingly the government brought in legislation to get rid 

of this spring, and they’re saying in this case that they’ve 

consulted with these groups again . . . And so we should look 

back to the minister’s second reading speech on The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and find out whether or not it was true 

that she’d consulted with these folks. 

 

And I gave a lengthy speech in the spring, delineating for the 



6162 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2010 

Assembly and for the people of Saskatchewan that almost to a 

group — that was mentioned in the minister’s second reading 

speech — that where she said she’d consulted, almost to a 

group, they denied that they had been consulted. 

 

And so when you have impartial bodies that represent nature 

lovers and wildlife habitat protected lands, people like the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy, 

and the FSIN, when they come back and say that it is absolutely 

false, that we were never consulted on this Bill, and it makes 

the minister’s second reading speech, you have to ask yourself 

when they bring in a Bill again six months later that does 

exactly the opposite of what they brought in six months earlier 

in the spring and say that they consulted, you have to wonder if 

that’s true. 

 

And so the job as a credible opposition, the work that we do as 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, we take very seriously. And 

so we’re going to again, as we did with The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, ensure that these groups have been consulted. 

And we’ll find out whether they have an opinion on the 

legislation because, whether it was directly or indirectly, the 

comments attributed to those groups in the spring were 

misrepresented. And it’s unfortunate that without consulting 

these major stakeholders in a Bill that you would try to use 

these same folks to provide credibility for your actions. And so 

we’re going to ensure once again that that hasn’t happened in 

this case. 

 

And we’ve had the same issue with other Bills and other actions 

of this government, certainly Bills 5 and 6, where there was a 

complete and total lack of consultation and in fact a United 

Nations body ruled in an international judicial process that what 

the Sask Party government has done in the case of Bills 5 and 6, 

what they’ve done in those cases was essentially illegal and 

should be stopped and changed. And it was because of a lack of 

consultation. 

 

And so this comes up time and time again, unfortunately, with 

this government. My colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale 

pointed out very adroitly that when it came to the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network, the government had claimed to have 

consulted people with respect to the closure of SCN. And we 

find out very directly just after that that it’s not true, that they 

weren’t consulted, and in fact they hadn’t been called for the 

period that the government had been elected. So they didn’t 

know and they didn’t care. So that’s unfortunate. 

 

Now again it’s important, if you want to have credibility in 

bringing forward legislation, that you tell the truth about what 

you’re doing and what you’re trying to do, what the motivation 

is. What’s the impetus for the legislation to begin with? 

Because when you don’t, you lose credibility over time. And so 

it’s interesting to note that on many other occasions this 

government has lost some credibility in that case. 

 

And so again we’re going to have to check with all of the 

affected groups, with each of them, and also look deeply at 

what the motivation for bringing forward a Bill like this might 

be. Because we have a case in Saskatchewan today where the 

government in power has no idea how to manage the province’s 

finances. And so the implications for that range anywhere from 

bed closures to signing deals that are not good for the people of 

Saskatchewan to try to hide money from the provincial 

treasury. 

 

And so we have to certainly look in this case if it’s an attempt 

by this government to take money off the books so that they 

don’t have to count it in their budgetary process in the same 

way that they’re doing it with Amicus in Saskatoon, if they just 

guaranteed the loan and guarantee that they’ll pay a premium 

for the beds in there over a number of years. That’s what might 

happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being now 5 p.m., the Assembly will 

recess until this evening at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6131 

  Iwanchuk ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6131, 6133 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6131 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6131 

  Morgan .......................................................................................................................................................................... 6132, 6133 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6132 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6150 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6133 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6134 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6134 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6134 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6134 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6134 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6135 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Another Step Towards the 2010 Grey Cup 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6135 

 Western Division Champions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6135 

 Movember 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6135 

 Agribition Celebrates 40th Anniversary 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6136 

 Everyday Heroes Recognized 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6136 

 Service Animal Protection 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6136 

 Economic Update 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6137 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6137 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6138 

 Health Care Workers’ Contracts and Health Region Funding 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6138 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6139 

 Protection for Service Animals 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6140 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6140 

 Housing Issues 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6140 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6141 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 617 — The Protection of Service Animals Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6142 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6142 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on Priority of Debate 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6142 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6142 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6143 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6144 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6145 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6146 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6148 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6150 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6152 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6153 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6156 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6158 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6160 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6161 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


