




















































Hansard: November 15, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 10B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6027 

 November 15, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., debate will resume. I 

recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 

pleasure to rise this evening and be able to continue comments 

into The Animal Protection Act, Bill No. 148. The minister 

made some fairly lengthy comments in his second reading 

speech, and I was kind of hoping they’d have been up on 

Hansard. I wouldn’t have minded looking at some of the 

details; I didn’t catch it all when he was making comments. But 

I’ll just have to get up bright and early tomorrow to actually 

read it and see what it was; see if it was half as good as it 

sounded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I can say quite easily that the opposition 

supports this Bill. Everyone I think in this province has a duty 

to ensure that animals are protected from cruelty and abuse and 

that they receive the necessities of life to which they are 

entitled. And I agree with the minister that a majority of 

producers or animal owners in this province would take great 

care with the animals that they raise or the animals that they 

have and make sure that they’re adequately protected. But, Mr. 

Speaker, when we live in a country with such a variance of 

weather and weather conditions — when you can go from 40 

below to 35, 40 above — there’s always an effort that needs to 

be made to make sure that animals in our care have what they 

need and are adequately cared for. 

 

So you know, all in all, while this is pretty short piece of 

legislation, the definition of owner: “No person responsible for 

an animal shall cause or permit the animal to be or to continue 

to be in distress”. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m kind of out of step 

here because part (1) is, “No person shall cause an animal to be 

in distress,” and part (2) is, “No person responsible for an 

animal shall cause or permit the animal to be or to continue to 

be in distress”. And that’s important. It makes some 

clarification on what was an older description and makes it 

more appropriate to this day and age. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think everyone supports increased penalties for 

perpetrators of any cruelty or abuse, and we do support the 

changes to ensure that charges can be levied against people who 

abuse other people’s animals as well as their own. And this was 

a kind of a separation in the description that, or a better 

definition of the description, I know, that the SPCA [Society for 

the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] had touched on when I’d 

first heard some comments the other day on the radio about this 

piece of legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other part that the minister touched on is 

providing additional resources to the SPCA to be able to follow 

through in their investigations because of course you can put 

the best piece of legislation in place, but if you don’t have the 

adequate resources to be able to follow through and to enforce 

the legislation that’s on the books, it really isn’t worth the paper 

it’s written on. And, Mr. Speaker, so I was very pleased to hear 

the minister in his comments talk about increased support for 

SPCA. 

 

And there was an article, it was an editorial, I believe, in The 

StarPhoenix the other day . . . in July. And it spoke about the 

tough job, that the SPCA has to do it. And they talked about it 

being a charitable organization that, in conjunction with the 

Agriculture ministry, needed to enforce . . .  

 

The charitable organization works in conjunction with the 

Agriculture Ministry to enforce the Animal Protection Act 

— legislation that’s meant to protect animals in 

Saskatchewan from cruelty. 

 

So it goes on to talk about: 

 

The SPCA also is charged with providing care and 

treatment for animals that are seized in cases where an 

investigation deems that it is warranted. And that this task 

is . . . [probably] as tough as the investigation and the 

enforcement of the Act. 

 

So I think what really initiated this editorial in The StarPhoenix 

in July was that the Saskatchewan SPCA was on a fundraising 

drive as it attempted to care for 82 dogs and puppies seized in 

early June from a breeder in Leslie. So what we have here is an 

organization that really is charged with enforcing legislation 

and giving care for any animals that may be seized. But they’re 

doing it as a charity and relied heavily on the community for 

support, and as they weren’t even a registered charitable 

organization it was even more difficult. But they were on a 

fundraising drive to help look after these puppies and dogs that 

had been seized in June, and it really brought to light some of 

the problems that they deal with while they are carrying out this 

very important work. 

 

So what we have to do is look at, is the funding that the 

minister’s committed to providing for the SPCA, is that 

appropriate? And the article goes on and talks about it was 

questionable whether the SPCA should be put in a position of 

having to beg for donations to carry out this important task on 

behalf of taxpayers. Because that’s what they’re doing; they’re 

doing the work on our behalf, for all of us that are citizens of 

this province. And it is legislation and requirements that are put 

in place by this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see the government make the 

decision that there would be additional funding. Now I guess 

the question always is, is it enough? And that’s what we’ll have 

to look into. And we will have to do some more discussion on 

that, and some calls to make sure it’s in the ballpark and that 

it’s close to providing or is adequate to provide what the SPCA 

needs to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is the same government . . . I guess, that 

said, this is the same government that put in place the coyote 

program last year. And this program, I think many people 



6028 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

talked about it not being very well thought through. And this 

bounty is blamed for what they referred to as a mass killing of 

37 coyotes in Alberta last spring. And now these animals were 

killed, and their bodies were dumped with the paws cut off 

which was of course the requirements of the coyote program. 

You had to turn in the feet to your RM [rural municipality] 

office to receive the bounty. Now they know that it was 

something to do with the coyote program in Saskatchewan, 

even though the animals were killed in Alberta, because the 

pelts were still intact on the animals. So we know that they 

weren’t killed by trappers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at pieces of legislation 

like this animal protection Act, we really have to look at it in 

the broader sense and make sure that initiatives that we’re 

putting in place to maybe address or help alleviate some 

problem in some areas — as coyotes were a problem for some 

producers in certain areas of the province — we have to make 

sure that you look at it with the big picture in mind. Killing off 

coyotes may lead to an increase of rodents and gophers which 

leads to more problems for producers, and what we have to do 

is then put out poison to get rid of the gophers. And that costs 

money, but it also can cause residual damage to other wildlife if 

gophers are eaten, dead gophers are eaten, ones that have died 

from poisoning are eaten by birds of prey or other animals. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we do any of these pieces of legislation, 

nothing is done in isolation. And we really need to look at the 

big picture and make sure what we’re doing is appropriate and 

is the best process that we can possibly follow. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, another area of this Bill, the minister named 

off quite a list of people that he had said had been consulted 

with before this Bill was moved ahead on. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

quite like to think of myself as an optimist. I don’t think of 

myself as a pessimist, but we do have the experience, we do 

have the experience of the last session especially when we’ve 

seen a number of pieces of legislation come forward where 

there had been minimal consultation; I would actually say no 

consultation. 

 

Some of the parties had been notified that the government was 

planning to make changes to, say, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. They were invited to a general meeting with no 

kind of inclination of what changes were being proposed or 

what was happening. Then lo and behold, we had the legislation 

brought forward. And the government said, well yes, they felt 

they had done adequate consultation. 

 

Well once we heard from these organizations — and it was a 

real variety from right across the province, Mr. Speaker — we 

found out that, you know, there is a big difference between 

being notified there may be changes proposed to actual changes 

being put forward in the House, and what constitutes 

consultations and actually working through this legislation or 

any proposed changes with interested parties or people who had 

a vested stake in what the law of Saskatchewan says, and how 

their industry or how their lifestyle may be changed according 

to any new laws or legislation changes that are put forward 

here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister had said that there had been 

consultations done, but I think what there needs to be is a bit of 

a check to see exactly what kind of consultations have been 

carried out, and what kind of input. Now I do have to say, Mr. 

Speaker, these are good changes. I don’t think they would be 

controversial to anyone, but still all of these producers, all of 

these organizations across the province, they are still partners. 

They are still taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan, and 

they have a right to be consulted with and be able to voice their 

opinion when any type of new changes are being put forward in 

areas that are specific to their industry or their careers or their 

occupations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that we will do. I know that 

there has been a number of cases, or a few cases, and not that 

many — I think the minister referred to about seven over the 

past year or two years — that had been quite serious. And I 

hope that the minister . . . I know the legislation really doesn’t 

speak to household animals or whether it speaks to other types 

of animals that may be in our care or if it’s, if it covers them all 

generally. And that’s something I think that we will need some 

clarification on. 

 

And maybe a discussion with the minister or maybe questions 

when this Bill finally moves to committee would be appropriate 

because there are many concerns that are out there. And while 

this at face value looks like it could address many of them, I’m 

sure that my colleagues will have numerous questions. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, so we can have consultations with 

some of the interested parties and make sure that the Bill 

adequately does what the minister is expecting it to do, at this 

point in time I would adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 148, The Animal 

Protection Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I’m pleased to rise today to speak to the 

second reading of Bill 147, An Act respecting the Protection of 

Public Servants who make Disclosures. After enactment this 

will be known as The Public Interest Disclosure Act. Mr. 

Speaker, after my comments I will be moving second reading of 

Bill 147, The Public Interest Disclosure Act. 

 

We’re introducing this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to fulfill 

government’s commitment to strengthening protection for 

employees in the public service. It was an election commitment. 

It was also included in the mandate letter in 2007 for the 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission. As 

the minister responsible for that portfolio, I am pleased to 

confirm that we are moving forward. This is a positive move 

for the province and for the Saskatchewan public service. 

 

At a high level, this Bill is intended to first of all enhance 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6029 

confidence in government institutions and in the public service. 

It will facilitate disclosure and investigation of alleged 

wrongdoings and it will protect whistle-blowers in the public 

service workplace. 

 

The proposed new public interest disclosure Act will also 

protect employees from reprisal if they report wrongdoing by 

government institutions. This legislation covers the following 

four kinds of wrongdoings. 

 

[19:15] 

 

First of all, a contravention of any legislation. Second, an act or 

omission that creates a substantial and specific danger to the 

life, health, or safety of persons other than a danger that is 

inherent in the performance of the duties or functions of a 

public servant; or a substantial and specific danger to the 

environment. Third, gross mismanagement of public funds or a 

public asset. And fourth, knowingly directing or counselling 

someone to commit a wrongdoing of the three kinds I have just 

described. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to protecting our 

employees. They can bring forward concerns knowing they will 

be safe from dismissal, layoff, suspension, demotion, 

elimination of a job, or reprimand. This legislation will apply to 

executive government, Mr. Speaker. With this, all employees in 

all ministries in all locations will be protected if they blow the 

whistle on wrongdoing. We also intend to include the Crown 

Investment Corporation and Treasury Board Crowns. This is 

the same definition of government institutions as found in The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

We’ll bring in regulations after this Bill is enacted to set out the 

details of which Crown corporations and other entities will be 

covered. This legislation focuses on government institutions 

and the public service. It provides specific provisions for 

employees that hold this public trust. 

 

Other employees in the province, including those in private 

industry and in the wider public sector, such as regional health 

authorities, school divisions, and municipalities, will continue 

to have protection under The Labour Standards Act. 

 

I’m also pleased to say that this legislation establishes a Public 

Interest Disclosure Commissioner as an independent officer of 

the legislature. The commissioner will have authority to provide 

education, to undertake investigations, to make 

recommendations, and to initiate systematic reviews when 

common themes or issues are identified through the complaint 

process. 

 

This Bill provides flexibility for the Assembly in appointing the 

commissioner. The role may be with the Ombudsman’s office 

or someone other than the Ombudsman may instead become the 

Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner. 

 

Finally, there are a number of procedural requirements covered 

by this Bill to ensure sound and effective process. For example, 

each government institution must appoint a designated officer 

to accept and to manage disclosures of wrongdoing and 

complaints of reprisal. Employees may report wrongdoings to 

this designated officer within each ministry or Crown, or to the 

commissioner. All disclosures must be in writing and in a 

prescribed form. Knowingly making a false statement, 

obstructing an investigation, falsifying or concealing 

information will be an offence and subject to a penalty of up to 

$10,000. 

 

And there are provisions for tabling annual reports by the 

commissioner on disclosures he or she has received. Once this 

legislation is enacted, each ministry and Crown will be 

responsible for establishing internal processes for managing 

disclosures. The Public Service Commission will work with the 

Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner to develop a 

consistent approach across the public service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again this is an election commitment that we 

made, and I am pleased to be here at second reading to speak to 

this Bill. We are committed to the consultation and in the 

development of this Bill that discusses this issue and this 

legislation and the new position of the Public Interest 

Disclosure Commissioner with a wide range of stakeholders. 

 

We met with the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General. 

We’ve spoken to Crown Investments Corporation, and this 

agency as you know represents all commercial CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] Crowns. In 

addition, we met with representatives of the four Crowns: 

SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance]. We’ve discussed this issue with the 

Provincial Ombudsman. We’ve notified all deputy ministers 

and heads of all Treasury Board Crowns of this legislation. In 

addition, we’ve informed the two public services unions: the 

Saskatchewan Government and General Employees Union, 

SGEU and the Canadian Union of Public Employees or CUPE. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe this legislation fills a critical need in 

our current system, and it will protect employees in government 

operations around our province. 

 

I’d like to summarize for all members of the Assembly the 

results of this new legislation, The Public Interest Disclosure 

Act. It will require permanent heads of ministries and chief 

executive officers of Crowns to establish internal procedures 

for managing disclosures. It will provide a process for 

employees to disclose wrongdoings within their own 

government institutions. It will protect employees from reprisal 

if they make a disclosure of wrongdoings. It will apply to all 

employees of executive government, including all ministries. It 

will also enable the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 

prescribe by regulation those Crown corporations and other 

entities which could be brought under the Act. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, our intention is to include all Crown 

Investments Corporation Crowns and Treasury Board Crowns. 

This legislation will establish a Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner as an independent officer of the legislature. It 

will provide this new Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner 

with the authority to provide education, undertake 

investigations, make recommendations, and initiate systematic 

reviews when common themes or issues are identified through 

the complaint process. 

 

It will encourage disclosure either to designated officers within 

each ministry or Crown, or to the Public Interest Disclosure 



6030 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Commissioner. It will outline the Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner’s duty when receiving and conducting 

investigations. It will prohibit reprisals against public servants. 

Any employee who feels that he or she has been a subject of 

reprisal can make a complaint of reprisal to the designated 

officer or the Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner. 

 

It will provide for a penalty of up to $10,000 for knowingly 

making a false statement, obstructing an investigation, 

falsifying or concealing information. And finally, this new 

legislation will provide for the tabling of annual reports by the 

commissioner on the disclosures he or she has received by the 

minister on internally handled disclosures. 

 

I’d also like to explain what it means for employees, and the 

steps they will follow if they believe there’s been wrongdoing 

and wish to raise concerns. First, they will decide whether they 

want to disclose their concerns to the designated officer in 

government, or whether they would choose to disclose to the 

commissioner. Next, they will fill out and submit a form with 

their information. They will be then interviewed, and if the 

matter can be resolved internally, efforts will be made to do 

that. Finally, if an investigation is required, the designated 

officer or commissioner will ensure that this is done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many times when matters reported to the 

commissioner are more appropriately handled through other 

legislation. This could involve other agencies. For example, it 

may be the Provincial Auditor if a financial concern is raised. 

Or it may be the Information and Privacy Commissioner if 

privacy concerns are raised. As I have said, this Bill protects 

employees from reprisals. These protections continue and carry 

forward even when another agency or process becomes 

involved. 

 

Protection from reprisal is one of the overarching purposes of 

this Bill, as noted in the long title, An Act respecting the 

Protection of Public Servants who make Disclosures. This 

purpose, broadly stated and as not qualified any way, provides 

that a public servant has acted in good faith. It will remain in 

place for the employee no matter what agency may need to 

become involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know our employees in the public service are 

hard-working people committed to their jobs and to serving the 

people of our province. We believe they are dedicated and 

competent and loyal and capable. We want to protect them if 

they believe there are wrongdoings that should be disclosed. 

 

And so how will this process work in practice? We actually 

expect to get inquiries and questions from public service 

employees, and also some disclosures. Where possible, we will 

resolve these internally. And as I mentioned, there’s a capacity 

for investigations. We don’t expect to get many of these but if 

they do occur, investigations will occur. We believe this is an 

important step forward, ensuring that our workplaces are the 

best they can be and ensuring that employees in the public 

service can do their jobs with dignity and be protected from 

reprisals if there are issues of concern. What we want to have is 

a safe, effective system in place so that concerns can be 

addressed. In the event that something inappropriate happens, 

employees will now know they have a way to raise issues and 

know that they will be taken seriously. 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation provides a comprehensive and 

effective approach, and we are pleased to be moving forward 

today. This is a commitment we made in the election and we 

are keeping this commitment. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce the second 

reading of Bill 147, An Act respecting the Protection of Public 

Servants who make Disclosures. This Bill will be known after 

enactment as The Public Interest Disclosure Act. It represents 

the fulfillment of our commitment to strengthen protection for 

public servants in the workplace. It will increase integrity, 

accountability in government operations, enhance confidence in 

government institutions, and facilitate disclosure of 

wrongdoings. This is a positive move for the province and for 

the Saskatchewan public service. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

move second reading of Bill 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 147, The Public Interest Disclosure 

Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m pleased today to rise and speak to second reading 

of Bill 147, an Act respecting the protection of public servants 

who make decisions, an Act that may be cited under its short 

title, The Public Interest Disclosure Act. I appreciate the words 

of the minister in introducing the Act here just a few moments 

ago, Mr. Speaker. I listened carefully to the minister as she 

described the Bill. 

 

My first thoughts on reading the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and on 

listening to the minister, my first thought was, good try. This is 

a great first draft, Mr. Speaker, of a Bill that has some potential. 

But, Mr. Speaker, as it stands right now this piece of 

legislation, as I will describe over the next few minutes, this 

piece of legislation, The Public Interest Disclosure Act, Mr. 

Speaker, fails very much to meet the test originally set out by 

the Saskatchewan Party itself in its election commitments in 

2007, Mr. Speaker. And also it fails to address some of the real 

needs that exist within the public service as far as disclosure 

goes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by way of summarizing some of what I will 

address in my remarks on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, let me just say 

that this Bill does not provide the greatest public disclosure. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, this Act acts almost to the point of 

suppressing information to ensure that perhaps there is no 

public disclosure of certain things, Mr. Speaker. This Act, the 

way it’s set up, the practice that’s set up in the Act seems to be 

protecting the government in ways in which it can control the 

flow of information as opposed to ensuring that information 

flows smoothly, Mr. Speaker. In fact it actually pulls away from 

the public interest as opposed to moves us more closely to 

protecting the public interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So let’s just have a look at some of the things that we need to 

think about, Mr. Speaker, as we take a look at how to take this 

first draft which addresses some of the concerns that have been 

expressed in the public service and amongst the members of the 

public, Mr. Speaker, as we take this first draft and try to create 

from it some legislation that would actually be extremely useful 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6031 

in the interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, just to make it clear — sometimes 

words get distorted in this place, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

ensure that there’s some certainty around this — the purpose of 

the Bill is something that the opposition supports, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly as I speak today I want to indicate clearly I 

support the purpose or the principle behind the concept of this 

Bill 147, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that governments must be accountable. They must be 

transparent. They must be open. They must be honest, Mr. 

Speaker. And the public relies on a system that protects 

employees within government, Mr. Speaker, if they choose to 

speak out in the protection of the public interest. That’s how we 

ensure open, honest, and accountable government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Just to add even further clarification to what I’m talking about, 

I have the Saskatchewan Party’s election booklet in front of me 

from the 2007 election. There’s a whole section here on 

accountable government. The Sask Party told the people of 

Saskatchewan prior to 2007 election, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan people expect their government to be open, 

honest, and accountable. A Saskatchewan Party 

government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any previous 

government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that was the commitment to Saskatchewan 

people. We’ve seen in this legislature now on numerous 

occasions, most recently just this week, Mr. Speaker, how this 

government has actually acted to be less transparent and less 

accountable to the public. 

 

An instance that I cite right off the top of my head, Mr. 

Speaker, is the case of a freedom of information request about 

information surrounding a deal that this government has made 

with Amicus corporation, a private sector corporation, Mr. 

Speaker, planning on providing long-term care service and 

facilities in the city of Saskatoon. A simple arrangement, 

apparently between the government and Amicus, Mr. Speaker, 

a simple arrangement in which the government, according to 

them, will simply provide some funding for beds in a home 

built by, owned by, and operated by this corporation, Amicus. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we asked for the agreement . . . It 

seems to be a simple deal, Mr. Speaker. We asked for the 

agreement. Under freedom of information, we get 900 pages 

back: 900 pages, Mr. Speaker, of which 890 of them were 

blanked out. A huge amount of black ink, Mr. Speaker, on this 

agreement. Obviously this government has chosen not to be 

transparent and not to be fully accountable, Mr. Speaker, on 

that particular matter. 

 

So I think the public would want members of the opposition to 

ensure that when legislation comes forward that the government 

says will make us more transparent and more accountable, that 

we’re going to look at it very, very closely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just opened the Saskatchewan Party election 

booklet to the page that follows, the page after this section on 

accountability, Mr. Speaker. And the election platform 

commitment was very simple, supporting a professional public 

service: “Strengthening protection for public servants and 

whistle-blowers in the workplace by establishing a public 

integrity commissioner.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we’ve heard the term public integrity 

commissioner since before the 2007 election. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve now got a Bill that says that whistle-blower protection 

will be provided by a commissioner, a public disclosure 

commissioner who in fact may be the Ombudsman in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I’ll have more to say 

about that shortly. But the whole idea of an integrity 

commissioner, which is broader than a whistle-blower, Mr. 

Speaker, seems to have disappeared. So another reason why it 

is important for members of the opposition to question exactly 

what the government is attempting to do by bringing forward 

this whistle-blower legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not like the government was starting 

from scratch when they designed Bill 147 because, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has talked about whistle-blower 

protection since, again, before the 2007 election. They talk 

about consultation. The minister outlined some consultation 

that had occurred prior to this Bill coming forward, Mr. 

Speaker. She also talked about not just consultation, but 

informing groups that this legislation was coming forward. 

 

And I think she’s hoping that there will be some feedback from 

organizations, groups, bargaining units, unions, and members 

of the public, Mr. Speaker. Because like so many other pieces 

of legislation the government brings forward, they say, we 

brought it forward and then we consult; as opposed to 

consulting first and bringing forward the Bill later. This Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, suffers from a lack of consultation because it 

doesn’t deliver all of the things that it could, and I say, Mr. 

Speaker, because they didn’t start from scratch. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, recently, in fact in the last sitting of the 

legislature, there was a Bill on the order paper — Bill No. 609, 

An Act to provide protection, rights and remedies for certain 

employees. Mr. Speaker, this legislation — Bill 609 in the last 

sitting of the legislature, 2009, Mr. Speaker — was brought 

forward by my colleague, the member, the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon Fairview. Mr. 

Speaker, this legislation was known, short title, The 

Whistleblower Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. Interestingly 

enough, there are a lot of ideas in this whistle-blower protection 

Act, Mr. Speaker, that sat on the order paper. And I had some 

discussion amongst the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that do 

not show up at all in the government’s legislation, Bill 147. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not enough consultation on the Bill. Ignored a 

number of things that would improve the scope and delivery of 

this legislation and, Mr. Speaker, is brought forward at a time 

when there is skepticism amongst the public and amongst 

public sector employees. Let me expand on that just a little bit 

before I get into some of the details of the legislation itself. 

 

I think it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the public relies heavily 

on public servants in the province of Saskatchewan to provide 

critically important services. Some members opposite will go so 



6032 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

far as to say these services are essential. Not the Minister of 

Health, Mr. Speaker, who said we don’t need essential services 

legislation, but perhaps the minister of Labour, the former 

minister of Labour, who said that no, we need essential services 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, because of course health and safety, 

plowing our highways in winter, are critically important to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t need essential services legislation 

to ensure that the people who work for the province of 

Saskatchewan would provide critically important services to the 

people of Saskatchewan. They do it every single day that they 

go to work, Mr. Speaker. And the public, the public has 

certainly come to rely heavily on these people, often in 

emergency situations. Sometimes members of the public 

service put their own health and safety at risk, Mr. Speaker. But 

we have men and women who have expertise that members of 

the public and even members of the legislature rely on, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that there are good decisions made on their 

behalf. 

 

We rely on health care workers to take care of us and our loved 

ones when we’re ill. We rely on teachers and their support staff 

to educate our children and give them the best possible start in 

life. We rely on child protection workers to protect the safety 

and well-being of thousands of Saskatchewan children, both 

who have been placed in care and those who are at risk. Of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we rely on our Highways workers to clear 

the snow and repair our roads so that we can travel safely from 

one location to another, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But today in the province of Saskatchewan, public servants 

work in an atmosphere where they sometimes feel afraid to 

speak out and they are afraid of reprisal, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

said earlier, it’s not like they don’t have any reason to be 

concerned, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party has a record already, in 

only three years in office, of terminating employees who try to 

do their jobs and protect the public. 

 

It’s not that long ago, Mr. Speaker, that we were talking in this 

legislature about this government, the Sask Party government, 

spending more then $10 million in taxpayers’ money to pay 

severances to non-partisan career public servants who won their 

jobs through fair competitions but who the Sask Party did not 

believe shared their philosophy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the same government that fired an occupational health 

and safety officer who was fighting for better working 

conditions for employees of the Saskatoon Correctional Centre. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that everyone listening to me tonight 

remembers this is the same government that reacted to the 

opposition’s disclosure that an offender was unlawfully at large 

and that the public had never been notified, not by addressing 

the reasons that the system broke down, but by firing an 

employee of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing who, Mr. 

Speaker, you will know they incorrectly believed was 

responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a government that has a strong record 

that public servants feel confident in, that will respect their 

rights. So public servants who want to report wrongdoings in 

their workplace definitely need protection, Mr. Speaker, from 

this government. The opposition of course is concerned that this 

government’s Bill doesn’t go far enough, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

going to address some of that as I address clauses within the 

Bill. 

 

The Bill will protect whistle-blowers who say the law has been 

broken but, Mr. Speaker, not those who allege that policy has 

been broken. And, Mr. Speaker, we find it interesting that the 

minister has suggested that the commissioner would be part of 

the provincial Ombudsman’s office. This is the same 

government that will not commit to implementing any of the 

recommendations of the provincial Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. 

They will pick and choose as they feel inclined. So how, Mr. 

Speaker, can public servants have confidence in an officer 

working out of the Office of the Ombudsman if the teeth of the 

protections aren’t necessarily in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated that the government said they 

want to be more accountable, but they’ve proven that they can’t 

be. They’ve said they want to . . . They promised an integrity 

commissioner, Mr. Speaker, and instead we’ve got a desk, 

perhaps in the Ombudsman’s office. They’ve said they want to 

provide true whistle-blower protection, but they’ve ignored 

some of the factors in The Whistleblower Protection Act that 

was in front of them for some period of time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have, while I said, a very good 

first draft in front of us, Mr. Speaker, there’s so much more that 

this could be. Let’s just have a look therefore, Mr. Speaker, at 

this Act, 147, that the minister has brought forward to us 

tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act, as I said, cited as The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act, provides for a public interest disclosure 

commissioner to be appointed, Mr. Speaker. Disclosure means 

disclosure of a wrongdoing made in good faith by a public 

servant in accordance with the Act, Mr. Speaker. And it 

indicates very clearly, Mr. Speaker, the legislation does, that 

this applies to government institutions.  

 

Now government institution is defined as the Office of 

Executive Council or basically the office of government, Mr. 

Speaker: any department, ministry, secretariat, or other similar 

agency of the executive government of Saskatchewan; any 

prescribed board, commission, Crown corporation; any 

prescribed portion of a board, commission, Crown corporation. 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously the Crowns are included. Staff, 

employees of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, are included in this. 

 

The process that’s set out by the government is interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, because it sets out that wrongdoings to which this Act 

applies are related as follows: a contravention of an Act; as I 

said earlier, Mr. Speaker, disclosure of a wrongdoing in law, 

Mr. Speaker. So the Act applies to a wrongdoing related to a 

contravention of an Act or regulation of an Act. 

 

[19:45] 

 

It also applies to an act or omission that creates a substantial or 

specific danger to the life, health, or safety of persons, and 

provide or provides a substantive or specific danger to the 

environment. It also applies to wrongdoings that could be a 

gross mismanagement of public funds or a wrongdoing where 

someone knowingly directs or counsels a persons to commit a 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6033 

wrongdoing within government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, a very good first draft. This is directing 

people as to what’s included: all government ministries, all of 

its agencies, the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And the 

wrongdoings, as I said, include acts of law, gross 

mismanagement of funds, or counselling of an individual to 

commit a crime. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if someone who works for the public service 

sees one of these wrongs being committed, has some 

documentation or can direct some information surrounding 

these wrongdoings, Mr. Speaker, what are they supposed to do? 

Well the Act ensures that there is a person, Mr. Speaker, within 

each of the agencies, within each of the ministries, within each 

of the Crowns, there’s a person who is going to be designated to 

act as the designated officer for the purpose of receiving this 

wrongdoing information. So an individual who sees 

wrongdoing, Mr. Speaker, can make a representation to this one 

person within the department or directly to the commissioner, 

Mr. Speaker. Nowhere else. That’s the process. That’s the 

procedure. Nothing else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Remember I said there was an Act last year, Bill 609, the Act 

that was brought forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. He in his Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll quote from clause 

no. 3 of the Bill: “No reprisal shall be taken against an 

employee of an employer that is a public agency or public 

institution because the employee does any of the following.” 

 

So this is true whistle-blower protection, Mr. Speaker. So no 

reprisal can be taken against an employee of government if: 

 

(a) discloses, threatens to disclose or is about to disclose to 

a supervisor, a public agency, public body, public 

institution or to an independent officer of the Assembly, an 

activity, policy or practice of the employer, a co-employee 

or another employer, that the employee reasonably 

believes is in violation of a law, an enactment, rule or 

regulation promulgated pursuant to law or an enactment. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, what this does, it protects individuals 

who may disclose or attempt to disclose information beyond 

their immediate supervisor or beyond the commissioner, Mr. 

Speaker — so a public body, a public institution, an 

independent officer of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, this gets, to 

a certain extent, to the heart of the process that an employee 

feels comfortable with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a wrongdoing has occurred. Let’s make the 

assumption a wrongdoing has occurred. An employee knows 

something about this wrongdoing. They have a choice right 

now of going to the commissioner — could be the Ombudsman 

— or going to immediate department head. What happens, Mr. 

Speaker, if that employee is more comfortable disclosing in a 

more public way what has taken place? What occurs, Mr. 

Speaker, under this legislation? Well, Mr. Speaker, reprisal can 

take effect because the process outlined in the Act has not been 

followed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act itself says the supervisor or the designated 

officer or the commissioner is the only one to whom this 

information can be disclosed. If it gets disclosed to the public, 

to the media, or even, Mr. Speaker, to the opposition in the 

legislature, then this legislation does not protect that individual, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s a major failing, a misunderstanding, or 

maybe a better way to put it, a failure of this government to 

understand, Mr. Speaker, how this process really should work 

to ensure full and broad protection of the employee and more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that the legislation allows 

for accountable and transparent government, ensuring that, Mr. 

Speaker, that if information gets to the public, that the 

government then has to ensure that there’s public disclosure, 

there’s public debate, and public discussion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this Act goes way too far in trying to ensure that nothing 

goes to the public, Mr. Speaker, that everything is contained 

quietly, Mr. Speaker, in a file on the designated officer’s desk, 

on a file in the Ombudsman’s office, Mr. Speaker. And the only 

information that’s going to be released to the public is once a 

year — could be a year after the disclosure has taken place, Mr. 

Speaker — in a report to the legislature that would outline, 

without names, without specific information, how many cases 

were brought forward in which departments, what type of cases 

they might be, that sort of thing, Mr. Speaker. So that if there is 

wrongdoing, Mr. Speaker, the public is kept away from that 

information by the very law that this Sask Party government 

predicts is going to make it more transparent, more accountable, 

and, Mr. Speaker, ensures the integrity of the whistle-blowing 

process. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a reason why the promise to 

create an integrity commissioner has been broken, Mr. Speaker, 

because the integrity piece is what’s missing from this 

legislation. Yes, they are creating a commissioner for 

disclosure, Mr. Speaker, but the commissioner is designed in 

this legislation to contain the information, not to ensure 

disclosure. 

 

This Act has to do several things. Number one, it has to protect 

the members of the public service, Mr. Speaker, and it has to be 

seen to protect the interests of the public service. So the 

government has to spend a great deal more time in consulting 

with the representatives of the employees of government, Mr. 

Speaker, before this legislation goes through committee and is 

dealt with in a way in which amendments could be brought 

forward or the legislation is pulled and redrafted, Mr. Speaker. 

A second draft would be good. Perhaps it needs a third draft 

and a fourth draft after proper consultation occurs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to highlight a couple of other things to 

further support what I have to say. Let’s say that a member of 

the public service wishes to seek advice before taking their 

disclosure forward, Mr. Speaker. What if an employee of 

government, an employee of a Crown corporation, an employee 

of an agency of government says, I think this is wrong, but I’m 

not sure if it’s wrong or not. Who can, under this Act, the 

process outlined by this Act, can the employee talk to, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Seeking advice: this is under division 2, page 5 of The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act: 

 

Seeking advice before making a disclosure 

 

9(1) A public servant who is considering making a 



6034 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

disclosure may request advice from: 

 

(a) the designated officer . . . 

 

(b) the Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same people to whom the report must be made 

is required, is only required . . . The public servant is limited to 

talking to the person who’s going to judge the information, to 

getting advice on that report, Mr. Speaker. It is very interesting 

that this government does not wish the public employee to seek 

advice, Mr. Speaker, from anyone other than those who are 

going to judge or adjudicate the written wrongdoing 

information when it is finally presented, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course the content of the disclosure, as I said, must be made in 

writing, Mr. Speaker, so public employees are going to be 

required to provide whatever information they have in writing 

before any further action can be taken care of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On top of that, the commissioner is given certain 

responsibilities, including, Mr. Speaker, the conducting of an 

investigation, and of course, the reporting on that investigation. 

But it is interesting that there is a section in the Bill 147 in front 

of us, The Public Interest Disclosure Act, very specifically said 

the commissioner is not required to conduct an investigation if 

certain circumstances come forward. The commissioner makes 

all the decisions, Mr. Speaker, about whether a matter is 

relevant for investigation or not, and is not required to conduct 

an investigation if the commissioner feels that it’s not important 

enough. In fact the legislation goes so far as to say the 

commissioner is not required to conduct an investigation if “the 

disclosure is frivolous or vexatious, has not been made in good 

faith or concerns a trivial matter.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if someone seeks advice from the 

commissioner and is told, number one, this isn’t worth going 

forward, there’s no place else for it to go, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

done. If advice is not sought, or a matter is brought before the 

commissioner, the commissioner can simply say, sorry, I find 

that frivolous; I’m not doing an investigation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting that there is no further appeal 

process or way in which a whistle-blower can take their 

information further. In fact, Mr. Speaker, sometimes what 

appears frivolous on the surface, once it’s investigated proves 

not to be frivolous, Mr. Speaker, and therefore the public 

service members must have more confidence that this 

government is setting up legislation that ensures their 

protection, but more importantly, Mr. Speaker, ensures that the 

government is accountable at the end of the day to the public. 

 

At the end of the day if an investigation is completed, the 

commissioner prepares a report that sets out the commissioner’s 

opinion and the reasons for that opinion, Mr. Speaker. And the 

commissioner must provide a copy to the designated officers in 

the various departments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again the person to whom the wrongdoing 

may have been reported in the first place, a designated officer, 

reports it to the commissioner. The commissioner does an 

investigation and reports back to the officer, Mr. Speaker. And 

the commissioner may also notify the public servant who made 

the disclosure, Mr. Speaker, but there’s no indication here of a 

copy of the report being provided to the public servant, only 

that the commissioner would notify the public servant. So again 

someone who makes a disclosure, puts their job on the line, Mr. 

Speaker, may not in fact find out the exact nature of the 

investigation or the conclusion of the investigation unless, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s some other reason for the commissioner to 

make that information public. 

 

As I said earlier, the commissioner does report once a year in 

accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act. The 

commissioner once a year submits to the Speaker of the 

Legislative Assembly a report that sets out in the previous year 

the number of disclosures received, the number of 

investigations commenced, whether or not there were any 

findings of wrongdoing, the number of recommendations the 

commissioner has made, but in fact no information or details 

are actually provided in The Tabling of Documents Act 

reporting mechanism, Mr. Speaker. A special report can come 

forward again, Mr. Speaker, but only if the commissioner 

considers it is in the public interest to do so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think as I said earlier, there are matters that 

are raised in this legislation, Bill 145, that attempt to meet some 

of the needs of the public and provide some general sense of 

protection to members of the public service, Mr. Speaker, but 

we need more than that. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this 

legislation be reviewed very carefully before we move it along 

very quickly. Review it very carefully, Mr. Speaker, by 

representatives of the public service, representatives of the 

people who work for government, for agencies, for Crown 

corporations, but also, Mr. Speaker, reviewed by those who 

ultimately need to know that the government is transparent, that 

the government is accountable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The last point that I wanted to make in terms of the specifics on 

the legislation, Mr. Speaker, the last point deals with some of 

the final and ultimate responsibility of the commissioner in the 

Act. There’s a section under the Act called non-compellability, 

Mr. Speaker. These are legal terms, but I think it’s important 

that I put them on the record today: 

 

The Commissioner is neither competent nor compellable 

to . . . produce any files, papers, information, reports, 

correspondence, or other documents relating to the 

business or activities of the Commissioner.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the work of the commissioner, the files, the 

papers, etc., cannot be subpoenaed or reviewed really by 

anybody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then, “Proceedings of the Commissioner not subject to 

review.” This is section 43 of the Act, Mr. Speaker: 

 

No proceeding of the Commissioner is invalid for want of 

form and, except on the ground of lack of jurisdiction, no 

proceeding or decision of the Commissioner shall be 

challenged, reviewed, quashed or called into question in 

any court. 

 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6035 

So, Mr. Speaker, the commissioner’s word is it. It’s the end of 

the day. If someone disagrees with a report of the 

commissioner, Mr. Speaker, that’s it. Nothing you can do about 

it, Mr. Speaker. And because the disclosure is only made to the 

person, the designated authority, or the commissioner, Mr. 

Speaker, and the protection only applies to a public servant who 

has made a disclosure only to the designated authority or the 

commissioner, Mr. Speaker, the protection doesn’t exist if the 

public servant goes to the opposition with their information, 

goes to the media with their information, Mr. Speaker, or goes 

to the public in another way, Mr. Speaker, to express their 

concern that in fact one of the wrongdoings covered by the Act 

does exist. And let’s just review that, Mr. Speaker. The 

wrongdoings are identified in the Act very clearly. 

 

This Act applies to the following wrongdoings. This is section 

3 of the Act: 

 

(a) a contravention of an Act, a regulation made pursuant 

to an Act, an Act of the Parliament of Canada [those are 

federal Acts, Mr. Speaker] or a regulation made pursuant 

to an Act of the Parliament of Canada; 

 

(b) an act or omission that creates: 

 

(i) a substantial and specific danger to the life, health or 

safety of persons other than a danger that is inherent in 

the performance of the duties or functions of a public 

servant; or 

 

(ii) a substantial and specific danger to the 

environment; 

 

(c) gross mismanagement of public funds or a public 

asset; 

 

(d) knowingly directing or counselling a person to 

commit a wrongdoing mentioned in clauses . . . 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are fairly significant matters. There are 

some things that I said are not here, Mr. Speaker, like policy, 

Mr. Speaker, whereby government policy may not be followed 

within a department that perhaps leads to some other action or 

activity that indeed the government should be more accountable 

or held more accountable to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But these are serious and significant wrongdoings, Mr. Speaker. 

And ultimately anyone who blows the whistle needs to ensure 

that their job is protected, that their health and safety is 

protected in blowing that whistle, Mr. Speaker. And this Act 

just, at the end of the day, doesn’t go far enough to provide 

either the public servant with the confidence to make the claim 

or the public the confidence to believe that their government is 

giving them all the information that they need to ensure that 

government is being run properly and in their interest. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just going back to what I said at the top of my 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, while I believe that the minister has 

made a very good first step here in addressing the issues, Mr. 

Speaker — she has overseen the writing of a very good first 

draft, Mr. Speaker — we need a broader public review of this 

issue and this legislation. We need a second or a third draft, Mr. 

Speaker, before this legislation meets all of our needs. 

So therefore, knowing that there’s more work to be done and 

many of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, would also like to review 

this legislation, discuss this legislation with their constituents 

and members of the public service, Mr. Speaker, I would 

therefore move that tonight debate on Bill 147 be adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise and move second reading of 

Bill No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on December 3, 2009, our government announced 

its intention to introduce a new targeted tax incentive intended 

to encourage economic growth and diversification in 

Saskatchewan by enhancing the attractiveness of refining 

minerals in this province. To achieve this objective, this Bill 

will add a new section to the provincial income tax legislation 

that creates a five-year corporate income tax incentive for 

companies that engage in the processing of minerals imported 

into Saskatchewan from elsewhere in Canada. The legislation is 

a result of the work done by officials at Enterprise 

Saskatchewan who have been consulting widely with the 

business community in an effort to improve the province’s 

business and investment climate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to be eligible, a corporation must process in 

Saskatchewan ore extracted from a mineral resource located in 

Canada, but not in Saskatchewan, to the prime metal stage. In 

addition the corporation must have a minimum capital 

investment in Saskatchewan of $125 million. It must also 

employ at least 75 full-time employees in Saskatchewan and 

must allocate at least 90 per cent of its taxable income to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This incentive will be administered by the Saskatchewan 

Ministry of Finance and an eligible corporation will file its 

corporate income tax return and pay its tax liability to the 

Canada Revenue Agency and then claim a rebate of the taxes 

paid from Saskatchewan Finance. Eligibility starts from the first 

year that the corporation has a tax liability and continues for the 

next four years. 

 

This initiative forms part of a larger effort to improve 

Saskatchewan’s tax competitiveness. Over the past decade, 

Saskatchewan has implemented several specific measures to 

enhance the competitiveness of Saskatchewan businesses such 

as reducing the general corporate income tax rate; eliminating 

the general corporate capital tax; enhancing tax credits for the 

research and development, manufacturing, and various royalty 

reductions and incentives for resource producers. 

 



6036 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

These changes are paying significant dividends. Saskatchewan 

has the lowest unemployment rate in the country, and we are up 

over 5,800 jobs through the first eight months of this year. 

Retail sales, housing starts, exports, and average earnings are 

up over last year. There are more than 16,000 people living in 

Saskatchewan than a year ago. Mr. Speaker, we are committed 

to making affordable and sustainable reductions to 

Saskatchewan’s taxes that improve our competitiveness. 

 

As you know, we have already brought in a major reform to the 

personal tax regime. In the fall of 2008, Saskatchewan 

announced the largest one-year PIT, personal income tax, 

reduction in the province’s history by significantly enhancing 

the value of provincial tax exemptions. These enhancements 

removed an estimated 80,000 taxpayers from the income tax 

roll, moved Saskatchewan’s basic personal exemption to the 

second highest in the country, and moved Saskatchewan’s 

exemptions for a family of four to the highest in the country. In 

addition Saskatchewan also enhanced the refundable 

low-income tax credit for lower income residents, ensuring that 

all Saskatchewan residents were better off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also moved to reduce the burden that 

onerous levels of property tax have placed on farmers, 

businessmen, and homeowners. The first phase of the property 

tax reform increased the share of the cost of education that 

government pays, and it reduced the share that property owners 

pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel that we have made good progress on 

fixing the property tax problem, and we intend to do more. Our 

goal, as outlined in the Speech from the Throne, is to bring the 

education portion of property tax down by an average of 20 per 

cent from their levels in 2008. For agricultural land, that tax bill 

will drop by an average of 80 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment to The Income Tax Act is 

designed to build on these initiatives. It will supplement an 

already attractive investment climate by opening up a new field 

of possibilities. Mr. Speaker, this initiative is intended to 

support value-added processing that businesses can take 

advantage of and our willing and capable workforce and the 

infrastructure we have been building to accommodate an 

expanding commercial sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 149, The Income 

Tax Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased tonight to rise and speak to Bill 149, An Act to amend 

The Income Tax Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, short title, I may refer 

to it, the Act may be cited as The Income Tax Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the Minister of Finance making a few 

comments here in relation to the reasons for The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Finance is someone who the public must have trust in, Mr. 

Speaker, as he reviews the revenues of the province and 

presides over the Treasury Board distribution of those revenues, 

Mr. Speaker, for programs and services that the public come to 

expect from government. 

 

But what I found interesting, Mr. Speaker, is the two really 

important questions that one would have in a preliminary 

review of this legislation — the two questions that the Minister 

of Finance alone could answer — the Minister of Finance failed 

to address at all in his introduction of the Bill. Number one, Mr. 

Speaker, what is the impact of this measure on the treasury? 

Mr. Speaker, what impact will this measure have on the ability 

of government to deliver programs and services and support 

those things, Mr. Speaker, that the public relies on government 

to deliver? 

 

[20:15] 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, what, aside from generalities 

which the minister had in great number, aside from generalities, 

Mr. Speaker, really who is eligible for this refund, Mr. 

Speaker? I’m going to address that point in a minute, Mr. 

Speaker, very specific to this piece of legislation. 

 

But since the Minister of Finance in addressing the Bill in front 

of us, Mr. Speaker, talked about how many measures that he 

thinks his government has initiated, Mr. Speaker, to make this 

province more acceptable to investors, Mr. Speaker . . . He 

forgot to talk about a number of things, Mr. Speaker. If one 

were to look at the farm economy in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one would have a hard time 

understanding the economic strength of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had a budget earlier this year, Mr. Speaker — we’re still in 

budget year 2010, Mr. Speaker — in which almost $100 million 

was cut from the Agriculture budget while at the same time our 

agriculture producers are facing one of the most challenging 

years they’ve ever had to face, Mr. Speaker. If you’re a 

livestock or hog producer, Mr. Speaker, this has been a hugely 

challenging year. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, if you are in 

an area of the province that was flooded out, Mr. Speaker, you 

didn’t have a crop this year. And yet the funding from the 

province and the federal government, Mr. Speaker, has not been 

adequate to meet the needs of the farm community, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Finance talked about retail sales being up, Mr. 

Speaker, but is he aware that car sales — not vehicle sales, Mr. 

Speaker, but car sales — in the province of Saskatchewan for 

the most recent two months have dropped, Mr. Speaker? Car 

sales in August were down 8 per cent; car sales in September 

were down 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. These are challenging, 

challenging times, Mr. Speaker, in the province. 

 

Employment in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Accordingly to the latest issue of Sask Trends Monitor for 

October 2010, employment has slowed in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Employment in Saskatoon alone, Mr. Speaker, 

is down 3.3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the government has to do 

more than put money into advertising, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that the public is going to understand what’s going on in this 

province and support those who are managing this economy, 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6037 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Finance, as I said, Mr. Speaker, is that 

individual in whom the public must have the most confidence, 

Mr. Speaker. The previous minister of Finance lost $2 billion in 

forecasting potash revenues, Mr. Speaker. And now this 

Finance minister is introducing his first Bill in this session by 

failing to give us any indication of what the impact of the 

legislation on the treasury will be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a look at this legislation itself. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, members of the Chamber and some 

members watching at home listened to some remarks I had a 

few minutes ago on another piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

And in that previous speech I indicated that it’s very important 

that I put my bias on the table, Mr. Speaker. I make things 

perfectly clear where I stand. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear too in this case 

that under, you know, all of the conditions that are necessary to 

ensure for accountable government and fair government, Mr. 

Speaker, raising revenues and providing expenditures for the 

public service, I’m not afraid to address issues of tax benefits 

for corporations, Mr. Speaker. In fact in the last government 

that sat in this Chamber from 2003 to 2007, Mr. Speaker, I sat 

in a government that began to see, began to put the steps into 

place that saw massive investment in the province of 

Saskatchewan in the corporate capital tax changes that took 

place in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So just to be clear and on the record, I am generally in favour of 

doing those things that are going to ultimately provide a net 

benefit to the province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, that 

is an interesting way perhaps that the public should look at new 

pieces of legislation that this government brings forward. What 

is the net benefit in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

So we’ve got An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000; short 

title, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. This Act sets out a 

mineral processing tax refund. So who’s eligible, Mr. Speaker? 

Let’s just take a look at what the government says. And this is 

very specific, so listen carefully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[An] ‘eligible asset’ means depreciable property of an 

eligible corporation that is included in any of the classes 

in Schedule II of the federal regulations for capital cost 

allowance purposes; 

 

‘eligible corporation’ means a qualifying corporation . . . 

 

that the corporation directly employs at least 75 . . . 

employees in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

that the ratio of the corporation’s taxable income 

earned in the . . . [taxable] year in Saskatchewan for 

which a refund is claimed to the corporation’s total 

taxable income earned in the taxation year . . . is at 

least 90 per cent; and 

 

any additional conditions that may be prescribed by 

regulation. 

 

So here we’ve got something that’s very specific, Mr. Speaker. 

Corporation must employ at least 75 full-time employees in 

Saskatchewan. And the minister mentioned something else. 

Here it is under (e), qualifying corporation. The corporation 

must acquire “. . . eligible assets for use in Saskatchewan 

having an initial capital cost equal to at least $125 million.” The 

minister mentions both those things — 75 employees and 

acquired eligible assets, 125 million. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what corporation is he specifically talking 

about, Mr. Speaker? This is obviously related to mineral 

processing, so we’re talking about potash. We’re talking about 

uranium. We’re talking about . . . What else might we be 

talking about, Mr. Speaker? I don’t know because the minister 

won’t say, Mr. Speaker. So who fits this qualifying category, 

Mr. Speaker, and who is it that this legislation has been drafted 

for? 

 

One thing we know that it doesn’t apply to, Mr. Speaker, 

because there’s an exemption: 

 

‘eligible mineral processing’ means processing at a 

mineral processing facility located in Saskatchewan of any 

of the following: 

 

ore, other than iron ore . . .” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s an exemption for iron ore. Iron ore 

doesn’t qualify, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we have a full disclosure, a 

full understanding, of who does it apply to and who doesn’t it 

apply to, Mr. Speaker, because obviously there is some reason 

behind this. 

 

The minister in his introductory remarks said there was great 

consultation through Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that Enterprise Saskatchewan has been set up by this 

government for consultation purposes. There have been quite a 

number of recommendations made to this government, most of 

which to this point in time have not been accepted by the 

government, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of recommendations that 

have been discussed thoroughly by representatives of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have been dismissed outright by 

this government, Mr. Speaker. But this recommendation, Mr. 

Speaker, to fanfare from the minister, has been accepted. 

 

So what is the argument that the government is bringing 

forward, Mr. Speaker, that meets that test of what’s good for 

business, what’s good for investment? And on the balance side, 

how is that good for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

specific for this dollar value? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also read the Act fairly closely and in section 

5(a), I’ll just read it: 

 

(a) if the minister is satisfied that an applicant is an 

eligible corporation and has complied with this section, 

grant a refund for the taxation year for which a refund is 

claimed and each of the next four taxation years equal to 

the amount of the corporation’s refund within the 

meaning of subsection (6) . . . 

 

So four more years, Mr. Speaker. One application reviewed, 



6038 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

evaluated, and then four more years after that, Mr. Speaker. I 

think we’ll need to ensure that we have a very clear 

understanding of what the government’s intent was there, Mr. 

Speaker. What if there’s a change during the next four years? Is 

the number of employees remaining constant at 75, etc., etc., 

Mr. Speaker? And again once we discover who this specifically 

applies to, Mr. Speaker, we have a little better understanding of 

how to develop out the questions to see the net benefit for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, interesting Act being brought forward. The 

context, according to the Minister of Finance’s speech, not 

quite as the public understands it. There’s lots of people across 

this province, Mr. Speaker, who can’t make their rents, who 

can’t find a doctor in their community, who are having 

difficulty, Mr. Speaker, finding a bed for their senior mother or 

father or brother, Mr. Speaker. There are lots of issues in this 

province that need attention from this government. 

 

This legislation may serve a purpose, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister’s speech didn’t make that very clear so there will be a 

number of questions that members of the opposition, probably 

members of the media, will have for government on this. 

Obviously we’re going to need some time to discuss this matter 

with members of the public. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move tonight that debate on Bill 149, The Income Tax Act, 

2000 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that debate on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 

2010 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions)Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to move second reading 

of Bill No. 150, The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the superannuation Act applies to these defined 

benefit plans: the public service superannuation plan, the 

Liquor Board superannuation plan, the Power Corporation 

superannuation plan, the Anti-Tuberculosis League employees 

superannuation plan, and the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company employees superannuation plan. Mr. Speaker, these 

pension plans are administered by the Public Employees 

Benefits Agency, PEBA for short, as part of the Ministry of 

Finance under the direction of their respective pension boards. 

 

These defined benefits, also referred to as DB pension plans, 

were closed to new members on October the 1st, 1977. Starting 

that date, new employees could join and participate in the 

public employees pension plan, or PEPP as it is commonly 

referred to, which is a defined contribution pension plan. I want 

to make that very clear, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking the new 

plan that is in effect as a defined contribution pension plan, 

whereas the five that I have outlined are defined benefit plans. 

 

In total, Mr. Speaker, these defined benefit plans now include 

1,181 active and deferred members and 7,853 pensioners. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act will do three things. One, the 

first amendment to section 28.3 will enable the proper 

calculation of the surviving spouse’s pension after the member 

has retired. Two, the second amendment to section 48.1 is a 

housekeeping change that will make the Act comply with the 

Income Tax Act of Canada. Three, the third amendment to 

section 69 will eliminate the need to include personal 

information in the pension plan annual reports. 

 

Up to 2003, a member’s new spouse attained after retirement 

could not get a survivor benefit. In 2003, Mr. Speaker, section 

28.3 of this Act was amended so members who attained a 

spouse after retirement had the opportunity to provide the new 

spouse with the survivor’s benefit upon the death of the 

pensioner. However in that amendment, the calculation in some 

circumstances undervalued the member’s pension. Now by 

amending section 28.3, it will properly value the member’s 

pension in the calculation of the survivor benefit payable to the 

new spouse after retirement. The proposed amendment will 

make the survivor benefit cost-neutral to the plan, and the 

proposed amendment to the calculation has no financial 

implications to the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the housekeeping amendment proposed to section 

48.1 of the Act will provide compliance with the Income Tax 

Act of Canada or ITA. The federal Act allows pensions to be 

attached — in other words, garnisheed — except for 

maintenance orders and divisions on marital breakdowns. 

Section 42 of The Financial Administration Act, 1993 allows 

for attachments for various reasons. We wish to amend section 

48.1 to ensure it complies with the Income Tax Act. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we wish to make an amendment to 

legislation that requires that pensioners be identified in annual 

reports. Currently, pension plans’ annual reports must identify 

names of those members who have retired or died in the fiscal 

year. The reporting includes the offices held by them, the nature 

of their employment, the amount of salary payable at the time 

of retirement or death, and the age at retirement or death. The 

requirement for such reporting serves no practical purpose. It is 

not consistent with the spirit and intent of The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act. This amendment 

will remove the requirement to disclose personal information in 

the annual reports. 

 

It is proposed that these changes will come into effect on 

assent. Mr. Speaker, these amendments demonstrate 

government’s concern for current and former employees as well 

as for the overall governance of the pension plans subject to this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6039 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 150, The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

spent a bit of time discussing The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act and also listened with interest 

to the minister’s comments. He gave quite a good explanation 

on clause 28.3(6)(b) and the changes that are made there, which 

really clarifies calculations for surviving spouses, which I know 

can be a complicated situation. And the legislation needs to be 

maintained and updated on a continual basis to make sure it’s 

current with society and situations that may arise. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, 48.1 where the minister had referred to it as 

housekeeping, I need to do a bit of work on that one because 

it’s . . . I’ll have to make some reference to federal legislation 

and see exactly what changes are being made and proposed 

with this housekeeping amendment. 

 

I agree with the sentiment that the minister stated when he 

talked about attachment through the income tax for certain 

specific reasons, and it needs to be allowed in provisions in 

Saskatchewan’s legislation and that we were keeping up with 

the federal legislation and making sure we’re in compliance. So 

I would agree with both of those. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, section 50 on first glance, I have to say that I 

strongly disagree with the changes that are being proposed by 

the minister. When we look at the existing provisions: 

 

The report transmitted by a board to the president of the 

Executive Council need not show [it need not show] the 

amount of superannuation or other allowances granted in 

each case to a named person. 

 

The name is given but no details, no amount of superannuation 

or other allowances granted. 

 

So when we look at what’s being proposed in the new 

legislation it states quite clearly that the new section 50: 

 

The report transmitted by a board to the president of the 

Executive Council must not show the names of individuals 

who retired or died during the period to which the report 

applies, the amounts of superannuation or other 

allowances or benefits granted in individual cases or any 

other personal information respecting any of those 

individuals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I agree that there should be no personal 

information respecting any of those individuals. There should 

not be reports, reports of the amounts of superannuation or 

other allowances or benefits that have been granted. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I need to remind the minister opposite that in 

their very first Speech from the Throne, one of the comments 

that were made was that this government would be the most 

open and accountable that this province had ever seen. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re still waiting, because what happens with 

this clause, what it would do, it could possibly mean that the 

$10 million that was paid out in severance to long-term public 

servants in the province of Saskatchewan when this government 

took over — money that they were required to pay into pension 

plans — and because they had inappropriately fired or let go of 

people . . . they have the right to do it, but they have to pay. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if we had this clause in place, I suspect that 

we would not know the names of people and who had been paid 

to be let go out of the service of the government of 

Saskatchewan. And we would not be able to ask the questions 

about amounts, and all that would be slid under the carpet. And, 

Mr. Speaker, for a government that has talked about being the 

most open and accountable, they’ve got a long ways to go. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we look at this clause, and it raises a number 

of doubts. And I have to say that we do disagree totally with 

section 50 of the proposed amendment. And, you know, the 

member may wonder why. Well all you have to do is look at 

question period over the last number of days. Today when we 

asked questions about Amicus and this special financing of the 

private long-term care home in Saskatoon. Well we’re hearing 

all kinds of things, and we’ve gotten bits and pieces of 

information. But, Mr. Speaker, the deal smells. 

 

The member has asked a number times for information to be 

revealed, and we have been refused any type of accountability. 

So when we have a government that is saying open and 

accountable, and they are arranging these special financing 

deals with companies that have not competed in any type of 

tendering, even though this is public money that will pay for the 

operation, this is public money that is guaranteeing the loan, 

which is another very unusual circumstance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Moose Jaw, my community has a levy on it to 

raise 35 per cent of the health facility in our community. And 

many communities around the province are doing the same 

thing. But now this private long-term care in Saskatoon, they 

don’t have to put up the 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And we want 

to know why, my community wants to know why. Other 

communities around this province want to know why this deal 

is being treated quite a bit differently than what other similar 

circumstances are around the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when this government is trying to remove 

accountability out of legislation, it raises concerns. It raises 

some huge concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Amicus deal, all of the 

contracts that have been let, none of them have gone to tender. 

They have just been dispersed, I would assume, to friends or 

investors. I’m not quite sure how you would classify some of 

them. But it’s you and I that will be paying these contracts, Mr. 

Speaker, in the long run — taxpayers’ dollars, but no publicly 

tendered contracts. It’s not fair to taxpayers, and nor is it fair to 

other businesses across this province who might have had an 

interest in putting in a tender. 

 

And this government is just saying, oh well, don’t worry. Just 

trust us. We’re looking after it all. Even though when we put in 

a FOI, a freedom of information, trying to get details on 

Amicus, it all comes back blacked out, no information. So again 

we don’t have a lot of faith in this government being open and 

accountable, and they do have an awful long way to go. 



6040 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, this one clause, and it’s interesting how one clause 

can really start you thinking about all the things that have gone 

on. And when we look at the way the debt is being shifted out 

to either Crown corporations or arms-length organizations, and 

there are many that feel that this Amicus deal in Saskatoon, that 

it may possibly be the same type of financing arrangement that 

we’re going to see on the 13 long-term care homes that were 

announced a number of years ago by this government. But then 

when they had spent too much money, couldn’t afford to roll 

out the money, they ended up pulling back on the 

announcements and using the money for operating in the health 

system. 

 

So here we have 13 other communities across the province that 

are still waiting to hear when they’re going to receive their 

long-term care home funding and when these new facilities are 

going to start. So they’re waiting to hear. Well will they get the 

same kind of special financing arrangement that Amicus has in 

Saskatoon? And if they do, what does that do? As I said, many 

people believe that this just may be a tactic for the government 

to move their debt off the Government of Saskatchewan books 

and shift it out to Crown corporations and into community 

organizations. 

 

And, you know, the minister stood the other day during 

question period, and no offence to the minister, but he kind of 

reminded me of one of those old milk horses we see in the 

westerns or the old movies, and they’ve got the blinkers on. 

And my grandpa used to have a team of work horses and they 

had blinkers on, or blinders, whatever you want to call them. 

Some call . . . Okay, blinders. Blinders may be more 

appropriate for the Minister of Finance. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, but you know he’s walking down . . . And 

he’s saying, oh no, our GRF [General Revenue Fund], our 

GRF, the debt, it’s down. We haven’t added any debt and we’re 

not going to. But then he’s got $1 billion that comes in from the 

Crown corporations. Now he can’t see the Crown corporations, 

but by golly he jumped on that money and he spent her. And 

he’s saying, well I’ve got more money. I’ve got more money. 

Don’t know where it’s coming from; I can’t see what’s 

happening out on the edges, but the debt is piling up in the 

Crown corporations. 

 

But he’s not even looking at that. He’s got his mind set. He’s 

just looking straight ahead — GRF. I’m spending the money 

that comes from the Crowns, but I’m not accounting for the 

debt that goes with it. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And that’s what you’re doing with these health organizations 

also. You are dumping the debt out into the regional health 

authorities so it shows up differently. We are looking at 

municipal financing for municipalities. And yes, it’s been 

helpful, but it also moves the debt to a different area. And this 

government has also created a number of Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, which have also enabled them to shift debt to 

these Crown corporations. 

 

So the minister can stand there with his blinders on saying the 

debt’s fine, the debt’s fine; it’s not going anywhere. But we 

know by the financial reports, the summary financial reports of 

the province of Saskatchewan, debt is actually increasing when 

you look at all of the organizations, all of the operations that are 

just outside the blinders of the Minister of Finance. And he 

knows it’s there. It’s just a poor way to account for the 

spending that’s gone on by this government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see this Bill 150 and we see 

accountability sliding away even more so, that is a problem. 

That is a huge problem. And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at 

Public Accounts, Public Accounts was just released about a 

month ago. Every expenditure of the Government of 

Saskatchewan over $50,000 is listed in that book, whether it’s 

contracts, whether it’s wages, whether it’s . . . I mean 

expenditures of any kind, they are listed in Public Accounts. 

 

But for some reason when it comes to the pension plans, the 

minister wants to wipe out any type of names and reduce 

accountability. Having your name listed when you are an 

employee of the Government of Saskatchewan and are entitled 

to a pension is no different than being listed for many years in 

Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this serves no purpose other than reducing the 

openness and the accountability of this government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we are suffering that on a number of levels, and I 

think one more is just too much to take. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time my colleagues and I need 

to do some discussion on Bill No. 150, but there needs to be 

some discussions had on the specifics of these changes that are 

being proposed and especially on section 50. But until the 

discussions are done, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on this 

Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 151 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, I 

rise today, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of Bill 151, 

The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment 

Act, 2010. My comments I trust will serve as a brief 

prolegomena preceding broader discussions and deliberations 

that will likely ensue as we enter into committee. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to announce that the 

government is moving to bring the Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technology legislation in line with that of other 

post-secondary educational institutions specifically regarding 

an important area of taxation. 

 

Our government proposes to amend The Saskatchewan Indian 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6041 

Institute of Technologies Act to provide SIIT [Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies] with an exemption from 

school and municipal taxes on property owned by SIIT, that 

property which is used for educational purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of our government’s societal priorities, indeed 

one of Saskatchewan’s priorities, both at the level of state and 

society, is to improve the education and employment outcomes 

of our First Nations and Métis people. 

 

We can think specifically of both the intrinsic value of 

education, as well as the instrumental outcomes that we seek by 

increasing areas of employment. And to that, Mr. Speaker, we 

have seen some success over the course of the last six months 

as employment has increased for First Nations and Métis people 

across our province. That being said, we know that there’s more 

to do. 

 

We certainly know that there’s more to do when we think about 

the 72,000-plus learners that we have in a number of skills 

training and post-secondary educational programs right across 

the province. And we think about the more than 13,000 First 

Nations and Métis learners that consist of a significant and 

important cohort of those learners. 

 

When we think about our talent challenge, when we think about 

the tens of thousands of jobs that are going to be opening up in 

Saskatchewan over the course of the next five to ten years, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that it’s imperative that we have increasing 

First Nations and Métis learners that are successfully 

completing post-secondary education, skills training, and 

related programs so that they can better participate within the 

economic growth that’s under way within Saskatchewan, as 

well as contribute to their own intrinsic value regarding identity 

and self-actualization as well as making greater contributions to 

their families and to their communities. 

 

SIIT’s principal role is to provide academic, skills training, and 

career-related programming for First Nations and Métis 

students. That is education, skills training, personal and 

professional development which allows these students to meet 

their full potential, thereby allowing their families, their 

communities — indeed the entire province — to reach its full 

potential by being far more inclusive to those that for too long 

have been left behind. 

 

In the area of instrumental benefits, Mr. Speaker — essentially 

that is focusing on the realm of employment — SIIT focuses on 

developing a strong workforce to benefit communities right 

across the province. The organization works to build positive 

and collaborative relationships with many stakeholders in 

industry, First Nations and Métis communities, governments, 

and other training institutions as well as a number of other 

societal partners. These partnerships help to ensure that SIIT’s 

skills training and educational programs meet the needs of the 

students, of employers, and of relevant sectoral and community 

stakeholders. 

 

On the subject of partnerships, Mr. Speaker, I recently had the 

honour of representing the Premier in the grand opening of the 

SIIT Aviation Learning Centre in Saskatoon, an event that saw 

the Minister of Justice join us for that important opening as 

well as, from the opposition benches, the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. The province has contributed 

hundreds of thousands of dollars in operating funds and donated 

four aircraft toward this program through this very first year, 

which has also seen investment from the federal government’s 

Western Economic Diversification — investments that we are 

very grateful to receive here within the province of 

Saskatchewan — as well as investments from significant and 

serious multinational players within the area of aviation. These 

include Lockheed Martin, Boeing aerospace, and Rockwell 

Collins. 

 

As we can see these partnerships develop with more than 50 

students now being trained within that centre, and SIIT sharing 

a partnership with SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology], we also see that there are 

connections to Mount Royal. That is a high school within 

Saskatoon run so ably under the direction of the impressive and 

visionary principal, Dean Newton. 

 

What we can see is increasingly a vertically integrated system 

of support and partnership that is helping a number of students, 

especially those from First Nations and Métis communities, see 

opportunities in a sector that for too long has gone 

underappreciated. And what we see is that within the aviation 

and aeronautics sector there are real opportunities for First 

Nations and Métis learners. We think these partnerships, 

sustained by the support and leadership of SIIT among others, 

will help to ensure that more First Nations and Métis learners 

are succeeding within this sector, among others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SIIT board of governors initiated this request, 

and our government wishes to see this change fulfilled in this 

legislature. We see, Mr. Speaker, despite the disruption from 

the members opposite, that this is a very worthy initiative that 

has been requested by the SIIT board of governors — requested 

by the board of governors — which will allow SIIT to 

maximize public funding, thereby directing more dollars to its 

primary purpose: the education, skills training, personal and 

professional development for First Nations and Métis students 

across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislative amendment will also bring SIIT in 

line with other post-secondary institutions in our province. To 

this end, our consultations have been thorough. We have 

consulted with the Ministry of Municipal Affairs which is 

responsible for policies on municipal taxation. We have also 

consulted with the city of Saskatoon where SIIT currently owns 

property, with the Saskatoon business improvement district; 

with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

SUMA; with the two school boards in Saskatoon, and of course 

naturally with the Ministry of Education, as part of the Ministry 

of Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration’s due 

diligence. Generally we have heard broad and sustained support 

for this measure which is intended for SIIT own property to 

receive this tax exemption, especially for properties that are 

used for educational purposes. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that this 

legislation will provide SIIT with the same tax exemption status 

provided to other Saskatchewan public post-secondary 

institutions, and I am pleased to speak to this amendment today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 151, an 



6042 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

important piece of legislation, The Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 2010. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education 

and Immigration has moved second reading of Bill No. 151, 

The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment 

Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

have the opportunity to respond to the minister’s second 

reading speech of Bill 151, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technologies Act. 

 

After the minister’s lengthy remarks, I went back to the page 

because I thought there must be more to the proposed 

amendment than is down on paper. But I guess the minister was 

just being thorough. So I thank the minister in doing that this 

evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course SIIT has a long and proud history here 

in the province, and I think all members of the Assembly would 

agree that SIIT does wonderful work. They do very important 

work here in the province, and the minister is correct in his 

remarks that I was at the opening ceremony for the Aviation 

Learning Centre that SIIT has opened in Saskatoon. 

 

In a variety of educational pursuits or sectors, SIIT does 

tremendous work in assisting Saskatchewan students, many of 

them First Nations students, in receiving the education that they 

need to participate fully in the province as they ought to. So for 

that I applaud SIIT and thank them for the good work that 

they’re doing here in the province. I think it’s important work, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the job numbers that come out once a month, 

when we look at the area of Aboriginal employment for First 

Nations and Métis individuals, there is certainly a lot of work 

that we do need to do here in the province to ensure that 

everyone is participating in the economy and contributing as 

individuals want to do. So I think that’s a positive thing. 

 

If there are things that we can do as a Legislative Assembly to 

assist SIIT in meeting that mandate, in educating Saskatchewan 

students to contribute and make the positive contribution that 

they want to do, I think that’s a positive step, Mr. Speaker. I 

think that’s a track record that has been part of NDP [New 

Democratic Party] governments in the past, and if this change, 

Mr. Speaker, is requested by SIIT and is a positive thing, then 

in principle, Mr. Speaker, I would support changes that help 

SIIT and allow them to do their job more effectively. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are my brief remarks on this 

amendment. I do have additional questions about the 

implications and some details to do with the aspect of the 

changes that is proposed in this amendment, but I’m happy to 

do so in committee, Mr. Speaker. So at this time I would move 

that Bill 151, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies Act be referred to committee. 

 

[21:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Advanced Education and 

Immigration that Bill No. 151, The Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 now be read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 151, 

The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment 

Act, 2010 be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 152 — The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Commissioners for Oaths Act authorizes the 

administering of oaths and the taking or receiving of affidavits, 

declarations, and affirmations, within or outside Saskatchewan 

for use in Saskatchewan by commissioners for oaths. 

 

Some commissioners are appointed, while others have that 

authority by virtue of their positions or occupations. These 

include lawyers in good standing, members of the Legislative 

Assembly, certain court officers, and officers in the permanent 

Armed Forces. 

 

In the Armed Forces, as part of their duties, it is necessary for 

officers to complete affidavits, declarations, and affirmations on 

a regular basis. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is frequent for a reserve 

member or a member of the Armed Forces to have documents 

as part of their personal life that are shipped to them wherever 

they may stationed or wherever their duties may be carried out. 

This may relate to the purchase or sale of a home, a mortgaging 

of a property. It may include completing estate or probate 

documents for a deceased relative or a minor or many other 

things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Documents can be used for a variety of persons’ purposes, both 

military and civilian. Many of them relate to administrative 

procedures in the various regiments. While senior officers of 

the regular force can administer oaths, it will make it easier for 

members if they can also use the services of senior officers of 

the reserve force. This amendment will make Saskatchewan’s 

requirements similar to most of the rest of Canada. 

 

Saskatchewan is one of the few jurisdictions to grant the status 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6043 

of Commissioner for Oaths only to “permanent” members of 

the Canadian Forces — that is to say, regular force officers. 

Officers in the reserve force have been excluded. Alberta, 

Manitoba, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and 

Labrador, Yukon, and Nunavut refer to officers “on full-time 

service,” which include reserve officers. Nova Scotia, New 

Brunswick, and British Columbia refer to officers on active 

service, which also excludes reserve officers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proposing an amendment that will put 

reserve officers on the same footing, respecting administration 

of oaths, as their permanent counterparts. This change 

recognizes the important role played by Canada’s reserve force 

and eases the job of reserve officers. In the Canadian Forces the 

reserve force is being used much more frequently than in the 

past to supplement the permanent Armed Forces. It is 

appropriate that officers in the reserve force be able to exercise 

the same powers as commissioners for oaths as those in the 

permanent force. This is a change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

was requested by the North Saskatchewan Regiment, which is a 

reserve regiment in Saskatchewan. 

 

Reservists are members of the Canadian Forces who usually 

serve on a part-time basis. Primary reserve units are located in 

hundreds of communities across Canada with more than 26,000 

personnel Canada-wide as of June 2010. There are 10 such 

reserve units in Saskatchewan representing army, navy, and air 

force services. 

 

Reservists give up their time for training and other duties. They 

may be called up for active duty, and some have lost their lives, 

most recently in Afghanistan. I think it’s proper that we can do 

everything, only proper that we do everything we can to assist 

them in their work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Commissioners for Oaths Act has 

remained largely unchanged since it was passed in 1945. 

Section 10, respecting Armed Forces officers, was changed in 

1949 to add the word permanent. In the modern Canadian 

Forces, however, the reserve force is frequently used to 

supplement the regular forces, and it is important to recognize 

that fact. 

 

Reservists are members of the Canadian Forces who usually 

serve on a part-time basis. The reserve force of Canada 

comprises these part-time members of the Armed Forces whose 

role is to augment and support the regular force. It consists of 

approximately 30,000 officers and non-commissioned 

members, and is divided into the naval reserve, the militia, the 

air reserve, and the NDHQ [National Defence Headquarters] 

primary reserve list and the communication reserve. All are 

composed of volunteers who train on evenings and weekends or 

at short camps. Primary reserve units are located in hundreds of 

communities across Canada with more than 26,000 members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we are making a substantive change for 

reserve officers to have the same powers to administer oaths, 

declarations, and affirmations as their permanent counterparts, 

we are also taking the opportunity to update terminology. 

 

The current legislation refers to Her Majesty’s naval, military, 

and air forces, and refers to the ranks of lieutenant in the naval 

forces, captain in the military forces, and flight lieutenant in the 

air forces. Those descriptions and ranks were updated over 40 

years ago in 1968 when the three branches of forces were 

merged into a unified structure and the ranks rationalized. At 

the present time, the rank of flight lieutenant in the air force is 

no longer used. Those individuals are now called captains. A 

change in terminology is being proposed to bring the legislation 

up to date. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the brave women and men in 

Saskatchewan’s reserves play a crucial and ever-increasing role 

in the delivery of Canada’s Armed Forces services, and this 

proposed amendment will recognize this increased 

commitment. Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move second 

reading of Bill No. 152, The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 152, The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is the House ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise this evening to speak on The Commissioners for 

Oaths Amendment Act, 2010. I can advise you, Mr. Speaker, 

and through you, the House, that I will be the only opposition 

member speaking on second reading on the Bill and that we 

would propose that it move to committee following this 

evening, to be dealt with there. 

 

My remarks will be brief. I understand the minister related the 

concern that was raised by some reservists in the province of 

Saskatchewan as to an unfair distinction between members of 

the regular forces and members of the reserves that may very 

well have reflected the intent of the legislature back in 1949, 

but certainly does not reflect the intent, I don’t believe, of this 

Legislative Assembly today. And maybe the wording has not 

kept up with the current circumstances, but certainly current 

circumstances are far different than they once were, Mr. 

Speaker. And so this comes to the attention of the minister. 

 

And I think briefly after it came to the attention of the minister, 

it came to my attention as well, with some hope on the part of 

reserve forces that this would not necessarily be a matter of 

partisan debate, Mr. Speaker, but a matter upon which there 

could be some consensus and agreement in the Assembly. 

 

I understand that the Ministry of Justice, realizing that the Act 

had not been reviewed for now almost 60 years, was looking 

forward to an extensive review of the Act so that any changes 

that might need to be made could all be made together. And I 

know that there were probably some individuals in the ministry 

who would have thought that it would make more sense to have 

the review first and make all the changes and that this could 

wait for that review. 

 

And reviews of Acts are important, Mr. Speaker, not just to 

update the Acts. But as the Minister of Justice knows, all kinds 

of interesting things come to people’s attention when you 

review legislation. And some errors in practice that aren’t 

concurrent with the law sometimes come to the attention of 

ministries and then to the attention of the minister only upon 

review of legislation. And I understand that recently took place 

in the case of the legislation involving the Liquor and Gaming 



6044 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

Authority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a review of The Commissioners for Oaths Act is probably 

overdue, and it would probably be worthwhile. But I think the 

minister in this case made the right decision to proceed with 

this amendment and not wait for a review. And as I said, we 

support the amendment, and any examination on the details of it 

is best done in committee. 

 

I just want to briefly speak to the distinction and almost the 

discrimination against reserve officers that the minister alluded 

to in his second reading remarks. Mr. Speaker, anyone who’s 

followed the mission in Afghanistan I think is well aware that 

that mission would not have been possible without reserve 

forces. Canada does not have a large standing army. It certainly 

did in 1945 at the dissolution of the Second World War — 

maybe the fourth largest army in the world at that time, at the 

end of the Second World War or by the end of the Second 

World War, Mr. Speaker. But at this time, even compared to 

countries of a comparable population, Mr. Speaker, we do not 

have large standing armed forces. 

 

And yet we have, as I think someone said — maybe it was a 

federal minister — punched above our weight in Afghanistan 

for some considerable period of time, Mr. Speaker. And that 

has been partly due, and significantly partly due, to the reserves 

supplement the regular forces, Mr. Speaker. Matter of fact, 

while our American cousins were distracted by their second war 

in Iraq, I think the overall mission in Afghanistan would have 

faltered considerably if it was not for the act of Canada, 

Canadian Armed Forces and Canadian reserves in Afghanistan. 

And a number of missions here at home in relieving the stress 

to civilian populations in Canada could not have been carried 

out to the success that they were without the reserve forces. 

 

And so this distinction anywhere, Mr. Speaker, between regular 

forces and reserve forces that is not necessitated by the fact that 

one is full-time and the other is part-time and supplemental, any 

other distinction is unacceptable and inappropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. And this ask from the reservists to remove this 

distinction effectively from The Commissioners of Oaths Act is 

a small ask, and it is one that should be given freely and quickly 

by this Legislative Assembly. And so, as I said at the beginning 

of my remarks, I would propose that this matter now proceed to 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 152, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 152, The 

Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

This Act will accomplish the following: repeal section 8.1 of 

the Act that established the civil division of the Provincial 

Court. It will allow Provincial Court judges from other 

provinces to be appointed as temporary judges in Saskatchewan 

when required to deal with a file where all Saskatchewan 

Provincial Court judges are in a conflict or appear to be in a 

conflict position. 

 

It will reduce the waiting period for disability benefits for 

judges from one year to three months. It will require the 

Judicial Council hearing committee to disclose their report 

following an investigation into a complaint concerning the 

conduct or capacity of a judge, with certain exceptions allowed. 

 

It will clarify how the Law Society of Saskatchewan appoints a 

replacement representative of the Provincial Court Judicial 

Council if the president of the Law Society is unable to attend. 

It will consequentially amend The Small Claims Act, 1997 to 

allow justices of the peace to hear small claims matters. 

 

Our government is committed to providing an efficient and 

effective justice system for the people of Saskatchewan. In 

criminal matters, reasonable time to trial is a key aspect of the 

effective operation of the courts. This Bill and the 

consequential amendments to The Small Claims Act, 1997 

focus on providing the court with additional tools to reduce the 

time to trial in criminal matters. 

 

This Bill repeals section 8.1 of the existing Act. That section 

established the civil division of the court and allowed 

designated judges to dedicate their time to hearing civil matters. 

Repeal of this provision will give the court additional flexibility 

to manage time to trial pressures by allowing judges currently 

assigned to the civil division to focus on criminal matters when 

required and when assigned by the chief judge. This 

amendment works hand in hand with the consequential 

amendments to The Small Claims Act, 1997. That amendment 

allows justices of the peace to become more involved in 

resolving small claims matters. Again, this will help free up 

Provincial Court judges to focus on criminal matters when 

backlogs occur. 

 

This Bill provides authority and procedures for the appointment 

of judges from other provinces as temporary judges in 

Saskatchewan. Occasionally a matter comes before the 

Provincial Court where all judges in Saskatchewan are in a 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6045 

conflict of interest with one or more of the parties. This 

provision allows the judge from another province to be 

temporarily appointed to hear such a matter.  

 

Currently the only option available to deal with the situation . . . 

this type of situation in Saskatchewan is to assign the matter to 

a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. By comparison, 

Manitoba and British Columbia allow a Provincial Court judge 

from another province to be temporarily appointed as a judge in 

their province. This gives their courts flexibility when dealing 

with these controversial matters. 

 

Currently Saskatchewan provides assistance to the other 

Western provinces when their provincial courts experience 

similar conflicts. Now the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan 

will be in a position to request another province to reciprocate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, integrity and transparency are fundamental to 

public confidence in the court and the administration of justice 

in the province. The Provincial Court is held in high regard 

today, and the amendment to disciplinary provisions contained 

in section 62 will enhance public confidence in the court by 

making the disciplinary process for judges more transparent. 

Complaints against Provincial Court judges may be resolved 

either through an informal review by the Judicial Council or the 

Judicial Council may recommend that a formal hearing be 

constituted. 

 

At the present time, the less formal process is not open to the 

public, and the results are not made public at its conclusion. 

The hearing conducted by the committee is public, unless 

otherwise ordered by the committee. The hearing committee 

provides a report to the Judicial Council, minister, defendant, 

and complainant. The report is not made public unless the 

report recommends and the Judicial Council agrees to issue an 

order that the judge be removed or retired from office. In that 

case, the report and order are filed with the legislature and only 

then are publicly accessible. 

 

Many other provinces have a much more transparent process 

that requires the release of the report in a broader range of 

circumstances. With these amendments, the report and order of 

the Judicial Council will be made public in all circumstances, 

except where its release would disclose personal health 

information, the identity of the complainant in circumstances of 

sexual harassment or assault, or in other circumstances where it 

is contrary to the public interest. Making the order public in 

most circumstances offers an opportunity for the Judicial 

Council to publicly renounce inappropriate behaviour by a 

judge, to clear the name of a judge found not to have acted 

inappropriately, and also to enhance public confidence in the 

disciplinary processes under the Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Law Society of Saskatchewan requests 

the changes to its representation on the Judicial Council. Under 

the current provision, the president of the Law Society is a 

member of the council and the president may appoint a 

replacement representative to the council if he or she is unable 

to attend. The Law Society was concerned that this appointment 

process could lead to annual changes in representation on the 

council. Many of the responsibilities of the council benefit from 

the consistency of membership. The government worked with 

the Law Society to prepare amendments that would allow the 

Law Society to maintain consistent representation on the 

Judicial Council. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the final amendment implements the 

recommendation of the Provincial Court compensation 

commission to reduce the waiting period for judges’ disability 

allowance from one year to three months. This puts judges in 

the same position as provincial government employees. The 

waiting period for disability benefits for most provincial 

government employees is three months. The Provincial Court 

Act, 1998 currently requires the Provincial Court judge must 

have served at least one year prior to becoming incapacitated in 

order to be eligible for disability allowance. In 2008 the 

Provincial Court Commission recommended that the Act be 

amended so that a judge becomes eligible for disability 

allowance after three months of service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to respond to the information provided by the 

Minister of Justice about this particular Bill. And I’m mindful 

of the fact that I was the Minister of Justice when the previous 

Bill was introduced in the House at a time when we had much 

conversation with the Provincial Court about how they should 

be organized, what should happen, what kinds of things should 

proceed. 

 

And so I’m also very mindful of the fact that when the 

legislature or the executive branch of government deal with the 

Provincial Court or with anything related to any of the levels of 

court, we have to be especially vigilant in what we’re doing to 

make sure that there aren’t unintended consequences or that the 

intentions . . . make sure that the intentions are entirely clear as 

we proceed. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there are a number of things 

that are being proposed here which are logical, but I think we’re 

going to have to spend some time to make sure that we 

understand where these changes are coming from. I found it 

somewhat curious that there were recommendations for changes 

coming from the Law Society around the representation and 

how that worked. And that seemed like a logical request, to 

allow them to have more say in, from the perspective of the 

Law Society, by having a person who could serve maybe a 

three-year term instead of a one-year term because of the 

wording of the legislation. There is also changes that came from 

the committee looking at compensation the last time around as 

it relates to the disability issue, which is in the paragraph, I 

guess it would be . . . well the paragraph relating to the length 

of time required reduced from one year to three months. 

 

Those were specific requests, but all of the other requests that 

are here must come from the Minister of Justice. I didn’t hear 

that there was a request coming from other places. And it may 

be that the minister actually has that information, but it wasn’t 

presented here tonight. For example, is the idea around 



6046 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

eliminating the civil division and the power of the court itself to 

organize its affairs a proposal that’s coming from the court, or 

is this coming from the minister himself? If there isn’t a clear 

answer to that, that immediately raises this question of the 

independence and the role of the Provincial Court or the courts 

and the legislature and the executive. And so, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we need some better information about why that 

particular section is being repealed. 

 

Also as we move forward, I think it’s the situation across 

Canada that judges from other courts can be of assistance in 

working here in Saskatchewan. And as the minister said, our 

judges have the abilities to go and assist in other places. And I 

think there are a number of changes that are being made there 

which are logical, especially as it relates to some of the judges 

who had recused themselves when there’s a matter that involves 

another one of the particular judges. And so I think that that is 

kind of a logical point, but I’m not sure I know exactly where 

that request came from. Did it come from the minister, or did it 

come from the Judicial Council? Did it come from the chief 

judge? Where did this request come from? I think that that kind 

of information would have been helpful in the explanation of 

this Bill so that we understand why changes are being made. 

 

I know that there are administrative pressures around the time 

that certain cases are taking to go to court. The traditional way 

of responding to that was to expand the number of judges that 

were in the system to make sure that there were sufficient 

judges, and it strikes me that the minister is kind of stepping in 

and taking over some of the administrative functions that the 

chief judge used to handle or handles now or maybe wouldn’t 

handle under this legislation. So I think we need a better 

explanation as to why the minister would be intruding into this 

particular aspect of the running of the courts. 

 

It may be that financially there’s a sense of let’s not appoint 

more judges to do this work even though there’s a request for 

more of those judges. I think that the consequential amendment, 

which is Bill 154, allowing for justices of the peace to take over 

some of the work of our present Provincial Court judges, is 

another example of attempting to do this work in a different 

way without maybe respecting the way the court has been set 

up. There is no explanation of who requested that particular 

solution. 

 

Now it’s possible that it would make sense in certain 

communities where there isn’t a Provincial Court judge located 

that you would use a Justice of the Peace. But from what I 

heard tonight, it raises the question of whether or not there’s 

being work transferred out of the Provincial Court to the 

justices of the peace in a way that impinges on the integrity of 

the overall court structure. 

 

And that raises a matter of concern, I think, not just for us here 

in the legislature, but for people across the province. And I 

know that from past experience that one has to be very careful 

in proceeding with these kinds of amendments. And I guess I 

didn’t hear that these requests were coming from the court itself 

through the processes that they have. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And so I’m concerned that there are changes that are being 

proposed here, as it relates to how the court runs and the 

number of people there able to do the work, that maybe don’t 

fully respond to how our constitution lays out these 

responsibilities. And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that some of my 

colleagues will have questions in that area and will eventually 

get a chance to ask some questions about it. 

 

Now when the practical parts of this Bill are laid out, such as 

allowing the minister to enter into agreements with other 

provinces, that does make a lot of sense in that there needs to be 

an appropriate legislative authority for the Crown to pay money 

to another province for the services of judges from another 

place. 

 

But all of these administrative changes that are here still go 

back to this fundamental question about who requested this 

particular kind of change. Is it the kind of request that actually 

comes from the judiciary itself? As I said before, there were 

recommendations from the provincial compensation committee 

around one specific clause. There was also request of change 

from the Law Society on another clause, but all of the other 

changes, there wasn’t an indication of where the request was 

coming as to the changes. 

 

Now the last part of the amendment here relates to the release 

of the reasons around making orders, and I think it’s 

appropriate that this all be done in conjunction with what other 

provinces have done. It’s not entirely clear from the 

information that we have here tonight whether we will have the 

most open system or we’ll have something that’s in the middle 

of the pack or where we are. 

 

I think there’s an attempt to provide some of that information, 

but I wasn’t, in the way it was laid out, able to tell whether we 

were going to have the broadest release of information. And it’s 

a bit interesting that this Bill follows on a Bill from the Minister 

of Finance not many minutes ago that actually restricted a lot of 

information that the public needs to know around the 

superannuations that are to be paid out to individuals. 

 

I think in our society here in Saskatchewan we’ve gotten quite 

used to the fact that payments of over $50,000 from the public 

funds will be identified, and it will say who the money goes to 

and why. That proposal that came from the Minister of Finance, 

that seemed to eliminate that as it relates to superannuation, 

goes in the wrong direction. This proposal from the Minister of 

Justice of providing more of information is, I think, more in the 

light of kind of how we expect our society to work. But I think 

it’s important that we have further information to help us 

understand exactly how this fits in with the system across the 

country, and I’m sure the minister will be happy to provide that 

in committee as we deal with this later. 

 

So on the whole, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some 

appropriate needed changes, but for some of the main ones we 

need a better explanation of where this comes from and why. 

And we have to be extremely careful that it is not just a 

budgetary type of response coming out of the Ministry of 

Justice to deal with some of the financial issues that the 

government as a whole has, because ultimately those things, as 

they’re vetted by courts at various levels, will be clearly 

identified as that. And they’ll cause problems for our Ministry 

of Justice, but also for our community. 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6047 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this matter will require 

further discussion from some of my colleagues here on this side 

of House, and it may be that we can get some more information 

as to where some of these requests have come from. But I want 

to say clearly on the record that we need to have full 

transparency about how we make changes to the courts so that 

subsequently if these changes are challenged, then we have 

clearly a record in the legislature of why the changes were 

being proposed. 

 

With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll adjourn the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 153, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to 

move second reading of The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2010. As I mentioned in my remarks on The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010, this Bill makes 

consequential amendments to The Small Claims Act, 1997. 

These changes complement the amendments to The Provincial 

Court Act, 1998 to provide the Provincial Court with additional 

tools to reduce the time to trial in criminal matters. 

 

This Bill amends the definition of judge in The Small Claims 

Act, 1997 to include both Provincial Court judges and justices 

of the peace. This will allow justices of the peace to become 

more involved in civil matters when backlogs occur, which will 

in turn free up Provincial Court judges to focus on criminal 

matters. It is planned that justices of the peace will take on an 

expanded role in case management and pretrial conferences in 

civil matters. 

 

Justices of the peace currently preside over trials involving 

municipal traffic safety, occupational health and safety, and 

environmental safety offences as well as consider matters 

relating to search warrants under provincial and federal 

legislation. Justices of the peace accept guilty pleas. They’re 

also very involved in resolving procedural issues for the 

Provincial Court, including granting certain adjournments, 

receive information under the Criminal Code and municipal 

bylaws from peace officers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 154, 

The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill 154, The Provincial Court 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The minister 

had an opportunity to further explain where some of these 

requests had come from around this change. But clearly in the 

remarks as it relates to this particular Bill, No. 154, the minister 

has said that they will be using justices of the peace to do the 

work of provincial court judges in a number of areas where they 

have not traditionally done this work. 

 

And one of the points made is that small claims cases obviously 

would be handled not by a Provincial Court judge in all cases, 

but by a Justice of the Peace. And this is a change. It’s like 

contracting out work, I suppose, to another group of workers. It 

is important that the minister tell us if this is a request that is 

actually coming from the Provincial Court judges, the chief 

judge and their group, or if this is something that is being done 

as a administrative financial solution to the situation. 

 

Because when it comes to the courts, the ultimate test is 

whether the citizens of Saskatchewan perceive that they receive 

justice and that they actually receive justice. I have a great deal 

of respect for justices of the peace, but I know that there are 

many situations where the skills of a Provincial Court judge are 

required for solution of a number of the issues. And if this in 

any way causes members or citizens of Saskatchewan to have 

less faith in our court structure, then I think it’s a problem. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that some of my other 

colleagues will have comments about this. And I encourage the 

minister to provide more information about where this is 

coming from and why, so that we can understand this better 

because I think it’s important for all of the citizens of this 

province that we have a robust, well-funded court system that 

can provide the kind of results, the kind of justice that citizens 

of this province have come to expect. And so with that, I’ll 

adjourn debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 154, The Provincial 

Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

after my remarks I will be moving second reading of Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last spring our government passed The Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act. And in fact today marks 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That Act recognizes the important role that 

hunting, fishing, and trapping have played in shaping 

Saskatchewan’s social, cultural, and economic heritage. It is 

also a reflection of the important role that hunters, anglers, and 

trappers play in conserving the province’s rich ecological 



6048 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

diversity. 

 

That diversity is in the foundation for making a healthy and 

sustainable environment for this and future generations. We are 

blessed in this province with pristine lakes, rivers, and native 

prairie that allows Saskatchewan people to enjoy a quality of 

life that is unsurpassed in any other part of Canada, and dare I 

say, anywhere else in the world, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

knows that a healthy and secure environment is fundamental to 

sustaining the health and well-being of Saskatchewan people. 

And our environment is fundamental to sustaining the 

economic growth and prosperity that is the hallmark of 

Saskatchewan today. There are many natural places within this 

province that are unique and special to the people of 

Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, we must protect them. 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund has been and 

continues to be a great success story in the conservation and 

enhancement of biodiversity on many acres of fish and wildlife 

habitat. Through collaboration and co-operation with 

non-governmental organizations, our government’s 

conservation efforts have increased over the past three decades. 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund was established in 

the mid-1970s when resident hunters, anglers, and trappers 

asked the government to place an impost on hunting and fishing 

licences and to use the revenue to purchase and improve 

wildlife habitat. Currently 30 per cent of the revenue generated 

from the sale of hunting, angling, and trapping licences is 

directed into the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. This 

amounts to approximately $3.5 million annually. 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund provides the money 

necessary to secure habitat to support a diversity of fish and 

wildlife species. To date the fund has acquired, through 

purchase or donation, approximately 212,000 acres of land for 

wildlife habitat purposes, with many acres under joint title with 

various partners. Aside from the obvious benefits to hunters, 

anglers, and outdoor enthusiasts, it is important to note that 

much of this land continues to be made available to local 

communities for haying and grazing. 

 

The largest piece of this funding goes to the on-the-ground 

preservation and securement of natural habitats. Over recent 

years much of this funding has gone to the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, Nature Conservancy of Canada, Ducks 

Unlimited Canada, and the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation 

under cost-sharing agreements. In some instances, a dollar that 

has gone into the fund from licence sales has leveraged 

significantly more into the fund from licence sales has 

leveraged significantly more dollars from the federal 

government and the private sector through the fundraising 

efforts of non-governmental organizations. This is truly a great 

example of co-operation and partnership. 

 

[21:45] 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund also provides funding 

through agreements with a variety of researchers and 

non-governmental agencies to better understand, manage, and 

promote the wise use of our fisheries and wildlife resources. 

Currently the Ministry of Environment directs the use of the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund funding under the 

advisement of the FWDF [Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund] steering committee. The committee is comprised of 

representatives from the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Saskatchewan Bowhunters Association, the Saskatchewan 

Flyfishers Association, Nature Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association, and the Saskatchewan 

Outfitters Association. 

 

As a result of the amendments contained in The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010, the current Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund steering committee will evolve into the fish 

and wildlife development advisory council. The council will 

play a greater role in directing how and where FWDF resources 

are spent so as to maximize the value of ecological diversity 

that those expenditures generate. The council will play a major 

role in reviewing, evaluating, and making recommendations on 

agreements proposed or already funded under the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund. 

 

There is acknowledged need to increase the level of land 

management performed on Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund lands. We will employ land management tools such as the 

control of invasive alien species and the use of sustainable 

grazing to ensure that Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

lands continue to support biodiversity in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government will task the advisory council with an 

increased role in directing the evaluation of the land base to 

identify specific management needs. The council will also play 

an important role in determining the best means of delivering 

the required management activities. Amendments contained in 

this Bill also broaden the scope of activities that are covered 

under the fund to include the restoration of fish and 

species-at-risk populations or of habitat necessary for fish and 

wildlife species. Here again the advisory council will play an 

active role in identifying priorities under its expanded mandate. 

 

Taken together, these amendments represent another positive 

step in the important work of conserving our natural 

environment. And these amendments mean that, together with 

the organizations represented on the fish and wildlife fund 

advisory council, our government will work even more 

effectively in the future to preserve biodiversity in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 155, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased tonight to rise and speak on Bill 155 at second reading. 

Bill 155 is the Act to amend The Natural Resources Act, and as 

some people will know, we always have short titles. The Act 

may also be cited as The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to follow the minister in making the 

explanation about Bill 155, and, Mr. Speaker, I share the 

minister’s celebratory comments about the Hunting, Fishing, 

and Trapping Day today declared by the legislature. As you 

know, Mr. Speaker, that legislation was debated to some extent 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6049 

in the last session of the legislature. The declaration of the day 

— Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping Day — was made by 

legislation here in the Chamber. 

 

Some of the concerns raised at that time, Mr. Speaker, indicated 

that respect for the North, respect for those who are involved in 

hunting, fishing, and trapping, respect for the views of the 

individuals that are involved in that . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 

some may remember even some of my comments that in fact 

hunting, fishing, and trapping, Mr. Speaker, there’s one other 

element of this that needs to be taken into consideration, and 

that is the tradition of gathering, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at northern communities and First Nations 

communities, hunting, fishing, trapping, and gathering were all 

a part of the community’s way of life, Mr. Speaker. We can’t 

allow ourselves to forget that gathering is a very important 

tradition as well when it comes to the lands and what the lands 

produce for human benefit. 

 

So that having been said, Mr. Speaker, and welcome the 

opportunity to celebrate the recognition of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping. Something else that we can’t forget, Mr. Speaker, is 

that this legislation comes about as a result of a lack of 

consultation that occurred with the organizations involved in 

wildlife and wildlife habitat protection also in the last session, 

Mr. Speaker. We saw this government attempt to — and then 

succeed simply because they have a majority, Mr. Speaker — 

move wildlife habitat lands from the protection of legislation, 

without adequate consultation with those who are most 

involved with wildlife habitat land in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but note that even the non-partisan, 

objective observers that exist within the editorial committee of 

the Saskatoon StarPhoenix newspaper commented on that in 

their recent editorial about the new vision of the Sask Party 

government as expressed through the Throne Speech. The 

StarPhoenix editorial of Thursday, October 28th recognizes 

that, and I quote from the editorial. They’re talking about a 

reference to the creation of measures designed to protect the 

Sand Hills. The editorial says: 

 

However, it only serves as a pre-election reminder of this 

government’s utterly bone-headed move last year to 

remove nearly three-million acres of Crown land from the 

protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even the, as I said, non-partisan, objective 

observers at The StarPhoenix recognize the government’s last 

efforts at wildlife conservation and wildlife habitat protection 

as boneheaded, Mr. Speaker. It means that we have to be extra 

vigilant in reviewing new legislation that’s coming out from the 

same department, the same ministry, Mr. Speaker. Even though 

there’s a new minister in place, Mr. Speaker, the old 

government is still in place. 

 

I also note, Mr. Speaker, when I review the Throne Speech this 

year, the legislative agenda outlined in the Throne Speech there 

— the Throne Speech delivered on October 27th — the 

legislative agenda portion does not mention anything about the 

new natural resources Act, Mr. Speaker. The legislative agenda 

outlined in the Throne Speech talked about legislation to be 

introduced to protect whistle-blowers. It talked about legislation 

to increase penalties for those who mistreat farm animals. It 

talked about legislation to reduce Provincial Court delays. It 

talked about legislation to introduce new human rights 

legislation. It talked about another boneheaded idea, Mr. 

Speaker, asking for . . . giving municipalities the authority to 

require photo ID [identification] when conducting local 

elections. And it talked about introducing a similar Act 

requiring voters to produce photo ID when voting in provincial 

elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So a few weeks ago the government gave an indication of a 

large number of pieces of legislation, many of which we’ve 

actually seen introduced and debated today, Mr. Speaker. There 

was no mention of the new natural resources Act. So was the 

government not interested in highlighting this in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker? Has it come up just recently, Mr. 

Speaker? Or what’s the motivation for bringing this forward? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to declare my bias in this legislation as I 

did in my speeches earlier on other pieces of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. I am a supporter of the work that’s being done by the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, by Ducks Unlimited, by the 

Outfitters Association, by the Nature Conservancy, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m a supporter of the efforts that have been made by 

these organizations in the past, and I believe that quality 

consultation with these organizations will yield a quality 

legislation and regulation for the protection of wildlife and 

wildlife lands in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also believe that the legislation that’s in front of us here — I 

have not discussed this with many folks within the Wildlife 

Federation or Ducks Unlimited, Mr. Speaker — but I 

understand that this legislation was put together with some 

consultation. And, Mr. Speaker, I welcome that. 

 

But I think we have to be very careful, Mr. Speaker, about what 

might be the government’s hidden intentions as opposed to the 

organizations’ good intentions to try to ensure that those who 

are involved in wildlife conservation, who are involved in 

habitat protection, Mr. Speaker, are actually able to provide 

greater influence over the decisions in this regard.  

 

Some even may go so far as to argue, Mr. Speaker, that had the 

council that’s currently . . . that in this legislation is being 

established, Mr. Speaker, had this council been in place a year 

ago, this — what The StarPhoenix refers to as boneheaded 

move last year — probably would not have happened, Mr. 

Speaker, because the council would have been advising the 

minister on a number of things, likely including that legislation, 

had they been consulted in advance. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome the creation of the council, and we wish them well in 

their work. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think there are some things that everybody 

has to understand, and we have to make this very clear. The 

council’s purpose is to advise the minister, Mr. Speaker. That 

advice is on allocations and expenditures from the fund, 

acquisition of lands pursuant to the Act, administration of lands 

acquired pursuant to the clauses of the Act, the disposition of 

lands acquired pursuant to clauses in the Act, proposed changes 

to the Act or regulations with respect to the fund and, Mr. 

Speaker, advise the minister on the annual budget and financial 

statement of the fund. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear on what 



6050 Saskatchewan Hansard November 15, 2010 

the council will advise the minister on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the most telling matter however is under 

duties of council, clause 20.2. If we look at subclause (4): 

 

(4) When making allocations or expenditures from the 

fund or administering lands acquired pursuant to clause 

20(6)(a), the minister shall consider: 

 

(a) the advice of the council provided pursuant to this 

section; and 

 

(b) any other matter that the minister considers to be in 

the public interest”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s got to be made very, very clear 

here: the council’s there to advise the minister. The minister, 

however, is not required to accept or act on that advice. So we 

just have to be very clear: the minister is still in charge over 

there, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not a bad thing if the . . . But 

everybody’s got to be clear of the roles of the various parties, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I believe that at the end of the day the wildlife lands, 

wildlife projects, Mr. Speaker, require the influence of the 

organizations that are most involved with them and are closest 

to the work that’s being done. 

 

[22:00] 

 

The minister outlined that the fund was established in the 

mid-’70s. It’s about 30 per cent of the revenues end up going to 

the fund, Mr. Speaker, and there has been a steering committee 

that’s going to evolve into this council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past the fund has been used primarily to 

acquire, for lack of a better word, let me use the word assets. 

The fund has been used to acquire land. It’s been used to 

manage that land. But, Mr. Speaker, it would appear that this 

legislation will now allow the fund to fund matters other than 

capital projects. Mr. Speaker, it appears that this fund could 

provide funding for projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how far the consultation has gone 

with the organizations, but many of the organizations, I think, 

believe that there’s additional money that’s available to the 

organizations through the fund now because the mandate has 

grown. There’s no indication whatsoever in the Act that I can 

see, Mr. Speaker, that there are additional funds available. 

 

If there are additional funds available, I hope the government 

will make that perfectly clear in either comments that they wish 

to make in the Chamber or certainly in answer to questions or 

perhaps even before we get into committee, whatnot, Mr. 

Speaker. But if there are promises being made about more 

financial support for the fund, then that’s got to be clear, Mr. 

Speaker, before we move on very much further. 

 

How do we ensure the sustainability of the fund, Mr. Speaker? 

Up to this point, the sustainability of the fund, the 

accountability on the fund, Mr. Speaker, has been pretty strong. 

But it’s been related to the purchase of assets, not so much on 

projects, Mr. Speaker. 

But here’s the point that I want people to really grasp and 

understand: it looks like this proposal is moving us towards 

more off-budget financing of projects, Mr. Speaker. By 

off-budget, what I mean is setting up a system whereby 

somebody other than the government through the GRF is 

funding activity. We’re seeing that in the health care field right 

now, Mr. Speaker. In long-term care, we’re seeing that 

government debt is being transferred from the GRF into the 

regional health authorities. This deal with Amicus, Mr. 

Speaker, will create additional long-term care beds, but they 

will not show up as government debts, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

going to show up off the books. 

 

We’re seeing other plans, Mr. Speaker, whereby what is 

normally a GRF expenditure is now going off the books, Mr. 

Speaker, and is being managed elsewhere. So a project under 

the fund, Mr. Speaker, could easily be managed or administered 

by a biologist that may previously have been working for the 

Department of the Environment, or the Ministry of the 

Environment, and has now moved over to become a project 

employee or funded through a project funded by the 

Development Fund. That expense, Mr. Speaker, would no 

longer show up under the GRF or be subject to the Provincial 

Auditor’s review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the sort of accountability that, if this is 

indeed the case, this is not the sort of accountability that the 

Saskatchewan Party promised the people of Saskatchewan in 

their election promise prior to 2007 or in their Throne Speech 

arguments that were made after the election. Promises that said 

we will be more accountable, we’ll be more open, we’ll be 

more transparent, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, more programs are 

being established that create off-budget financing for activities 

that are normally activities of government. 

 

Now, that having been said, Mr. Speaker, it’s a cautionary 

comment. At the end of the day, I think that a Bill that supports 

and recognizes the value of the organizations working in the 

wildlife and habitat protection areas, Mr. Speaker, is of value to 

the people of Saskatchewan. So we have to cautiously approach 

the language and direction outlined in this Bill because there 

could be some hidden, perhaps I will for the benefit of the 

doubt say, unintended consequences that could result because 

of this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the debate that will 

continue on Bill 155, An Act to amend The Natural Resources 

Act. I look forward to my meetings and consultations with the 

organizations involved in the wildlife field, Mr. Speaker. And I 

very much look forward to our time when this Bill ultimately 

does get to the committee stage where we can ask government 

more specific questions about its intentions and its ability to 

deliver, to meet the needs expressed today and yet unexpressed 

desires of the organizations that are being and should be 

consulted on this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I indicate that we are interested in 

consulting further on this legislation. I therefore move that Bill 

No. 155, An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act . . . Or 

pardon me. I should say debate on Bill 155, An Act to amend 

The Natural Resources Act, be it now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 



November 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6051 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House Leader has moved a 

motion that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:08.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6027 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6028 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6030 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6035 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6036 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions)Amendment Act, 2010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6038 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6039 

 Bill No. 151 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6040 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6042 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 6042 

 Bill No. 152 — The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6042 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6043 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 6044 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6044 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6045 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6047 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6047 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6047 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6048 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


