




















































Hansard: March 29, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 38A  MONDAY, MARCH 29, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4511 

 March 29, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the 

Assembly it’s my pleasure to introduce four guests that are 

seated in your gallery. These guests are involved in the 

Saskatchewan surgical initiative advisory committee and were 

present today at the official release of our four-year plan called, 

Sooner, Safer, Smarter: A Plan to Transform the Surgical 

Patient Experience. I’ll just ask them to give a wave. A couple 

of them are kind of around behind the clock, so I don’t really 

get to see them, but I know all four are here. 

 

First of all, Dr. Peter Barrett. If he’d just give a wave; there he 

is. Dr. Peter Barrett is a surgeon and physician leader of the 

Saskatchewan surgical care initiative. He sits on the Faculty of 

the College of Medicine at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] and is a past president of both the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association and the Canadian Medical Association. Dr. 

Barrett has a urology practice in Saskatoon and is a board 

member of the Health Quality Council. 

 

Also in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, there’s two patient advisors. 

The first one is Dan Stroman. Dan is a resident of Prince Albert 

whose experience undergoing knee replacement surgery has left 

him to become one of the five patient advisories serving on this 

committee, Mr. Speaker. As I said, Dan is the chaplain at the 

Riverbend Institution in Prince Albert. When you see his 

picture in the document, you’ll also see that he’s a proud 

grandfather — one of, I believe, three or four of his 

grandchildren happen to be in our document. 

 

The other patient advisor is Doug Denk who is a resident of 

Saskatoon and is also one of the five patient advisors. He knows 

first-hand experience accessing surgical services in the 

province, in fact I understand that he’s had three surgeries last 

year which have significantly improved his ability and mobility 

and his quality of life. And I want to thank Doug and Dan both 

for serving as patient advisors. 

 

And the fourth person, who probably doesn’t need much 

introduction, especially when it comes to health care in this 

province, is Dr. Marlene Smadu, who is the chair of the Health 

Quality Council, one of many hats that she wears. She is 

currently the Associate Dean, Regina site, for the College of 

Nursing, University of Saskatchewan. Marlene is instrumental 

in many different areas in health care. And one of the areas that 

we relied on her great experience, Mr. Speaker, was working 

with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses-government 

partnership where she was kind of a coordinator and a conduit 

to make that partnership work. Her experience in this province 

in health care is unmatched, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like all 

members of this Assembly to welcome our four guests, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome Drs. Barrett and Smadu and the two patient advocates. 

Good work. Marlene and I have had a long history, both being 

nurses and both being involved in various aspects of health 

care. Marlene was the ADM, the assistant deputy minister in the 

department when the member from Nutana and I were ministers 

of Health. And Marlene did a wonderful job as basically what is 

now the chief nursing officer. So we’ve had a long history, and 

I welcome her and the others to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 

through you through to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a wonderful Saskatchewan family in your gallery. 

Valerie Korinek is here. She’s the head of the department of 

history at the University of Saskatchewan. Penny Skilnik, her 

partner, is in the office of the dean in graduate studies. And of 

course Daniel and Thomas Korinek are also here. Thomas is in 

grade three at Brunskill, and Daniel’s in kindergarten at 

Montessori. 

 

You know, I can speak from experience to say that Daniel is 

remarkable in his production of election campaign posters. He 

does wonderful work. He’s just announced that he has a career 

ambition, and that is to be the prime minister of Canada, and we 

thought where better to start than right here in the Assembly of 

his own province. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to invite all 

members to welcome this wonderful family to their legislature. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Rulings on Points of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to statements by members, I 

think it would be appropriate for me to give my comments in 

regards to the points of order that were raised the last sitting of 

the Assembly, given the fact that they can also impact 

statements by members. On Thursday three points of order were 

raised by the House leaders. I’ve reviewed the issues and I’m 

prepared to rule on each matter. 

 

The first point of order relates to the comments about the 

trustworthiness of a member of this Assembly. The Government 

House Leader contends that the member from Regina Rosemont 

stated, a Premier you could not trust, which he deemed to be an 

unparliamentary expression. In response to the point of order, 

the Opposition House Leader countered that the member’s 

remarks were not directed at the member, rather his comments 

related to the trustworthiness of the budget. 

 

I’ve reviewed Hansard, and I have found that at page 4488, the 

member from Regina Rosemont stated, and I quote, “. . . this is 

a budget that you can’t trust from a Premier you can’t trust.” 

 

The word trust has many meanings. It might be applied in the 

context of competence, expectation, or reliability of a person or 



4512 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

thing. It can also be applied in the context of veracity, 

genuineness, or integrity of a person. 

 

The words that were spoken applied to the personal character of 

the Premier and were out of order. This incident only proves yet 

again that members need to be careful of the words used in this 

Assembly. I would ask the member for Regina Rosemont to 

apologize and withdraw his remarks. I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the 

remarks and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. 

 

In regards to the second point of order, which was raised by the 

Opposition House Leader, implying that the Premier questioned 

the truthfulness of the statements made by the Leader of the 

Opposition, I’ve reviewed the record. And I find that on page 

4487 of Hansard, the Premier stated, and I quote, “. . . and I’ll 

carefully word this — the hon. member’s information is not 

true.” 

 

In a follow-up question, the Leader of the Opposition states, 

and I quote, “. . . the member opposite can say what I’m saying 

isn’t true . . .” 

 

In the context used, I find the use of the word “true” to be 

within the acceptable standards of this Assembly. The 

Canadian Oxford Dictionary defines the word as, and I quote, 

“in accordance or consistent with fact or reality,” and “exact, 

accurate, precise.” 

 

Members’ understanding of the facts often differ, and that is 

why we have debate in this Chamber. This is quite different 

than past instances we’ve had, this session and in other 

sessions, when members have made comments that implied that 

another member had knowingly not told the truth. In this case, it 

was a dispute over facts which are regularly the subject of 

debate between members. 

 

The final point of order raised on Thursday related to 

allegations that members are the subject of investigations. I 

want to remind members that I had hardly finished commenting 

on a previous point of order that touched on this issue and we 

had yet another point of order. I repeat what I said in the ruling 

I made at the last sitting: members must be mindful that 

allegations, accusations, or innuendo of inappropriate behaviour 

are not acceptable. 

 

In closing I want again to remind members that the words 

spoken in the Assembly should demonstrate respect for one 

another and this institution. I am seeking the support of all 

members to ensure that the dignity of our institution is 

maintained. 

 

In conclusion I would like to quote my predecessor, Speaker 

Kowalsky, where on April the 15th, 2005, he stated, and I 

quote: 

 

As members exercise the responsibility given to them by 

the electorate, they should respect the privilege of free 

speech through vigorous debate of issues while making 

conscious effort to refrain from intemperate or personal 

attacks. 

 

I conclude my ruling. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of the concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned about the safety of their 

highways in this great province. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

particular petition is pertaining to Highway No. 10 from Fort 

Qu’Appelle to the junction of No. 1. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks in 

Fort Qu’Appelle and Milestone, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to present a 

petition that originated with the Saskatchewan Student 

Coalition. This petition is in support of the implementation of a 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund, the same scholarship fund that 

was promised by the Sask Party in the last general election, 

2007. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petitioners are from Regina and 

Abernethy. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition that speaks to the issue that the Government of 

Saskatchewan needs to recognize the value of all health care 

providers by making a commitment to adequate funding and the 

installation of good faith in the bargaining process, and that the 

heavy-handed use of the essential services legislation is making 

a mockery of the collective bargaining process in the province. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4513 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This petition is in 

support of maintaining educational assistants for young people 

that have special needs including learning disabilities, physical 

. . . and frail and medically fragile young people who are in our 

schools. And as you know, the ministry released a document 

that indicates the government is considering drastically 

reducing the number of EAs [educational assistant] in the 

province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling on protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. And we know that Saskatchewan 

renters in many of our cities are facing a combination of rising 

rents and low vacancy rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view of protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks come from the good city of Regina. I do so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care bed facility in La Ronge. 

With a waiting list of almost one full year for our seniors to 

wait, it is appalling, and no other community faces that type of 

waiting time. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition that has been put together by the Saskatchewan Student 

Coalition, a petition in support of affordable undergraduate 

tuition costs, and a call that the Sask Party government’s actions 

match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate retention 

program. The petition is being circulated because the 

Saskatchewan Party government amended the retention 

program to exclude master’s, Ph.D. graduates, and graduates 

from outside of the province. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to immediately expand the 

graduate retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the two pages of signatures are from the town of 

Lumsden and the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to present a petition on the Sask Party’s lack of action with 

respect to climate change. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the government to immediately, without delay, 

acknowledge and recognize that climate change is 

occurring and that the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening, and in so doing to cause the 

provincial government to undertake immediate actions to 

mitigate climate change by reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions, actions which will serve to protect 

Saskatchewan people from the significant costs to our 

economy, global security, and the quality of life which 

climate change threatens to bring about, and to also 

protect Saskatchewan people from longer and more 

frequent droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers 



4514 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

which feed our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more 

frequent and more serious flooding, and loss of at least 

the southern part of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest 

which is treasured by so many in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately without delay begin the process of creating a 

meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation, and substantial and meaningful regulations to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made the serious and significant commitment 

was serving as the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, to reduce our province’s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent from the levels of greenhouse 

gas emissions which our province produced in the year 

2007. 

 

And to meet said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions by the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from 

now or one short decade away. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring 

the Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set 

about the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions, rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties, to actually 

address this critically important issue which will directly 

affect our province’s economy and the quality of life for 

all of our residents. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately without delay reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets, which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act. 

 

And in so doing to cause the provincial government to 

immediately without delay reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that it generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan adapt to current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptation. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately without delay restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the prairie adaptation 

research collective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Christopher Lake, Prince Albert, and Macdowall. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents that 

are upset about the government’s unjust dismissal of an 

employee last week, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectively 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

call upon the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety to 

take the following action: 

 

Immediately order the reinstatement of the unjustly fired 

corrections worker and immediately assure other 

employees that they will not be punished for bringing 

forward important information in the public interest, and 

immediately work to improve protections for 

whistle-blowers within his department and throughout the 

public service of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is submitted on behalf of residents of the city 

of Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand here today and present 

a petition in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

the existing construction industry labour relations Act, 1992 has 

provided a stable environment for labour relations in the 

construction industry in the province. We all know that stable 

labour relations in the environment provide for quality work, 

safe construction sites that benefit all the people in our 

province. We also, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention that the 

existing building trades contracts support an apprenticeship 

system of training which results in a highly skilled workforce. 

And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of North Battleford, 

Saskatoon, Vanscoy, and Nipawin. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. The petition collected through the Saskatoon 

Anti-Poverty Coalition notes that the income gap in 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4515 

Saskatchewan between rich and poor continues to grow, and 

now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in deepening 

poverty. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

That the petitioners humbly pray that your Legislative 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to act 

as quickly as possible to develop an effective and 

sustainable poverty-elimination strategy for the benefit of 

all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford, the town of Cut Knife, and the town of 

Wilkie. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today’s petition is signed by residents of Battleford and North 

Battleford, Mr. Speaker, And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets. They’re worried that the 

Sask Party is trying to score a hat trick, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens in Regina and 

La Ronge. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition again in support of the Saskatchewan film and 

television industry. The petition basically addresses the 

concerned citizens regarding the film industry languishing over 

the last . . . left to languish over the last couple of years and 

now being kicked to the curb by the closure of SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and Regina. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Ordination of Bishop Donald Bolen 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday my 

wife and I had the opportunity to attend the ordination of 

Bishop Donald Bolen. On December 21st, 2009, His Holiness 

Pope Benedict XVI announced Bishop Bolen’s appointment. 

Bishop Bolen’s service to Saskatchewan is commendable. 

 

Bishop Bolen served as vicar-general of the Archdiocese of 

Regina and as pastor of St. Joseph Parish in Balgonie, St. Agnes 

Parish in Pilot Butte, and St. Peter’s Colony in Kronau. Further 

to his work as vicar-general and priest, Bishop Bolen is also the 

Chair of the Archdiocesan Ecumenical Commission in Regina, 

which is yet another example of his strong commitment to 

Christian unity. He also spent seven years serving in Rome on 

the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity. 

 

Bishop Bolen was born in Gravelbourg and then went on to 

study English and religious studies at Campion College. He 

graduated with a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] Honours in 1982. In 

1986 he entered Saint Paul Seminary in Ottawa and went on to 

complete his Bachelor and Master of Theology. And in 1991, 

Bishop Bolen was ordained a priest. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the bishop 

on his recent appointment. On behalf of the members of this 

Assembly, I want to wish the bishop the best in his endeavours 

to enhance the spiritual life of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

NDP Convention in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, as the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald put it on Saturday, “The future of the NDP in 



4516 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

Saskatchewan looks strong, if Friday night at the provincial 

convention was any indication.” More than 600 delegates 

representing working people, students, families, and business 

owners descended upon Prince Albert, and let me tell you, we 

painted the town orange. 

 

Over the weekend we welcomed all members to the floor to 

express their opinions about our economy, our social programs, 

and the future of our province — just as we always do and we 

will continue to do throughout our policy renewal process. We 

reflected on our proud and strong history by welcoming former 

premiers Allan Blakeney, Roy Romanow, and Lorne Calvert, 

who we can credit with building the unfaltering foundation of 

our party. 

 

But we also looked towards the future this weekend by 

nominating our first candidates for the 2000 election. My 

colleague, Darcy Furber, was selected by a packed house as the 

candidate for Prince Albert Northcote, as was my future 

colleague, Ted Zurakowski, who will be representing the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] in Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

As we all departed from the convention centre yesterday, we 

left with some great memories and souvenirs. But aside from 

buttons, petitions, policy renewal forms, and of course the 

noticeable orange scarves, we also carried home a sense of 

hope, optimism, and unbounded energy. And when someone 

asks any NDP member if we can win the 2011 election, what 

will we answer? You bet we can. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Youth Science Month 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

March is youth science festival month in Canada. The Youth 

Science Foundation is a leading organization in the area of 

promoting youth science. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1962 YSF Canada [Youth Science 

Foundation Canada] has been making project-based science 

accessible to young Canadians with an interest in this 

discipline. Mr. Speaker, YSF Canada is committed to educating 

young scientists from 7 to 12 about the numerous opportunities 

in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics available 

across the country. 

 

Programs such as YSF would cease to exist without the tireless 

efforts of volunteers. Volunteers consisting of scientists, 

educators, and parents encourage the scientific efforts of over 

half a million young Canadians. Young Canadian scientists are 

the next generation of innovators. They are disciplined and 

inspired by the rich scientific infrastructure being developed 

province by province and the work coming out of those labs and 

research facilities. 

 

Their showcase event is a Canada-wide science fair. This is the 

largest extracurricular youth activity related to science and 

technology in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, foundations like the YSF are not only inspiring 

our young to explore the world of science, but encouraging 

more of them to build their professional careers here. I would 

like to thank and recognize them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Harmonized Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 

has raised an issue of basic trust. At Friday’s chamber of 

commerce event he championed so-called benefits of a 

harmonized sales tax for Saskatchewan and urged debate. Mr. 

Speaker, this tax would shift on to consumers a burden of $400 

million — that’s $400 for every person in Saskatchewan or 

1,600 for a family of four. The minister welcomed the debate, 

Mr. Speaker, but very few families would welcome a tax hike 

of this size. 

 

After the minister opened the door to an HST [harmonized sales 

tax] tax grab, Mr. Speaker, the Premier tried to slam it shut with 

a clarification of the government’s position. Not credible, Mr. 

Speaker. Does the minister not know his government’s own 

position, or was he just unclear about the communications 

strategy? 

 

Assurances from this Premier ring pretty hollow, Mr. Speaker. 

Just look at the Premier’s record of broken promises, Mr. 

Speaker. He said he’d safeguard the Crowns, but he’s stealing 

their profits and selling off profitable business units. In health 

care, he promised to fix the doctor shortage and wait-lists. He 

has failed. Mr. Speaker, he made an empty promise to 

municipalities, and we will all pay through tax increases this 

spring. So when it comes to an HST, Saskatchewan families 

can’t afford to trust the Premier’s promises. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Kidney Health Month 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. March is 

national kidney month in Canada. Chronic kidney disease 

includes conditions that damage your kidneys and decrease 

their ability to keep you healthy. Chronic kidney disease may be 

caused by diabetes, high blood pressure, and other disorders. 

Early detection and treatment can often keep kidney disease 

from getting worse. When kidney disease progresses, it may 

eventually lead to kidney failure, which requires dialysis or a 

kidney transplant to maintain life. Simple laboratory tests such 

as urinalysis, which looks for protein and blood in the urine, are 

useful in detecting kidney damage at an early stage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone to get their blood sugar tested 

regularly. Uncontrolled high blood pressure can speed up the 

natural course of underlying kidney disease. 

 

The Canadian Kidney Foundation is a foundation that is 

dedicated to finding a cure for chronic kidney disease. Since its 

creation in 1964, the Kidney Foundation has helped millions of 

Canadians suffering from kidney failure and related disorders 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4517 

such as hypertension, diabetes, urinary tract infection, and 

kidney stones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fundraising campaign of the national Kidney 

Foundation has contributed millions of dollars to research. This 

money provides services to individuals living with chronic 

kidney disease and related conditions. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the next member, 

I’d just like to ask members to be mindful of the fact that 

members’ statements are an opportunity for members to make a 

statement without interference, and a couple of members have 

chosen to get involved while the member is trying to make the 

statement. So I’d ask members to be mindful and allow the 

member to make their statement without interference. I 

recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Treatment of Working People 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since coming to 

office, this Sask Party government has launched a full-scale 

assault on the working people of our province. Last Thursday 

we saw just the latest example. The Sask Party government 

fired a corrections worker for doing his job and serving the 

people of Saskatchewan. This individual has a wife, Mr. 

Speaker, and he has a family. Today their future is uncertain. 

 

Instead of taking steps to reprimand a dangerous criminal or 

make sure this wouldn’t happen again, they launched a witch 

hunt on the working people of Saskatchewan. They fired this 

worker in order to intimidate other employees who might wish 

to bring forward important information in the public’s interest. 

And furthermore, they compounded their mistake by firing the 

wrong individual. 

 

But this is only the beginning, Mr. Speaker. This government 

handed pink slips to about 100 more workers last week, leaving 

these people and their families with an uncertain future. And 

they have made it clear that they are firing another 1,700 

workers in the next four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party government is playing politics 

with the future of working people. The Sask Party government 

has little regard for the well-being of this worker, his family, 

and the hundreds more who will be left in the cold in the years 

to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Support for Project Hero 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the Premier and countless other Saskatchewan people who 

have expressed their disappointment and dismay at the 16 U of 

R [University of Regina] professors who oppose Project Hero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly these professors have every right to 

express their opinion, but to accuse the brave men and women 

who made the ultimate sacrifice for advancing an 

“imperialistic” agenda is just wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like these professors to name one Canadian 

military action where the objective has been to impose 

Canadian rule on a foreign country. From Vimy Ridge to 

Normandy to Kabul and Kandahar, Canadians served as 

liberators, not imperialists. To suggest otherwise is inaccurate 

and offensive to anyone who has ever served in the Canadian 

Armed Forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports any efforts to 

assist the children of fallen soldiers in pursuing their education. 

We believe that this program is a very noble cause. We hope the 

members opposite will join with us in supporting Project Hero 

and expressing our disappointment at the position taken by the 

16 U of R professors. Although the opinions of these professors 

are offensive, this is precisely what our soldiers have and will 

continue to fight for. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Harmonized Sales Tax 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister 

of Finance. Last Friday at a chamber luncheon meeting in 

Saskatoon at the chamber of commerce there, the minister 

indicated that he would encourage and want to have a 

wholesome . . . and welcome a debate on the harmonization of 

taxes in this province. 

 

My question to the minister is this: why does he think now is a 

good time to stick families in Saskatchewan with a $450 million 

tax increase? Why does he think now is the time to have that 

kind of a tax grab? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the position of the Saskatchewan Party going into the 

2000 election was that we didn’t support . . . 2007 election was 

that we did not support harmonization of the sales tax in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When we formed government, at the request of federal Finance 

minister, Jim Flaherty, we undertook a review of that position 

and we again found that it was inappropriate for Saskatchewan. 

We took a further review when Ontario and British Columbia 

announced that they were going to harmonize the sales tax. And 

the position remains steadfast; $400 million is the ticket that’s 

estimated to be shifted from business to the taxpayers of the 

province. We find that unacceptable and do not support 

harmonization. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question again to the 

minister: as we all know that in British Columbia a similar 

statement was made by the Minister of Finance and the Premier 

about this time before the last election in British Columbia and 

all the commitments made. What we know is that the trust issue 

on statements made by this government and by this Premier are 

not to be believed. The fact of the matter is, on many issues 

they have broken the trust and broken the promises. 

 



4518 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

My question to the Minister of Finance is this: isn’t it true that 

within weeks after the next election, if by chance the Sask Party 

is re-elected, that there will be the introduction of a harmonized 

tax here in the province of Saskatchewan? Isn’t that true? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I have 

indicated to the member in my previous answer, this 

government undertook two reviews of the issue. The facts 

remain the same and the position of this government remains 

unchanged. We do not support harmonization. 

 

It is one thing to recognize that there is going to be a debate 

about the issue, and there is a debate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the members to 

allow the Minister of Finance to respond to the question 

presented. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — There has been a debate. There has 

been ongoing debate. There have been questions posed to me on 

two occasions this last week about harmonization. The position 

of this government remains unchanged. We do not support 

harmonization because of the $400 million burden of taxes that 

is going to go from business to consumers in this province, and 

we think that’s entirely inappropriate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister. 

I’ve heard the expression, trying to put toothpaste back in the 

tube, but I’ve never seen it being expressed here in the 

Assembly in quite a clear definition. 

 

This is what’s happened. What’s happened here is in a moment 

of honesty, the minister said what the government is planning to 

do, at noon. But by 2 o’clock, the Premier had got a hold of him 

and said, look we shouldn’t be talking about our plan for after 

the next election, and I want you to tell the press that you were 

misquoted or somebody said the wrong thing. 

 

The fact of the matter is, we know that this is a plan in waiting 

to try to correct for the $1 billion deficit that is now in place — 

a major tax grab on the back of Saskatchewan families. 

 

My question to the minister is this: why doesn’t he come clean 

today and admit this is the plan and this is how they plan to deal 

with the huge deficit they’ve created in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Leader 

of the Opposition doesn’t seem to understand the issue. 

Certainly there is going to be, certainly, Mr. Speaker, under the 

proposal there would be a shift from businesses paying tax and 

flowing it through to consumers paying the tax. Under that 

situation there’s no benefit to the government at all. The cost is 

borne by consumers of the province and that’s why we don’t 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition 

had the opportunity to present his question without interjection 

and interference. I’d ask members on the opposition side now to 

give the Minister of Finance the same opportunity. I recognize 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The very 

reason in fact that the effect of this tax would move tax from 

business to consumers in the province in the magnitude of 400 

to $450 million is the very reason we opposed this initiative and 

for the very reason that this government has said consistently 

that we don’t support harmonization. We’re willing to discuss 

the topic; we’re willing to give our position on it at any time; 

and we’re consistent in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Spending Forecasts 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not all 

Saskatchewan people don’t believe from this minister. This 

minister also claims he’s holding increases in health care 

spending to 3.1 per cent in this budget. But the nurses alone will 

eat up nearly 100 million of the $123 million increase. 

 

The government’s made big promises on reducing wait times 

and doctor shortages. Health care workers are still without a 

contract and utility bills are increasing. All of this will cost a 

heck of a lot more than the $23 million that’s left, and that 

minister knows it. He’s hoping he can sneak by big spending 

increases later in the year. 

 

To the minister: how much will health care spending have to 

increase at mid-year as a consequence of this government’s 

failure to budget properly now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this budget in 

Saskatchewan is a record budget in that we in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well they’re clapping the fact that it’s 

a record budget. Mr. Speaker, it is a record budget. Never has 

so much money been spent in health care in Saskatchewan . . . 

[inaudible] . . . That’s the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are the only government in Canada that is 

seeing a reduction in spending overall, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know provinces around the country are envious of the work that 

our . . . [inaudible] . . . done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to deliver health care in all the vast 

parts of the province, Mr. Speaker, like we have. We’ve done 

more . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It’s even becoming difficult for 

the Speaker to hear the response. I recognize the Minister of 

Health to wrap up his comments. 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4519 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have done more on 

the health care front with recruiting health care professionals in 

the first two and a half years of our mandate, Mr. Speaker, than 

ever had been done in the past, Mr. Speaker. In fact nurses, over 

and over again said the former government completely ignored 

their concerns, Mr. Speaker. We’ve reacted on them. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Forgive us for not buying it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area where the government’s spending 

forecasts are dubious is education. The budget increases 

operating funding for school divisions by just $33 million. The 

collective agreement with teachers expires in the middle of this 

budget year. But instead of showing a contingency for teachers’ 

salary increases, it appears the government will just increase its 

deficit, increase its deficit. 

 

To the minister: how much will education spending have to 

increase at mid-year as a consequence of this government’s 

failure to budget properly now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the increase into the budget for education is very 

significant, Mr. Speaker, over the course of the school division 

fiscal year. In fact the increase is going to be $18 million, Mr. 

Speaker, — $18 million has been distributed to the 29 boards of 

education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we are looking at with the boards of 

education — and I’ve indicated this to the boards when I met 

with them on Thursday of last week, and I met with them again 

on Friday of last week, Mr. Speaker — is that as we move 

through the negotiation process, the current collective 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, expires on August the 31st of 2010. 

Negotiations are under way, Mr. Speaker, and the negotiations 

will produce a cost. At that time, the government will deal with 

that cost that the boards will be affected by. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — In this minister’s own words, we have 

another phoney budget in front of us. No dollars. No dollars. 

 

The government, Mr. Speaker, says it’s budgeting $30 million 

less to fight forest fires this year, but no one can predict the 

weather, Mr. Speaker, or forest fires. Mr. Speaker, the 

government is betting the northern forest on factors beyond its 

control to hide the actual size of its deficit. 

 

To the minister: why should Saskatchewan people have any 

faith in spending forecasts of a government that calls a lucky 

break in the weather a spending cut? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Ministry of Environment was asked to look for efficiencies 

and for savings, and that’s what we did. We looked back over 

the last few years on an average fire budget, and it is possible 

on an average fire basis that a $10 million reduction in the 

firefighting budget is achievable. And, Mr. Speaker, last year’s 

budget for ’09-10, the Ministry of Environment . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It seems like we’ve got a lot of 

individuals want to get into answering the question. The 

question was directed to the Minister of the Environment. I’d 

ask members to allow the Minister of the Environment to 

respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, while there is a $10 

million reduction in the fire budget going forward in the ’09-10 

budget year, by year-end the Ministry of Environment, through 

its firefighting department, has returned almost $20 million 

back to the treasury. So we feel that a $10 million cut is 

completely achievable and the people and their property in the 

North will be protected. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, why won’t the 

Finance minister just be straightforward, stand up and tell 

people what he actually has here and what it appears to be, and 

that’s a $1 billion deficit, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This minister simply gets rid of any budget numbers he doesn’t 

like, not with spending restraint but with whiteout. The real 

costs of health — white it out. The real cost of teachers’ salaries 

— white it out. The real cost to the health care system of cuts to 

chiropractic care — white it out. Enough with the whitewash, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: how much is government spending really going 

to increase throughout this next year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

tabled a budget that indicates that there’s going to be a General 

Revenue Fund surplus, which is consistent with the 

methodology of describing budgets that have occurred in this 

province for 16 or 18 years. And that’s a fair statement . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 

Regina Dewdney to allow the Minister of Finance to respond to 

the question. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve also said that we 

were going to, budget over budget, decrease the expenditure of 

the Government of Saskatchewan by $123 million, which is 1.2 

per cent. It’s the only province in Canada to date that has dealt 

with the realities of their situation by actually reducing 

expenditures, and, Mr. Speaker, we have done that. 

 



4520 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

And we have received a tremendous amount of support from 

the people of Saskatchewan that understand that this is what 

you have to do to balance your budget in a time of fiscal 

restraint. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Financial Reporting Practices 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, previous budgets have always 

listed total government debt in order to give Saskatchewan 

people the bottom line. But this year the Sask Party broke out 

the whiteout to hide the figure in the budget. 

 

To the minister: why the lack of transparency? Why is the Sask 

Party changing the reporting rules mid-term? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on the green sheet that accompanies the budget it 

clearly indicates, it clearly indicates that there is a component of 

government enterprises that are in the figures, and as well the 

government Crown corporation debt in the figures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is dated March 24th of 2010, and I also have the 

one dated for the 2007 and ’08 budget, dated March 22nd, 

2007. Mr. Speaker, the reporting methodology is identical, and, 

Mr. Speaker, it indicates that on a summary basis there was a 

$701 million deficit, the last budget that that opposition 

presented in the House of this legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking total government 

debt and we’re talking their unwillingness to give the figure. 

Refusing to report total government debt is not the only change 

the Sask Party government has made. They’ve also changed the 

way capital projects are financed in yet another attempt to 

whitewash the provincial debt. The government used to account 

for capital spending in the year it was incurred. Now that debt 

will be spread over a number of years, hiding the debt’s true 

size from taxpayers. 

 

To the minister: what is he trying to hide by changing the 

accounting rules on the fly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated to the member opposite, the accounting rules and the 

accounting procedure — in fact the colour of the paper — is 

identical to what it was in 2007-2008. And it clearly shows that 

the government decreased the government funded debt of the 

province by over $2.7 billion to reduce it from the number that 

was there in the past down to $4.1 billion, the lowest level it’s 

been in decades, Mr. Speaker. That’s important and, Mr. 

Speaker, it clearly articulates as well what the Crown 

corporation debt is of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So the methodology is exactly the same as that was used in this 

province in 2007-2008, and it is a fair and balanced 

methodology that was supported by that government when they 

were in office. And we are simply following the procedures. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just to remind members 

of rule 46(2)(l), “Members shall refrain from loud private 

conversations.” When a member’s trying to respond to 

questions, it would be appropriate to allow the member to 

respond, as it is appropriate to allow the member placing the 

question to be heard. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, instead of those long nights when 

the minister is working with his bottle of whiteout at his desk, I 

would encourage him to crack his own documents — crack the 

budget document, go to page 25, top paragraph, and note some 

of the changes that have occurred. 

 

The Provincial Auditor told the Leader-Post that “It’s very 

difficult for people — other than the few people who 

understand all the little things they do — to understand where 

we’re at.” Of course that’s just the way the Sask Party wants it, 

Mr. Speaker. By removing items from the budget and refusing 

to fully account for capital spending, the Sask Party government 

is trying to keep Saskatchewan people in the dark. 

 

To the minister: will he answer the Provincial Auditor’s call for 

greater transparency or will he continue to make the reporting 

rules up as he goes along? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, consistent 

with the practice established in Saskatchewan over a huge 

number of years, this government continues to report on both 

methodologies, the summary financial statement as well as the 

General Revenue Fund methodology. Both have their different 

perspectives and both have their value in terms of helping the 

people of Saskatchewan understand the true balance and the 

true affairs of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We believe it’s important to report under both methodologies. It 

gives the people of Saskatchewan the global vision, if they like, 

about what the affairs of the province are, including the Crown 

corporations, health districts and school boards and Crown 

activities and capital activities and pension activities. We also 

report on a GRF [General Revenue Fund] basis to make sure 

that people can understand what the reporting methodology is 

on government income and expenses by ministries. We believe 

both is the appropriate way to report. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister wants to have his 

cake and eat it too, but the members opposite need to lay off the 

cake. It’s time to clearly state what is the amount of the 

provincial debt. It’s time to clearly state what are the total debt 

issues, along with capital, Mr. Speaker. And when they do that, 

Saskatchewan people will have the full picture. 

 

This goes to the very issue of whether or not the people of 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4521 

Saskatchewan can trust the Sask Party with the provincial 

finances. Refusing to report total government debt and trying to 

whitewash the true size of the debt is counter to the 

accountability and transparency that Saskatchewan people 

demand from their government. 

 

To the minister: if he won’t listen to the Provincial Auditor, will 

he at least listen to Saskatchewan people who are demanding 

some accountability and transparency from this minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 

certainly been listening to the people of Saskatchewan over the 

last two years as we’ve undertaken to remedy some of the 

difficulties that this province was left in by that former 

administration. Mr. Speaker, we invested tremendously — 

almost $3 billion in infrastructure since we became government. 

We’ve reduced the government funded debt by 40 per cent — 

over $2 billion. 

 

We’ve reduced personal income tax by $300 million for the 

people of Saskatchewan, not once but every single year that 

we’ve been in office, and that will continue going forward. We 

removed 80,000 people from the tax rolls of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We increased dramatically the recruitment of 

nurses and doctors in this province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

increased the spending for cancer care. 

 

We’ve done the support for the agricultural industry by funding 

AgriStability, AgriInvest, and crop insurance. Mr. Speaker, we 

made tremendous progress in educational property tax and 

municipal revenue sharing. We have a great deal to be proud of, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll remind members of the fact that the 

members are to place the questions through the Speaker and 

refer to the individuals by constituency or title responsibility. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Health Care Provision 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the Minister of 

Health announced that the Sask Party is moving to third party 

private surgical care centres to provide our surgeries. Mr. 

Speaker, these surgical centres are businesses that need to show 

profits. They need to pay staff, buy and upgrade equipment, and 

pay for their own buildings. Mr. Speaker, these surgeries are 

going to cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer more. Can the minister 

table the costing model he used to come up with this plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker. I’m very glad to stand in 

the House today and talk about the surgical care initiative that 

we announced five months ago. Five months ago to the day, we 

put in place a surgical care team, an executive team that would 

look at how we can reduce the number of waits that people are 

facing in the province down to three months within the next 

four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some of the members are in the gallery. We have the brightest 

minds from across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that looked at 

this and looked at how we can reduce wait times. And they 

came up with a number of initiatives. A number of initiatives, 

Mr. Speaker, that would see the reduction in wait times, 

whether it’s clinical pathways, whether its pooled referrals, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s patient-guided websites for surgical care, 

Mr. Speaker — a number of initiatives that will help reduce the 

wait times in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of them is third party delivery. And Mr. Speaker, the health 

regions, Saskatoon and Regina, have been asked to look at that 

as a possibility, Mr. Speaker. She’s assuming automatically that 

the cost is going to be greater. We don’t know that. We think it 

will be even or even less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Just to remind members that 

they’re not to draw individuals in the gallery . . . And that goes 

for both sides. Prior to the budget presentation, we had 

numerous suggestions. We had people in the galleries here. So 

I’d ask members to be mindful of that they’re not to engage 

people in the gallery in debate. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not assuming 

anything. But the minister won’t give us the costs. We’re 

supposed to just trust him. I’m not going to assume that. I’m not 

going to be trusting him, and neither is anybody else in this 

province. Instead of putting money into the Regina ambulatory 

care centre and supporting the public system and preparing for 

the steadily increasing demand for surgeries, which is in the 

document that they just presented, the minister has decided to 

put money into the private system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that when the Sask Party was in 

opposition, they called for more privatization of the health 

system. Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm today that this is 

just part of his plan to privatize the health system and move to a 

two-tier system? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find that line of 

questioning absolutely bizarre. Let’s go back a number of years, 

Mr. Speaker, and look at the health care system. A number of 

years ago, Mr. Speaker, all X-ray and all blood work were done 

within the public system. Under the NDP, they decided that 

there could be some savings in that area and they contracted 

private companies to deliver X-rays and blood work around the 

province, Mr. Speaker. That’s a private company delivering 

health care within a public system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have the debate any day with that member 

opposite. When a person is put into an ambulance here in 

Regina or Saskatoon, they could care less whether it was 

private. They want quick response and they want quality 

response, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatoon it’s private and in Regina 

it’s public, Mr. Speaker. That argument is long past. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the public does care and has made 



4522 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

it very clear. The public does not want private health care. The 

whole country has said that. Where has this minister been? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister said they would build a children’s 

hospital and he hasn’t done it. The government promised 13 

new long-term care facilities and they haven’t done it. The 

Premier promised municipalities a 1 per cent PST [provincial 

sales tax] share. He broke that promise too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can anyone trust this minister or this 

government when they say that this will cost less? How can 

they just trust them that it’s not just another step down the road 

to privatization? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, she’s right. The public 

does care and they spoke loud and clear in the patient . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The opposition member had the 

opportunity to present the question without any interference 

from the government side of the House. I ask opposition 

members now to give the Minister of Health the same 

opportunity. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we conducted 

a Patient First Review that consulted with the people that the 

health care system directly impacts, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, to a person, they said they . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To a person 

they said they wanted timely access to health care. That’s what 

they wanted, Mr. Speaker. Now they can go on the political 

dogma and ideology that private and public . . . private delivery 

will not work, Mr. Speaker. This government will put the 

patient first every time over their ideology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the private members 

committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills to present its sixth report. Mr. 

Speaker, I move: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills has moved: 

 

That the sixth report be now . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. If the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote would come to order, we could move forward 

with the debate on the floor. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Northwest, the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills, has moved: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Following the passage of the concurrence motion, the motion is 

carried and pursuant to rule 98, the private Bill 904, The 

Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, is 

deemed to be read the first time and is ordered for second 

reading on the next private members’ day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1010 through 1019. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1010 through 1019 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 1020 and 1021. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1020 and 21 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 1022 through 1031. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1022 through 1031 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4523 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise of course to 

enter into the debate on the 2010-2011 provincial budget for the 

province of Saskatchewan and issues arising from the 

presentation of that budget, and to speak to the motion made by 

government members and seconded, in particular by the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton, spoken to yesterday to 

support the budget — a budget that I call unbalanced, 

backward-looking, and irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason that or at least one reason why I use those terms, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the government plays a shell game. The 

government plays a shell game with this budget. The budget is a 

shell game in three respects or at least three respects, Mr. 

Speaker. It is a shell game in respect to the deficit. It is a shell 

game in respect to the debt. And it is a shell game in respect to 

taxation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And first, Mr. Speaker, a few words on the deficit. Now I 

appreciate, as the Minister of Finance says, that there has been a 

tradition of accounting in two different ways on the deficit, Mr. 

Speaker. One is on the summary deficit, the summary balance 

sheet. And on the summary balance sheet no one denies — and 

I think most people when looking at the budget, wanting to 

understand whether it’s balanced or surplus or deficit, would 

look at it this way — that this year the government is being 

clear and honest about the fact that expenditures exceed 

revenues. And therefore this budget is a deficit budget. 

 

Now the minister points out that we also make an accounting 

over time greater than a year and that we balance surpluses in 

previous years against deficits in subsequent years perhaps, and 

can have, by that accounting method, a balanced budget even 

though the budget this year once again is a deficit budget on the 

summary balance sheet. 

 

But what we shouldn’t lose track of, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

surplus is not from this government’s administration. The 

surplus — the $2.3 billion surplus — was left by the previous 

NDP administration. And so this government doesn’t want to 

talk about the summary deficit, the deficit they’re running this 

year where expenditures exceed revenues. They want to talk 

about a balance that’s only struck by borrowing against a 

surplus that was administered, that grew during the previous 

NDP administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But so desperate are they to hide from the deficit that they don’t 

have a problem with claiming that surplus as part of this year’s 

budget so that they can claim that this year’s budget is a 

balanced budget. But in fact it is not a balanced budget, and in 

fact the deficit is much larger than the deficit the government 

will admit to. The government will admit to a deficit of $622 

million. This, in transparency and accountability. is a great 

improvement over last year, Mr. Speaker. Last year the 

government stated that the budget was a surplus budget, and 

surplus by not a small amount, Mr. Speaker, by quite a large 

amount. 

 

Now to get to that surplus budget, the government had to 

estimate potash revenues at record high sales at a time when 

everybody knew, everybody knew in the country and 

internationally that the market for potash and commodities like 

potash was gone, that the Chinese weren’t going to be buying 

potash; the Brazilians weren’t going to be buying potash; 

Kansas corn growers were not going to be buying potash the 

way they had in the past. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, last year’s budget, which was supposed to 

have been a balanced budget or a surplus budget, it’s a deficit 

budget. This year’s budget is a deficit budget, Mr. Speaker, as 

well. And the Premier, in a moment of candour, and I think he 

was in a moment of candour because he was channelling some 

inner Forrest Gump. He said, “Deficits are like potato chips. I 

bet you can’t just stop at one.” And to paraphrase, to paraphrase 

from this weekend, I bet he can’t. We had a deficit last year. We 

have a deficit this year. And if you look at the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, he can’t stop at two. We’re going to have a deficit next 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Ontario government, the Ontario Finance minister’s been 

very honest in their budget and they’ve forecast deficits going 

forward for eight years. Well, Mr. Speaker, if we have a return 

of the Sask Party government in 2011, if that’s what happens, I 

would make the same forecast for the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that they just won’t be able to stop 

eating those potato chips. 

 

And it was pointed out in question period, I thought, very well 

today. I mean the $622 million deficit is a work of creative 

fiction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The two major lines, the two major expenditures by a provincial 

government in this country, are first of all health and secondly 

education. And in the case of health, last year, last year this 

government budgeted a 3 per cent increase. I don’t think 

anybody believed that; I certainly don’t think the Health 

minister believed that, and that turned out not to be true. 

 

Now some of the deficit is hidden in the health regions which 

continue to run deficits and debts because of the way this 

government finances. But of course that turned out not to be 

true. And again this year, again another fictional prediction of a 

3 per cent, 3.1 per cent increase in health care spending. And of 

course, as has been pointed out, that is absurd. That would only 

be true if they get everything right in their budget and they 

settle for zero per cent wage increases with thousands of health 

care workers in this province. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And as tough as this government is being in those negotiations, 

and as inequitable as this government is being in those 

negotiations, nobody believes, even on that side of the House, 

that they’re going to give health care workers zero in an 

upcoming contract. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the $622 million is a fantasy. It’s a fantasy 

because there’s enormous wage settlements coming with health 

care workers, and there are negotiations going on with doctors 

that have not yet been resolved. And it is a fantasy, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s no way this deficit is only $622 million. The 

government members know it. And the budget is a shell game. 

The hand is quicker than an eye. Where is the deficit? We don’t 

know. It’s under one of these three. But it is a lot bigger than 

$622 million, Mr. Speaker. 



4524 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

And then of course the second largest expenditure by 

government, provincial government, is education. Right after 

health care. And again a percentage increase that puts the 

school boards in this province, who are not able to raise their 

own funds any longer, in tremendous difficulties and not fairly, 

not evenly across the board. I mean it hurts more some places 

than it hurts in other places, there’s no doubt about that. But 

that 2 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, is dependent upon 

believing that this government is going to give teachers zero per 

cent wage increase. 

 

And I can remember when the current Minister of Justice, when 

he was in the opposition went to teachers and said it was a 

responsible thing to do, like I guess it was in opposition, he 

thought it was a responsible thing to do, told them they 

shouldn’t settle for anything less than 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well is that his view now? Is that his view now that teachers 

shouldn’t settle for anything less than 5 per cent year by year by 

year? And if that’s his position now, how does the Minister of 

Finance say they’re going to get zero, which is what the 

Minister of Finance said in this budget? 

 

Now the Minister of Finance jokingly said — he has an 

interesting sense of humour sometimes — that it was easier to 

keep track of what potash revenues were going to be because 

numbers get smaller as they get closer to zero. And I guess 

that’s a qualification for being Minister of Finance in the 

province of Saskatchewan, is you understand that numbers get 

smaller as they get closer to zero. 

 

Well I have something to say to the Minister of Finance through 

you, Mr. Speaker. Numbers get bigger again as you get away 

from zero. And as we get further and further away from zero, 

from a balanced budget, this deficit gets larger and larger and 

larger. 

 

Now secondly, the shell game on debt. The Minister of Finance, 

in defence of what he had to say about accounting on deficits, 

referred to the tradition in Saskatchewan: well we account in 

these two different ways. We report in these two different ways. 

But he doesn’t have that defence on what he’s done with 

accounting on debt. This is no tradition. This is a radical change 

in how you’re going to account for what the debt of the 

province is in mid-term, Mr. Speaker. That’s got to concern the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We owed so many apples last year but we’re not going to 

measure them in apples this year, so we don’t know how much 

we owe this year. We’re going to change it. Well some of them 

will be apples, but some of them aren’t going to be apples. 

Some of them are going to be oranges and you won’t be able to 

make the comparison. And why would you do that, Mr. 

Speaker, if you were not playing a shell game with the debt, 

with the debt? Now it’s clear from the government’s own 

documents that public debt is going up. It is not going down. 

Member after member from the government side can get up and 

talk about government debt going down all they want. Public 

debt is going up. 

 

One of the scariest and at the same time most laughable things 

I’ve heard in this House recently is when on this side of the 

House we were pointing out that despite what was being said by 

the government, public debt in this province was going up, the 

Minister Responsible for Crown Investments Corporation said 

from her seat, but that’s Crown corporation debt. As if she 

doesn’t realize, the minister responsible doesn’t realize that that 

is public debt, Mr. Speaker. I mean that was both frightening 

and funny at the same time, Mr. Speaker. It was an amazing 

thing to hear. 

 

But public debt in this province is going up. And it is going up 

as it did in the ’80s, as it did in the ’80s in part, in part by 

loading debt onto the Crowns. And we have a Bill in front of 

this House that the government is considering, that this 

legislature is debating, to raise the debt-borrowing capacity of 

one of the Crowns, SaskEnergy, by $400 million. 

 

And I haven’t yet had an opportunity to speak on that Bill, but I 

did take a look at the second reading speeches on that Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And one of the most notable, notable characteristics of 

the minister’s second reading speech — and it was a different 

minister at the time; there’s been a cabinet shuffle since — 

what’s the date of that speech? What’s the date of that speech? 

That speech was before the November announcement that the 

deficit from last year was actually $1 billion. 

 

We have a saying, lawyers do, about being in appellate court: 

be prepared, be brief, and be gone. Well that was also one of the 

shortest speeches I’ve ever seen on borrowing $400 million, 

Mr. Speaker. There was a minister saying, I want a secured line 

of credit for the province of Saskatchewan on the capital of 

SaskEnergy of $400 million. And nobody could get a $4,000 

line of credit as quickly as he got through that speech in this 

House, Mr. Speaker. That was one short application process. 

 

But that was days before, it was days before — and I think 

deliberately so — days before we found out that last year’s 

deficit was in fact appearing to be a $1 billion deficit. And I 

expect we’ll be learning that about this year’s deficit about the 

same time, Mr. Speaker, in November. So perhaps we’ll see 

more borrowing power increase Bills from this government 

before we get to that announcement in November. 

 

The government has also changed how it’s going to account for 

capital borrowing, Mr. Speaker. Instead of saying this is the 

amount of money that we’re borrowing to build a school, this is 

the amount of money that we’re borrowing to build a hospital, 

this is the amount of money that we’re borrowing to build 

correctional centres — which I expect this government is going 

to be required to do because of changes in the law in Ottawa — 

we are going to spread this spending out over 20 or 30 years, 

Mr. Speaker. And when you’re trying to figure out how you’re 

even going to find out what the debt is for any of these projects, 

what interest rate is being paid on any of these projects, Mr. 

Speaker, you realize what a shell game we have now before us 

on the issue of debt. 

 

And like parents who have maxed out their credit cards, this 

government is sneaking into the rooms of children and 

smashing open the piggy bank, Mr. Speaker. All throughout this 

budget are what are euphemistically called, in the Ministry of 

Finance language, savings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the most egregious savings, and I have to say this as 

Justice critic, is the raid on the Victims Fund, Mr. Speaker. That 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4525 

is money that is set aside to help victims of crime. And it comes 

from two sources. It comes from government. It also comes 

from fine surcharges, Mr. Speaker. And that money is being 

pulled out of the Victims Fund, pulled out of that piggy bank 

and throw it into general revenue to hold down the size of this 

deficit, which is still a ballooning deficit, Mr. Speaker. And that 

justification for that has been, well we’re okay this year. We’ve 

got programming coming for this year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the people of Saskatchewan the 

Victims Fund is historically a very strained fund, and finding 

sufficient resources for it aren’t easy. And to take the attitude 

that, well we look like we’re okay on forest fires this year, we 

look like we’re okay on the Victims Fund this year, so we can 

pull this money back into general revenue and try to play a shell 

game with our deficit and our actual costs, Mr. Speaker, it is 

irresponsible. It is unbalanced and it is backward-looking. 

 

And I say backward-looking, Mr. Speaker, because on issues of 

deficit and on issues of debt we have seen this movie before. 

Maybe not the youngest of us have seen this movie before, but 

people of a certain age have seen this movie before. We saw it 

in the ’80s. We saw the deficits. We saw the debt and we saw 

the playing around with accounting rules, the attempts to hide 

deficits, mislead the people of Saskatchewan about the size of 

deficits, mislead people of Saskatchewan about how quickly the 

debt was growing. 

 

The difference, Mr. Speaker, is that people who played bit parts 

in that movie, like the Premier, are now playing major roles. 

And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, remakes are better than the 

original, but this is beginning to look like it’s not going to be. 

Mr. Speaker, this looks like it’s going to be just as bad. Just as 

bad, Mr. Speaker. But, you know, what we’re doing is so 

reminiscent of the playbook of the 1980s, the Grant Devine 

government. Underestimating debt, underestimating deficits, 

hiding debt and changing the rules, changing the way that you 

account for the rules, and raising — as members have said in 

the House, and I’m sure will continue to say throughout the 

next few weeks — raising concerns to the Provincial Auditor 

about what people can know and what people can trust about 

this budget. 

 

I said that the budget and the government were playing a shell 

game on deficits. They’re playing a shell game on debt, and 

thirdly they’re playing a shell game on taxation, Mr. Speaker. A 

government that likes to talk about its cut on income taxes, it 

doesn’t like to talk so much about its enormous tax rebate 

cheques back to the potash companies it had to write this year. 

 

But this is a government that wants to shift its deficits to other 

agencies, other levels of government, school boards, 

municipalities. It wants to shift the debt, if it can, outside of 

government to Crown corporations, and even outside of public 

debt or at least provincial public debt if it can, Mr. Speaker. 

And it wants to shift taxation away from the government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what municipal revenue 

sharing is and the broken promise in municipal revenue sharing 

is leading to at this moment. 

 

We’re seeing, across the province, municipalities raising 

property taxes in a way that they had been promised and 

therefore promised their own people they would not have to do. 

They’ve been promised a share of the PST. The PST hasn’t 

gone down. The PST is still 5 per cent. But because the 

government miscalculated on potash revenues, they are using 

that as an excuse to break the promise on municipal revenue 

sharing and so property taxes are going up. 

 

And I just want to say in respect to Saskatoon . . . And almost 

all my remarks are directed to the province as a whole, but 

many, many people who voted in the constituency of Saskatoon 

Meewasin thought that they were going to get, if the 

government changed, a $450 saving they were promised on 

their property taxes, specifically on the education proportion of 

the property taxes, Mr. Speaker. And I think some people, 

reluctantly in some cases, voted against me, Mr. Speaker, 

because they thought they needed that break on their property 

taxes. Well the reduction on their education property tax portion 

has been token in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I know some 

members opposite have had large percentage reductions in their 

constituencies, but in Saskatoon it was a token amount, Mr. 

Speaker. It wasn’t $450. 

 

And now on the non-education portion, the municipal portion, 

they’re seeing their property taxes go up. So across Saskatoon 

and throughout Saskatoon Meewasin that promise has been 

broken. It’s been broken to people I represent. It’s been broken 

to the people that my learned friend, the Minister of Justice, 

represents in Saskatoon Southeast. It’s been broken, Mr. 

Speaker. Their property taxes are going up. 

 

And because of the equity stripping of Crown corporations and 

pulling money out of the Crowns to try to bring down the 

deficit of the government and to bring down the government’s 

debt — although not the public debt because that just results in 

Crown corporation debt, Mr. Speaker — utility rates are going 

up. They’re going up particularly in electricity, but they’re 

going up in other areas as well, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not a tax, 

but it’s taking their place of a tax to a certain extent. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I’ve said it in this House before, and it becomes just truer 

every time I rise to speak on a budget, Mr. Speaker. Members 

opposite like to talk about how Saskatchewan is a have 

province. Well so do we, Mr. Speaker. It became a have 

province in an NDP administration. It was a have province for 

many years before the members opposite were elected as a 

government. But when was Saskatchewan last both a have 

province and the most affordable place to live in Canada? The 

year before this government got elected, Mr. Speaker. That was 

the last time that was the case. That was the last time that 

Saskatchewan was both a have province and the most 

affordable place to live. 

 

And one of the reasons that it no longer is, is because utility 

companies, Crown corporations of this province, are being used 

as a piggy bank by a government that is unable to manage the 

resources of government and government operations, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why we have deficit last year. That’s why 

we have a deficit this year. That’s why we’re going to have a 

deficit next year, Mr. Speaker. And these people opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, do not know how to quit eating those potato chips. 

 

Now the other issue, the other peekaboo game we’re playing on 



4526 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

taxation is in the harmonized sales tax, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Minister of Finance gets up today and says, we are not 

considering harmonizing the sales tax; I know that a few days 

ago I said we are going to debate that. We are going to take that 

as an issue into the next election, but I misspoke myself. We’re 

not actually considering any such thing. 

 

It reminded me of the now Minister of Health before the last 

election who said, we are not considering, we will not bring in 

essential services legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I have the same 

confidence in the Minister of Finance’s, I have the same 

confidence in the Minister of Finance’s assertions that what he 

said Friday he didn’t really mean, that I have, that I would have 

to have now in the Minister of Health’s assertions that he made, 

that he didn’t plan to bring in the legislation that they brought 

in. Was it Bill 5 or Bill 6? It was in their top ten, Mr. Speaker. It 

was in their top 10. And based upon that record, Mr. Speaker, I 

predict that the Saskatchewan Party’s return . . . 2011, 

harmonizing the sales tax will be in their top 10 because that is, 

that is the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Matter of fact, they are more, more confident. Minister of 

Finance is far, far more confident that that should be an issue 

that they would take forward, that they want to do, than they 

ever were on some of the other things they have done that they 

would deny that they would do when they got elected that they 

are doing now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we have a budget that is unbalanced, the second of at 

least three deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t know how 

they’re going to stop. It’s irresponsible, even taken at their 

word. And we know that the teachers aren’t going to get zero. 

This government may try, but we know they’re not going to get 

that. This government may try to give health care workers zero, 

but we know they’re not going to get that. So we know that this 

government has expenditures much greater, much greater than 

set out in the budget. And so year after year over three years, 

double-digit increase in spending from a party that said they 

would hold increases in government spending to 3 per cent a 

year, Mr. Speaker. They increase spending 3 per cent in a 

quarter, Mr. Speaker. It’s an irresponsible budget. We cannot 

continue down this path of deficit, debt, and mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it is a backward-looking budget, Mr. Speaker. We are 

seeing again the same fiddling with deficit numbers, the same 

fiddling with debt numbers, the same fiddling with revenues 

that we saw in the ’80s, Mr. Speaker. And in some cases, Mr. 

Speaker, the faces haven’t even changed; they’ve just grown 

older. And they’ve just gone from extras in the cast to front and 

centre in the case of the Premier, Mr. Speaker. He was here in 

the ’80s in the political staff of the government that ran these 

deficits that nearly bankrupt the province, and now he gets to 

play a starring role in the remake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The budget is . . . Dishonest I do not think is too strong a word 

for this budget, Mr. Speaker. I paused. I do not think it’s too 

strong a word for this. It is a shell game of a budget. It is a 

sleight of hand budget. It is not candid on either expenditures or 

revenues, Mr. Speaker, and I cannot support the government’s 

motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River, the 

Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased to enter into the budget debate today. And to 

start off with, I’d like to acknowledge and thank my staff in my 

office here in the legislature, my chief of staff, Rob Nicolay, my 

ministerial assistants, Bonnie and Linsay. And my 

administrative staff is Wendy and Tammy. Also at this time, I 

would like to thank my constituency assistants for all of their 

good work, Charlene and Sandy. 

 

And it’s appropriate I think, Mr. Speaker, to thank my family at 

this time. We’re on the road, as we all know, quite a bit, 

spending a lot of time in Regina, and I think it’s only 

appropriate to thank our families. So to my wife, Phyllis, and 

my sons and grandchildren who I don’t get to spend an awful 

lot of time with these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about my constituency 

and issues in the constituency that have come to front over the 

last numbers of years. And I will get into specifics on the 

budget later on, but right now I’d just like to talk a little bit 

about my constituency. 

 

For years, Mr. Speaker, for years the rural area was ignored by 

the previous administration. Highways were crumbling. 

Potholes were at a disgraceful level. Just total disregard for the 

rural areas of this province for a number of years. Mr. Speaker, 

I remember roads in my constituency, that potholes were so bad 

after a rain, one rain I was driving to the town of Climax and 

four ducks were swimming in a pothole in the highway. That’s 

how bad they were under the previous administration, and they 

did absolutely nothing about it. At that time the local people 

decided that they would do something about it, and they went 

out on their own and took product from the compound, with 

permission, and went and fixed the roads themselves. With 

100-and-some volunteers, they went out and fixed the road. 

That is the record of that previous administration to rural 

Saskatchewan roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have young people that have been 16 years old 

and never seen a paving machine in my constituency. That is 

totally unacceptable. Now that we have formed government, we 

actually have a very good road in the constituency of Wood 

River that has been paved, and that is a first time that they’ve 

had an opportunity to see a paving machine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I’m going to talk about the lack and the 

disrespect the previous administration had for rural 

Saskatchewan. We look at a drought that had happened and 

they would just totally ignore it — totally and I mean totally. 

They wouldn’t even go down and visit the drought areas. We 

come into power and one of the early things . . . we got to listen, 

and we did listen, to the people of my constituency and rural 

areas, and the Minister of Agriculture adopted the farm and 

ranch water infrastructure program. That has been just a real, 

real benefit to people in my constituency. 

 

The gopher initiative, nobody understands the gopher problem 

until you see it, and it is deplorable. And what was done? The 

Minister of Agriculture jumped to the forefront and had a 

poison that was authorized and sanctioned, and it has really 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4527 

helped. In fact the program is being extended for one more year. 

And this is just well received by everybody in my area where I 

live because the gopher problem is catastrophic there. They 

actually ruin ranch land. They destroy crops. I’ve seen where 

crops have been planted, and you’d swear it was summer 

fallow. It is actually been just cut bare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the coyote initiative also . . . and we get some 

pushback from some people. But until you are a livestock 

producer and you see the coyote problems when they start 

packing, and they will attack and kill sheep, lambs, a lot of 

calves. They’ll even go after colts. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

even had people in the Southwest that are very concerned 

because when these coyotes start to pack, you have a fear for 

your children because children out in the yard, these coyotes do 

not know that they’re just children, but they will attack 

children. And people are actually quite afraid of letting their 

kids out to play in some areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, businesses in my constituency, we have 

Whitemud that has actually suffered a little bit from the 

downturn in the world economy with their product, but it is a 

business that’s going to flourish. I’m very confident in that. 

And we have NuCoal. That is an industry that is looking at 

starting up in my constituency. And I’ve spoke to the 

proponents of this, and they look like this project is going to go 

ahead. And it’s the gasification of coal. And this would be a 

huge benefit for the province of Saskatchewan, but very 

specifically in my constituency it would be a real bonus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have other businesses starting all over the 

province, but in my constituency . . . Now one has to ask the 

question . . . is why would these businesses be coming into this 

province now? We have to be realistic and look at why 

businesses are happy to come into this province today, where 

they weren’t a few years ago. One of the reasons is because we 

have adopted a business-friendly climate for businesses to come 

into this province and to work in this province, 

business-friendly policies. For an example, repealing the potash 

nationalization Bill, that was huge because when people do due 

diligence coming into a province . . . When you do due 

diligence and you look and you see a then government that had 

a policy where they could nationalize any business, who would 

really want to come here? 

 

And let me add another little topic to that, Mr. Speaker. If you 

were a business person and doing due diligence and coming 

into the province and you read, you read a script that said, no 

NDP—CCF [New Democratic Party—Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] government will rest content until 

it has eradicated capitalism and put into operation a full 

program of socialized planning, if you were to read that doing 

due diligence, would you want to come into this province to do 

business? Well, Mr. Speaker, that happened to be a quote from 

the Regina Manifesto, their adopted Bible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another one of the reasons businesses are happy to 

come into our province today is because of the attitude. We 

have a positive, go-forward attitude. We’re not looking 

backwards in the rear-view mirror like members opposite. In 

fact the previous speaker just talked about backward looking. 

Well let me suggest, Mr. Speaker, they have an awful lot of that 

behind them, is looking backwards. They continue to look 

backwards on a regular basis. And the shell game he talked 

about, I’ll get onto that more later, but they are the champions, 

were the champions at looking backwards. They are the 

champions and were the champions of the shell game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the budget, this has been read into 

the record, but it’s worthwhile reading into the record one more 

time. I quote: 

 

Amid the ruin that has devastated most governments’ 

balance sheets, Saskatchewan stands as a beacon of light, 

tabling another balanced budget yesterday. The province 

has a tradition of fiscal rectitude that crosses party lines 

but what is encouraging about this budget is that the 

government has taken a pre-emptive stab at spending cuts, 

although times there are relatively good. Other 

jurisdictions could stand to learn from its example. 

 

I echo that, Mr. Speaker. I echo that. And because, and because 

our province is looking so good, Saskatchewan’s population has 

grown by more than 30,000 people in the past two years, its 

fastest rate of growth in any two-year period since 1929 to 

1931. Mr. Speaker, this is something we are proud of. We enjoy 

people coming into the province. We like to see this province 

grow, contrary to the years and years where the people on the 

other side when they were government chased people out of this 

province. They would do stuff to chase people out and I think 

we all have many, many stories about how they would put in 

policies that would drive people out of this province. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And on the budget, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worthwhile noting, 

we hear members opposite talk about the deficit. And I know 

my colleague and friend, the Minister of Finance, had explained 

it to him, but it’s very difficult explaining to members opposite 

when they have a one-track mind that does nothing but look 

backwards and non-progressive. 

 

But let’s be realistic about this. Here is a document, a green 

piece of paper, talks about a summary deficit of $701 million. 

That’s from the ’07-08 budget which happened to be the NDP 

budget. What did they call it? They call it the 14th consecutive 

balanced budget. Whoa, whoa, let’s think about this. It’s a 

deficit, but it’s a balanced budget. What are members opposite 

trying to say about today? But there is a difference, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to explain to some of the members opposite 

what the difference is. That was probably their best year was 

’07 and ’08. 

 

Let’s go back a little bit farther when the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund first come into being. It was a shell game and there’s no 

doubt about it. It was a shell game. Because what happened in 

those days, Mr. Speaker, for fourteen of those years? What they 

would do, they would borrow money. The debt would go up, 

but they would borrow money to put into this Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund that had zero dollars. There was no dollars in 

this fund. So they would borrow money, put it in the fund, take 

it out of the fund and say, we have a balanced budget. Well go 

figure. Just go figure. So how can anybody on that side with a 

straight face talk about the deficit budget of today? Mind you, 

mind you, knowing people over there I can understand how 

they can do it. 



4528 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about my ministry and some of the 

go-forward issues in my ministry. Our key priorities continue to 

make Saskatchewan a stronger, safer place to live. And we will 

see in Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing an 

additional $12.7 million in funding for programs and services 

this year. It’s an increase of 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now doing this, we will be completing or going forward with 

our plan to add 120 new police officers. We’ve added 60. Thirty 

more scheduled for this year. And I know there are members on 

that side of the House that have trouble counting, even up to 15 

in some cases, but having trouble counting, so 120 police 

officers over four years. I’ll help them with a little division 

here. That represents 30 per year and we’re on track to complete 

our 120 police officers in four years. We have initiatives to 

combat organized crime and gangs in Saskatchewan and we’re 

toughening security in prisons to crack down on drugs and 

gangs in jail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about a go-forward initiative that 

we’re working on and will be introducing and it’s the delegated 

administrative authority. And what this is is the establishment 

of an arm’s-length authority which will provide services 

currently delivered by CPSP’s [Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing] licensing and inspections branch. And the new 

authority will be called the Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan or TSASK, and we’ll get familiar with the phrase 

of TSASK over a period of time. And they will see more timely 

inspections of boilers, pressure vessels, and they will definitely 

be more responsive to industry. 

 

This again, Mr. Speaker, is another case where we inherited 

what one might refer to as a mess from the previous 

administration. We were in the vicinity, are in the vicinity of 

about 9,000 inspections behind. And this goes back to 

2003-2004 time frame — 9,000 inspections behind. What did 

they choose to do about it when they were government? 

Absolutely nothing. 

 

So this new technical authority when rolled out will provide 

industries with more involvement. We even have members on 

the other side — oh, oh that’s privatizing. Only the NDP would 

consider having industry involved in an organization to be 

privatizing it. I can’t understand their thought process at all. Of 

course there’s a lot of things I can’t understand about them. 

 

I’ve talked about our police services, the 120 new police 

officers, and I would like to remind people of this province a 

promise that was made in 1999. Do you remember? It was 200 

police officers. And what happened? Well they didn’t fulfill 

that by 2003 and they did not fill it through the next mandate 

neither. They did not complete their promise of 200 police 

officers. We are on road to complete ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also another initiative, and it was started under the 

previous administration — I don’t know where it would be now 

if they were still in power — but the PPSTN or the provincial 

public safety telecommunications network. And we have gone 

forward with this and we’ve done a number of initiatives which 

I doubt would have been carried out had we not been 

government. But this is going forward, and this is going 

forward helping out the small users, the small guys as we like to 

say. But this will be up and running, and it’s being used right 

now by SaskPower and the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] in areas, but it’ll be provincially up and running by the 

end of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the initiatives that we’ve done over the 

past while, the northern drug and gang enforcement unit, a 

seven-member unit with members of the RCMP and the Prince 

Albert Police Service, funded by us as a northern drug and gang 

agency. And this has been extremely, extremely effective, Mr. 

Speaker. They have had numerous, numerous successes, shall 

we say, already. In 2008 the additional funding for the 

combined forces special enforcement unit helped to fight gangs 

in the province. And we take gang and drug problems serious . 

And I say that again. We are very serious about curtailing gang 

issues and drug issues in this province. 

 

We have introduced the witness protection legislation that was 

passed in the spring of 2009 that’ll help crack down on crime. 

The SCAN or the safer communities and neighbourhoods 

investigator positions, we’ve added seven. We have funded 11 

officers in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert to form the 

ICE unit or the Internet child exploitation unit. And I don’t 

believe there is one person in this Assembly that would be 

against that unit, Mr. Speaker, because what it does, what it 

does, it protects our young children from people exploiting 

them on the Internet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do need to get to a couple of other issues before 

my time is up. It was brought up, it was brought up this 

weekend apparently at their convention on the other side, talked 

about — I don’t know if it was a hip shot or if it was planned — 

but they come up with a slogan. And their slogan was 

something like, you bet we can. And, Mr. Speaker, I found this 

passing strange because it seems to me, it seems to me there is 

an individual who is now the President of the United States that 

had that same motto: yes we can. That was President Obama. 

And I understand also that the Leader of the Opposition, when 

asked about that, said, oh I’ve used this all the time. I’ve used 

this long before Obama did. 

 

So I got thinking about it over the weekend and I got thinking, 

well maybe, just maybe the Leader of the Opposition had used 

this phrase before. Because I could see him and the rest of 

cabinet back in the earlier days, and they would sit there and 

say such things as, can we close 52 rural hospitals? You bet we 

can. Can we rip up GRIP [gross revenue insurance program]? 

You bet we can. Can we close 31 rural offices? You bet we can. 

Can we cut services to producers? You bet we can. Can we 

avoid funding CAIS [Canadian agriculture income 

stabilization]? You bet we can. Can we cut spot loss hail from 

crop insurance? You bet we can. Can we ignore drought in 

southwest Saskatchewan? You bet we can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have a feeling. I have a feeling that maybe 

the Leader of the Opposition has used this phrase before. I don’t 

want to take away from President Obama, but I think maybe 

that the Leader of the Opposition has used this phrase in the 

past because all of the devastating actions that he took against 

rural Saskatchewan, and I’m sure that they’d sit down and say, 

you bet we can hurt rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, when 

they closed the 31 rural offices, there was 22 extension offices 

in 2004 alone. They talk about cuts. There was 120 staff lost 

their jobs in 2004 — 120. Employees were told by those people 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4529 

not to focus on farmers, so no wonder there was cuts to the rural 

area when they’re told not to focus on farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was programs cut. Crop insurance and 

premiums went up; coverage went down. We know all about 

that. The hospital closures and crumbling highways, we 

definitely know about that. But there’s another aspect of where 

they probably used the phrase, you bet we can. Can we 

influence the potato market? You bet we can. So what did they 

do? They formed this organization called SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] and well 

for them it was a success. They only lost $35 million. 

 

Let’s look at, let’s look at what we . . . Can we lose money at 

Channel Lake? You bet we can. So they lost $15 million on 

Channel Lake. Mr. Speaker, when they sat around the table and 

said, can we control bingo in this province? We want to control 

bingo. Do you think we can control bingo? You bet we can. 

And what did they do? Just an $8 million loss, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How about, how about dot-coms? How about dot-coms where 

they would sit around and they could say, we’re going to put 

money into a whole pile of dot-coms. Do you think we can do 

that? You bet we can. And how successful were they? Can 

anybody on that side of the House show me one dot-com that 

was successful? I think not. There was none that were 

successful. 

 

How about one of our favourites? One of our favourites is 

Navigata. Navigata was a pretty famous one. You think we can 

invest a whole bunch of money outside of the province and lose 

it? You bet we can. Like to the tune of $80 million, give or take, 

10 million, whatever. They don’t care about that. They didn’t 

care about that. 

 

How about, can we invest in a pulp mill? Can we invest in a 

pulp mill or a mill in Meadow Lake? Can we invest and lose 

$800 million, Mr. Speaker? You bet we can. And you know 

thank goodness, thank goodness for the election in 2007 or they 

would have lost another 100 million. They were prepared to 

lose another $100 million on a mill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s an awful lot that we have that we do 

not want to follow in their footsteps. Mr. Speaker, this budget, 

this budget presents a very balanced budget. It’s a 

forward-looking budget. We look at also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we look at . . . Contrary to what members opposite will talk 

about, we paid down the debt by $2.4 billion. They talk about 

losing money, the deficit. We paid down $2.4 billion. They get 

up and get on their high horse and talk about, we left you a $1.2 

million in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, or the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund now it’s called. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Well right today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s over $700 

million in that fund and we’ve paid off debt by $2.4 billion, 2.4 

billion. We have people on the other side, I know they have 

math problems. I identified that earlier. Counting to 15, 

counting to 15 is a challenge for some people over . . . Even 

with help from the gallery, it was a challenge, counting to 15. 

So I know that there’s math problem issues over on that side of 

the House. 

But how can you, how can you laugh at reducing the debt by 

$2.4 billion? Mr. Speaker, this is a huge plus for the province of 

Saskatchewan, to the tune of about saving $67 million a year. 

That’s nothing to be sneezed at, saving $67 million. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re looking forward also. We do 

look forward. Our infrastructure budget this year is over $600 

million. And I describe the highways in my constituency. There 

are other constituencies that are the same. I won’t say worse 

because it couldn’t be much worse than in my constituency. But 

in the last three years — this will be our third budget — putting 

$3 billion into infrastructure, 3 billion. That was ignored. It was 

ignored. 

 

We have the member from Cumberland that was talking about 

health care in his constituency. Let me just go back — 52 

hospitals closed in the rural areas. I wonder. I wonder how, how 

important health care was to them when they were government. 

Mind you, he wasn’t there at the time, but now he gets up and 

says, you should fix all of the problems overnight. 

 

It is not going to happen. The infrastructure deficit we were left 

with was huge, billions and billions of dollars. Schools, schools 

with roofs that are leaking, hospitals that didn’t have air 

conditioning, hospitals that were closed, roads that were just 

impassable in some areas, and what did they do? The square 

root of you know what. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But we’re fixing them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Yes, and we’re fixing them. We’re 

going $3 billion worth, $177 million for municipal 

infrastructure. 

 

Now we talk about what they did, the downloading. For years 

they downloaded to the municipalities, years. Now they want to 

be the protectors of the municipalities by saying, you haven’t 

completed your 1 per cent of the PST. Well again math is a 

problem over there, but there is another budget in our mandate, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. That might be hard for them to 

understand, but a term is four years. We did pass that Bill here 

in the House. So a term is four years. We’re in our third budget. 

We’re in our third year. So I’d like members opposite to realize 

there is another budget and another year to go. 

 

Just to continue, Highway 11, 20 and the Lewvan interchange. 

Those are big dollars going into the highways. We have $161 

million for approximately 470 kilometres of highway 

construction. 

 

Get this, get this, in the rural highway strategy, the rural. I 

wonder if members over there even know where rural 

Saskatchewan is. I’ve said this before to a couple of the 

members when they talked about the southwest. They figure the 

southwest is that area south and west of the airport here where 

they’re building that new development. That was southwest to 

some of the members opposite because they have no idea where 

the southwest really is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is just so many good things in this budget, I 

could go on for an hour. But my colleague has suggested that I 

restrict my comments to a fixed period of time. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I will definitely be supporting this budget. I support it. 



4530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

I think it is just an absolutely great budget, and I will definitely 

be supporting this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour to stand in this Assembly today and speak about the 

2010-11 budget on behalf of my constituents, the constituents 

of Regina Coronation Park, and indeed I take the larger view on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. We all have critic areas 

and we all have interest, and this is the one time of the year 

when we can make comment on the entire budget, as opposed 

to restricting things to within our own constituencies or our own 

critic areas. This is the one chance we get to have a 

broad-ranging speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But first and foremost, I’m reminded of the good people that 

have elected me repeatedly out of the constituency of Regina 

Coronation Park. And I want to assure those great people that I 

genuinely am humbled, Mr. Speaker. There’s no other way to 

put it. I, most days, don’t think I deserve it, but I do try to 

represent them as best I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is about a government. I know we’ve 

heard much about trust. I say this is a budget that in some ways 

we can trust. We can trust the government opposite to declare 

war on working people. And they do so in this budget. More 

than 100 people fired budget day. More than 1,700 more are 

going to be fired over the coming four years. So we can trust 

the Sask Party government when they say they’re declaring war 

on working people, Mr. Speaker. And absolutely they’re 

delivering it in this very budget document. They’re delivering it 

to my constituents. They’re delivering it to people right around 

the province. And it’s a shame. 

 

We can trust this Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, to 

continue to deliver deficit budgets. By their own numbers, 

deficit budgets. There’s a $622 million deficit in their own, in 

their own numbers, the summary debt statement. More on that 

as my speech unfolds. We can trust this government to say 

they’re going to do one thing and to do something completely 

different. We can trust this Sask Party government to say one 

thing and do something completely different. 

 

We can trust this government to promise action on the 

environment. 2007, the last provincial election, we had a target 

of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 32 per cent from the 

base year of 2004. Well, Mr. Speaker, what did they say then? 

They said, us too. You can count on us, they said then. Us too. 

We accept that target. What are they saying now in this budget? 

What are they saying now about greenhouse gases? They’re 

saying, oh we have reduced it. It’s not 32 per cent from 2004, 

it’s 20 per cent reduction from 2006, a year when there was 

more greenhouse gases. A smaller reduction from a larger base 

year. We lose both ways, and of course the environment loses. 

 

And it’s a matter of trust, Mr. Speaker. It’s a matter of trust. 

And I say we can trust the Sask Party government to say one 

thing and do something completely different. That’s what 

they’re proving every day in every way. We can trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ask chiropractors. Ask the chiropractic association 

of Saskatchewan who negotiated a new contract in good faith. 

Who did they negotiate with? The Government of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not the opposition. Did the 

chiropractors negotiate with the opposition? No. They 

negotiated where they should, with the government, the people 

elected to look after health in Saskatchewan. They negotiated in 

good faith, Mr. Speaker, a contract. And it was a modest 

contract. I have to tell you, I was shocked at how little financial 

gain there was for chiropractors. But they had heard the 

government said, well, gee you know, we missed by $2 billion 

on our budget last year on one issue alone — potash. We 

missed by $2 billion. We got to tighten our belt, the government 

said. 

 

So the chiropractors said, well gee, you know, we look after 

some significant health problems for a significant number of 

people in Saskatchewan. We want to be part of the solution. 

This is our home too. We’ll be part of the solution. We’ll 

tighten our belts, and we’ll do our share. So they negotiated. 

The chiropractors signed the agreement. The Ministry of Health 

says, we’ll just get the minister to sign it, and Bob’s my brother. 

I think the saying is Bob’s my uncle, but in my case, Bob is my 

brother. So I changed that statement a little bit. 

 

But they signed . . . They didn’t sign, pardon me. The 

chiropractors signed in good faith. Negotiated and signed in 

good faith. And the government, budget day, budget day, 

announced no more funding for chiropractors. That’s in their 

budget, Sask Party budget. 

 

Did they say to a single chiropractor, a single chiropractic 

patient, a single person in this province of Saskatchewan that 

they were going to take away the funding for chiropractic 

services? Did they say that once in the 2007 election or in 

elections before that? No, Mr. Speaker, they did not. That’s the 

hard truth. They did not. 

 

Again I say, this is a budget about trust. We can trust the Sask 

Party government to say one thing coming up to an election and 

do something completely different when it comes to budget day 

to cover up their own mismanagement, their own fiscal 

incompetence, their own problems. And who pays the price, 

Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan, my constituents, 

and all of our constituents. What a shame that is, Mr. Speaker. 

What a shame that is. 

 

Ask corrections workers. You know, we’ve got a Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, that says they’re about law and order. 

Elect us, and we’re about law and order and respect for working 

people and respect for the law. That’s what they say. That’s 

what they say. 

 

What do they do? Well, Mr. Speaker, just — I think it was 

Friday — what did they do? Fired a corrections worker. Fired a 

corrections worker because there had been an issue brought to 

light. The issue around, I forget how many it is, but the 

umpteenth inmate, the umpteenth inmate that was released 

inappropriately, not by the opposition, by the Sask Party 

government administration. That’s who is responsible. That’s 

who’s responsible. But because there was some information got 

out, they go on a witch hunt. Fire a corrections worker. They 

had to blame someone, and certainly it wouldn’t be their fault, 

wouldn’t be the Sask Party government’s fault, Mr. Speaker. 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4531 

Have to take out the blame thrower, pick the low person on the 

totem pole. Fire the corrections worker. 

 

But get this: everything I’ve seen or heard or been told, they got 

a corrections worker that wasn’t involved in that particular 

issue. They got the wrong person. Even, like, if you accept, they 

should have . . . which we don’t, which we don’t. I mean, they 

talk about witness protection program. I heard the previous 

speaker talk about witness protection program. The only 

successful or even close-to-successful witness protection 

program in this province in the last decade has been the change 

of name from Conservative Party to Sask Party. But people are 

wising up. People are wising up to that, Mr. Speaker. People are 

looking at the budget and they’re saying, my goodness; this is 

just Grant Devine in a hurry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m one of the longest-serving members, 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], here. I was 

elected in 1986 when Grant Devine was premier. We missed 

narrowly defeating him in 1986. I’ll tell you, by 1991 the 

people of Saskatchewan did not repeat that. We won a massive 

majority in 1991, and I’ll tell you what I’m picking up around 

the province. What I am picking up around the province based 

on . . . People are increasingly now doing a comparison leader 

to leader. And let’s just do that for a second. 

 

Our leader, our leader: successful farmer, very successful 

farmer. In fact I’ve heard some people argue, suggest that 

perhaps he’s too successful. Pretty significant-sized farmer, 

successful farmer, has been for many, many years, a successful 

farmer. Successful in the business arena. He was vice-president 

of government relations for Nexen, an international oil 

company. As such he saw the world, interacted with many 

governments, many governments around the world. Many 

governments, good, bad, and indifferent, but he was successful 

in that right up until the time he came back to be leader, to get 

elected in a race, in a contested race. Became the elected leader 

of the New Democratic Party. Successful, our leader, in any 

way you want to measure it. 

 

Contrast that with the leader of the Sask Party. Contrast that. 

What’s his government experience? Well Premier — and we’re 

seeing that. People will pass judgment on that soon, maybe 

soon enough. Certainly by 2011 they’re going to get a perfect 

opportunity to pass judgment on the job the Premier’s done as 

premier. But what about his past? 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he was involved in government. He was a 

ministerial assistant in the Grant Devine government. That’s 

where he cut his teeth. That’s where he learned, was under the 

Grant Devine administration. And it’s a matter of public record 

the things that went on then. It’s even a matter of public record 

some of the things that the Premier was involved in signing for 

then. That’s public record, Mr. Speaker. You can’t hide from 

public record. That’s his history. Talk about our leader’s past; 

let’s talk about the Premier’s past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about businesses, our leader — 

successful business person, very successful business person. 

What’s the Premier’s business record? Two failed businesses. 

Couldn’t sell country music to the people of Swift Current, for 

heaven’s sakes. Swift Current, which was my original city. I 

grew up kind of a stone’s throw from Swift Current. It was the 

first city that I called my city because that’s where we went to 

do our shopping when we went from the farm at Beechy. We 

were going to the big city and we’d go into Swift Current. And 

I say that fondly. I don’t say that to denigrate Swift Current. It’s 

a fine community, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very fine community and 

it’s going to have a great future as is the rest of Saskatchewan. 

 

But here we are again now, Mr. Speaker. Again we have the 

Minister of Finance talking after the budget. To who? The 

chamber of commerce in Saskatoon. And what comes out? Well 

we’d welcome a discussion around harmonization of the sales 

tax. And then I’m sure I heard earlier today in question period, I 

am sure I heard that well, it was said that we don’t understand 

the issue because a shift to a harmonized PST/GST [provincial 

sales tax/goods and services tax] simply shifts from business to 

individuals. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, were it only that simple, we could have that 

discussion. But you know what? There’s no PST on reading 

material. There’s no PST on medication and health products. 

There’s no PST on restaurant meals. Credit the restaurateurs of 

Saskatchewan for letting us know when we were in government 

that that was a non-starter. Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope the 

restaurateurs are saying to the Sask Party today as loudly as 

they did and as effectively as they did to us, no, the 

harmonization is a non-starter. They do not want PST on 

restaurant meals. We do not want PST on medications and 

health supplies, and we do not want PST added to the cost of 

reading material and learning material and books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve wrestled with that issue. And while it’s fair 

that governments and oppositions, political parties should 

consider these things, it’s interesting that the Minister of 

Finance comes out with that right after he delivers this, this 

deficit budget, this $622 million deficit. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No, it’s bigger than that. It’s bigger than 

that. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the critic for 

Finance, says it’s bigger than that, and of course he’s right. Of 

course he’s right. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sometimes size does matter. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Absolutely. And size matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things I noted as I’m going through the budget 

documents is that in opposition, in opposition the Sask Party 

was fond of talking about hidden debt. They were fond of 

talking about debt in pensions, Mr. Speaker. And I noted that in 

this budget document, this year pension debt is going up by 

$290 million. That’s the obligation of the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. Two hundred and . . . not declared in the budget. 

Why? Because it’s pushed off into the future. 

 

And by the very arguments that the Sask Party have used in 

previous years, Mr. Speaker, it’s part of the debt. And there’s 

no one, I think even in the government side, saying that we can 

turn our back on the pension obligations. But it’s surely part of 

the debt. 



4532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

Now what’s the history, Mr. Speaker? Well last year, last year 

they projected that they were going to get $1.9 billion from 

potash. Can you imagine? The previous, the previous all-time 

record, the previous year, the all-time record was one and a half 

billion, was one and a half billion dollars. So you know, it’s 

like, it’s like if my top earning year — I’m just . . . It’s more 

than that, but — if it was $15,000 and I said, well that’s the best 

year I’ve ever had of personal earnings, so next year I’m going 

to earn 20,000 doing the same job, running the same business. 

How absurd when the historic level is, I may have earned, like, 

5,000. Just shifting the numbers to put it into the context. 

 

But while the budget document last year said we’re going to get 

$1.9 billion, the Minister of Energy was saying things like, oh it 

could be $3 billion or higher. Well you know, I guess, it could 

be, Mr. Speaker, but it wasn’t. It wasn’t. 

 

The sorry reality again, again shown in this budget . . . We 

didn’t put it together on this side. Put together by members of 

the other side. This budget put together by the Sask Party 

government, what’s the record? It isn’t that we collected 1.9 

billion. It’s that we wrote a cheque to the potash companies for 

$204 million. That’s $200 for every man, woman, and child. 

We . . . [inaudible] . . . the cheque, gave it to the potash 

companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been, I’ve been more than 23 years 

participating in debates in this legislature. It’ll be 24 years if I 

make it to this fall, and I expect to make it. Mr. Speaker, in all 

that time I’ve watched governments all around the world, all 

around the world. I’ve listened to the best. I’ve listened to the 

worst. I have never, never, ever seen any government, not the 

worst government in the world, miss on its biggest single 

revenue projection by more than 110 per cent. Missed it, not by 

that much — more than 110 per cent. 

 

Nowhere, nowhere in this world can you find an example like 

that, Mr. Speaker, nowhere in the world. I defy members of the 

Sask Party, show me a government, any government, anywhere 

in the world, that’s that incompetent. Show me one example, 

just one example. 

 

An Hon. Member: — SPUDCO. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Oh, Mr. Speaker. Oh, Mr. Speaker. I asked the 

Sask Party for an example of any government in the world that 

could miss their biggest single revenue projection by more than 

110 per cent, and I hear the broken record from members 

opposite. They say SPUDCO. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? In government, New 

Democrats built potato buildings — barns, I guess you call 

them potato barns — where there was irrigation. We created, 

built on a very small potato industry, made it many times 

bigger. And you know what? There’s not a single one of those 

barns not in use, not one of them. 

 

Absolutely they were built. Absolutely they were sold, but 

absolutely. And we lost money. We lost money on them but we 

built, we built an industry, we built an industry, a potato 

industry in rural Saskatchewan. We made it, made it much 

better, and I’m very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. We made some 

mistakes in how we sold it. I argue we should have said at every 

turn that we were investing money in rural Saskatchewan to 

build an industry, and we did build a potato industry. 

 

But there’s, I want to point out there’s a difference between a 

relatively few millions of dollars, a relatively few millions of 

dollars and $2.2 billion. And I mean their biggest single source 

of revenue and they missed it by 110 per cent. Nowhere, 

nowhere, but nowhere, will they find an example of such 

incompetence. It’s just absolutely unheard of. 

 

If there’s one reason not to trust the Sask Party government, if 

there’s one reason to boot them out from office, if there’s one 

reason to just end them, put them out of their misery so we can 

get on with building a viable Saskatchewan, so we can get back 

to balanced budgets, so we can deliver on health care, so we can 

deliver on a whole bunch of things that are important to people, 

if there’s one single overwhelming issue, it’s that gross 

mismanagement, that absolute bungling of the potash file, 

absolutely unbelievable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I looked at this year’s budget. And what do they 

say about non-renewable resources, potash being one of them? I 

want to just share that in total they took the total amount we got 

from non-renewable resources last year — that’s the discounted 

number, this is the real number — they took that and they added 

20 per cent for this year’s budget. Can you imagine that? I’m 

not sure they’ve learned their lesson. 

 

They took last year’s earnings, what the Government of 

Saskatchewan got from non-renewable resources, and added 20 

per cent. And that’s the number pencilled in, not in the budget 

document we created, but in the budget document that the Sask 

Party presented short days ago. Twenty per cent increase that 

they’re projecting, and these again are wishes. And we wish 

them luck. We wish them success. We wish. We hope. We 

wish, but my goodness, Mr. Speaker, there’s not much, not 

much belief in the accuracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to income and sales, I’ll do a little 

summation of what’s going on in this year’s budget with respect 

to income and sales tax. And when you look at the total of 

income and sales in this budget, it’s up $80 million this year 

over last. But let’s break it down a little bit. Let’s break it down 

a bit. 

 

What we have is individual income. That’s the taxes I pay as an 

individual, each of us pay — our neighbours, our parents, our 

sons and daughters, our neighbours, our constituents — as 

individuals pay. Individual income tax is up $75 million out of 

that total 80 million. Seventy-five million comes from 

individuals’ pockets — 75 million. 

 

And I don’t know a single corporation that smokes. Well they 

pollute but smoke tobacco . . . Tobacco’s up $36 million in this 

budget. Sales tax is up $56 million. Well I’ve just described a 

whole lot of things that affect my constituents, my neighbours, 

myself, my family. A whole lot of things going up. 

 

But oh, oh I see corporate income tax is down $118 million — 

$118 million. Does that reflect any cuts in corporate income 

tax? Were there cuts in corporate income tax in this budget? No. 

No, there were not. So why would corporate income tax be 

down $118 million, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s pretty self-evident. 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4533 

Despite the Premier cheerleading with his pompoms, 

cheerleading that Saskatchewan’s not going to participate in the 

worldwide recession, despite his cheerleading, clearly 

Saskatchewan businesses are participating. 

 

Saskatchewan businesses didn’t listen to the Premier. 

Saskatchewan businesses have something called reality that 

they have to deal with. When Saskatchewan businesses open 

their doors and they’re selling some goods or services, they 

have to attract customers in. And they do a darn fine job by and 

large. But they have a certain reality that the Sask Party 

government doesn’t seem to have connected with yet. And that 

reality is that they’ll only get their share of what dollars are 

available. And the hard truth is, when you have a government 

that creates the uncertainty that the Sask Party has, when you 

have a government that misses on its biggest, single revenue 

projection for last year by 110 per cent, this does not create 

confidence — not in the business community, not in the 

individual community. 

 

And then how do they come at that? Well you know, the 

number of cabinet ministers is the same. The number of hacks 

and flacks in government, if anything, is up. And I want to tell 

you how I have come to realize that it is up, Mr. Speaker. There 

was over 100 people got pink slips as a result of the budget that 

was delivered last week. More than 100 people in 

Saskatchewan. In one department alone, it lost nearly 10 

people, 10 positions I should say. Here’s . . . 

 

[16:00] 

 

An Hon. Member: — Holy. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well holy, holy the member says. Holy. This is 

people. This is people that Sask Party members may represent, 

we certainly represent. This is people that have husbands, 

wives, children, parents, grandparents, neighbours, friends — 

but this is people. These are real people, Mr. Speaker, that get 

up in the morning, and they’ve gone to work for quite some 

time saying, how can I earn my pay today? How can I do my 

job today? And the Sask Party members say, well holy, 10, like 

it’s nothing, Mr. Speaker, like it’s nothing. 

 

Well just wait till we bring some of them in here and let them 

look them right in the eye and say your job is nothing. The fact 

that you don’t have any income, it’s nothing. The fact that the 

bank is going to repossess your home, it’s nothing. The fact that 

you had to walk here because you lost your car because you 

couldn’t make the payments, it’s nothing. Laugh all you want. 

The people will not be laughing at the next election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The people do care. The people want a government that 

represents them. The people want a government that does care. 

They don’t want 100 pink slips. They don’t want 100 pink slips. 

They don’t want that, Mr. Speaker. And they don’t want 1,700 

pink slips over the next 4 years — 1,700 pink slips. I want to 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what we’re about. That’s not 

what New Democrats are about — never ever have been, never, 

never. 

 

The absolutely — and I will say this part — the absolute worst 

time in my life was the last time we took over from a right wing 

government. The absolute worst time was when we realized that 

we could not, we could not reach a balance. We realized, Mr. 

Speaker, that . . . And members scoff at this, and to their shame 

and discredit because if you won’t learn from history, we’re 

doomed to repeat it. And you’re well on the road to repeating 

that Grant Devine history, that history, Mr. Speaker, when we 

formed government and had nothing, no tools left. They had 

stripped the retained earnings out of the Crowns, exactly like 

they’re doing this year where 100 per cent of the retained 

earnings for this year out of the Crown corporations are being 

stripped, Mr. Speaker, stripped and put into the General 

Revenue Fund — 768 million, all of the earnings for this year. 

And this on top . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What? 

 

Mr. Trew: — What? That’s in your budget. And, Mr. Speaker, 

last year, last year, they didn’t take 768. They took 1.246 

billion, some 570 million more last year. Well how was that 

possible, you might ask. And here’s how it is. Last year there 

was a major investment that was sold, that being Saskferco, that 

was held as a Crown corporation. They sold that, snafued all of 

the money into the GRF to try and minimize their debt, their 

deficit, last year. Sell off the assets just in a desperate, desperate 

attempt not to have to show the real picture which was their 

spending was out of control and their revenue projections were 

even wilder than their spending. 

 

What a shame, Mr. Speaker. We have a government that . . . I 

wish I could stand here, I wish I could stand here like I did. And 

I invite people to look — government members and others — to 

look at my first speech when they first formed government, my 

first speech, which was one of congratulations and one of 

wishing them well, one of wishing the Sask Party government 

just that they could deliver what they had promised or some 

semblance thereof, wishing that they could do the things for 

people that we should want to do. 

 

And the reality is, Mr. Speaker, I’m standing here and if I’m 

looking angry, it’s because I am. And I’m not angry for me; I’m 

angry for my constituents. I’m angry for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I am angry for the future. I’m angry that we are 

stuck in a mudhole with the Sask Party and their 

622-million-plus deficit. And where are they going? They say, 

higher. And I think they are. The deficit’s not going to stop at 

$622 million, no more than it has any other time all through 

history, all through history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at the Conservatives, the forerunner of the Sask Party. 

And you know, I remember, I remember very well the very first 

budget that they delivered in 1982, and Bob Andrew delivered 

the first deficit budget that we’d seen in Saskatchewan in my 

lifetime — the first deficit budget. And he said this is the most 

intelligent budget in Canada. Maybe in fact it’s the most 

intelligent budget in North America. Those were his words. 

Look them up. That’s your history. That’s not ours. That’s your 

history. Look them up, Mr. Speaker, and you will find that that 

most intelligent budget, that first deficit budget was the start of 

the long and slippery slope. And in 11 sad, sorry Tory years, 

Mr. Speaker, what was the record? Deficit piled on deficit piled 

on deficit piled on deficit, and it got worse and it got worse and 

it got worse. And that’s just a matter of public record. 

 



4534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

And they stripped all of the retained earnings out of the Crown 

corporations. The first year, when we took office in 1991, we 

had to pump money from the taxpayers and put it into the 

Crown corporations because they were beyond broke. We had 

to transfer money from taxpayers to the Crown corporations. 

That’s the legacy. Look it up. It’s just a matter of public record. 

It’s a matter of history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I say to you, as I say to everyone, the people of 

Saskatchewan are not going to be fooled again. They will not 

go through this. This Premier is determined to make the Sask 

Party a one-term government. I want to tell you, I am very 

determined. Can we do it? You bet we can. You bet we can. We 

can. We can. The Minister of Energy says we’ll see. Well you 

bet we’ll see. You bet we’ll see because you bet we can. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s an excitement out and about. 

 

I’ve talked, I’ve talked numbers and I’ve talked about the 

deficit. I’ve talked about the sorry Tory past. I’ve talked about 

the sorry Sask Party current. I’ve talked about all of that. But 

how does this affect, how does this affect the people? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Sask Party members, many of whom are elected in 

rural Saskatchewan, got elected on a significant promise to fix 

health care, Mr. Speaker, to fix health care. Now I hear the 

member for Wood River who spoke just before me . . . was 

berating us for, I think his terms are, we closed 51 hospitals. 

Well you know, you inherited $2.3 billion when you took 

office. Show me one hospital you’ve opened. Oh, oh, this is a 

problem for them now, Mr. Speaker. We give them billions of 

dollars to do what you would think they were about and what’s 

the result? What’s the result? 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to fix hospital wait-lists. 

They’re going to fix hospital wait-lists. Wait-lists for surgery is 

what I’m really referring to, not hospital wait-lists, wait lists for 

surgery. What’s the situation in Sun Country, the Premier’s own 

constituency, Swift Current, that great city, that wonderful city 

that I was so proud to call my first city? And I’m still happy to 

go and visit Swift Current. What’s the situation in Sun Country? 

The wait-list for surgeries in Swift Current has gone almost 

double under the Sask Party, almost double. 

 

Just go onto the Ministry of Health website and you’ll see that, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m not making this up. It’s too good to make up. 

Truth is just too good. We could just speak the truth. That’s all 

we have to do, speak the truth, because Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, what’s the situation? 

 

I’ve already talked about chiropractors. I didn’t talk about the 

over half the health care workers that have now been well over 

a year without a contract. Well over half the health care workers 

that work in hospitals in long-term care, that work in all aspects 

of delivering health and health care service and wellness model 

to the people of Saskatchewan, over half of these people have 

been over a year without a contract. And the contract offer is 

miserly, to put it gently, Mr. Speaker, miserly. 

 

But I say to those people, those people that are still trying to 

negotiate, I’d say to them or I’d ask them this. Why would you 

bother trying to negotiate with the Sask Party government? 

Based on the chiropractors’ experience, the chiropractic 

association of Saskatchewan sat down, negotiated in good faith 

with the Sask Party government, their Ministry of Health, 

negotiated in good faith a collective agreement. The 

chiropractors signed it. The Ministry of Health said, yes we 

agree with this. This is what we’re supposed to get. So the 

chiropractors signed it. Off it went to the minister to sign. And 

budget day, no funding for chiropractors. So what’s the point in 

negotiating? 

 

This is a matter, this is a matter of trust. As I said earlier, we 

have a Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, that absolutely we 

can trust. We can trust them to negotiate with chiropractors and 

then say, oh just kidding. And not even . . . Well they didn’t 

even have to tear up the contract. They didn’t sign it, didn’t sign 

it. Negotiated in good faith, didn’t sign it. 

 

We have a Sask Party government that said they’re going to 

declare war on working people, and you bet they are. Yes they 

are. Yes they are. 

 

We have before this Legislative Assembly a Bill called Bill 80. 

This is dealing with construction trades and how it’s organized. 

And what it’s doing is taking away the workers’ rights to pick 

their union. And the words that are used are the opposite of 

what the Sask Party say, but they . . . I tell you, friends, I tell 

you I’ve talked to . . . I have many friends in the construction 

trades. They know better. They’re organizing themselves as 

best they can. 

 

You see the signs up every day in many, many places: “No to 

Bill 80.” Well that isn’t the government that’s saying no to Bill 

80. That’s the Saskatchewan building trades people saying no. 

And it is a shame. It is a shame, Mr. Speaker, that this goes on. 

 

And I hear the hon. member for Estevan talking from her seat 

about my daughter-in-law. And you know, Mr. Speaker, if I 

ever heard a veiled threat in this Legislative Assembly, I just 

heard it. I just heard it. I just heard it, Mr. Speaker. If I ever, 

ever . . . I can’t believe it. I can’t believe it. I’ve a son and a 

daughter who are making Estevan their home. They get up, both 

of them, go to their respective work. They’re both trying to be a 

positive part of that community. They’re both doing great work. 

I’m intensely proud of them both. I’m so proud of my son for 

picking my daughter-in-law to be his partner. And then this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, to say . . . I think I’ve said it. I absolutely trust 

the Sask Party to say one thing and do something else. They 

have a history of it with chiropractors. They have a history of it 

with health care workers. They have a history of it with 

essential services. Can you imagine in health care, Mr. 

Speaker? There’s an essential services Bill before this 

Assembly. And we know that what the government is 

demanding, what the Ministry of Health is demanding, is if 

there is a work dispute, if there’s a strike, there will be more 

people at work during the strike, more unionized people at work 

during the strike than there is today. 

 

We also know that every single day across this province, some 

health care workers are unable to report to work. They’re sick. 

They’re hurt. They have issues that simply prevent them from 

returning to work. And I’m not saying it’s the same person 

every day. This is just part of life. We all have those days. We 

all have those days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4535 

But isn’t it something that we have a situation where when you 

can have somebody sick, the Ministry of Health doesn’t replace 

them. But if there’s a strike, they have to be there or risk 

significant fines. Isn’t it a sad, sad state of affairs when the Sask 

Party government is proposing legislation that says, during a 

strike there’s got to be more unionized people at work during 

the strike than there is on a regular day today. 

 

Boy, oh boy. That’s a government that sure is standing up to, to 

working people. That’s a government, that’s a government that 

is very clear on where they stand with respect to the women and 

the men that get up every day and deliver health care — in this 

instance, that look after our parents, our grandparents, ourselves 

when we wind up in the hospital. This is a government that 

doesn’t like hearing this message. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? Don’t like the message? 

Pull that essential services legislation. Pull that nonsensical 

piece of legislation. Pull it and show working people, show the 

people in the health care system you value them. Show them 

that you actually respect them. Respect them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments, governments demand respect, but I 

tell you this, I’ve learned it from the 16-plus years we were in 

government. You can demand all you want, and you might get 

it frontally, but you earn respect. Governments must earn 

respect every day and in every way. And that’s not to say that 

every individual always agrees with the decisions you made, 

but you have to have the courage to go and face the people that 

you’re making these decisions, to talk to them and explain. Say, 

this is why we’re doing this; this is what it’s about. But what’s 

the government say? They’re saying things like, it’s our way or 

the highway, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the Sask Party is saying. 

That’s what the Sask Party is saying. And what a shame that is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Crown corporations, the 

government is stripping all of the retained earnings this year. 

All of them with the exception of Sask Power, and they don’t 

have to do that because they stripped Sask Power last year. So I 

guess you know, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that in Sask 

Power our rates have gone up 20 per cent in two years? Ask any 

farmer. Ask any farmer: 20 per cent raise in their power rates in 

two years under a Sask Party government. 

 

Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, with their record on stripping 

dividends that SaskEnergy, the people of Saskatchewan — 

despite the fact that we have huge natural gas resources, we 

have massive natural gas resources, despite that — the 

consumers of SaskEnergy gas pay amongst the very highest rate 

of consumers in all of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been that way right since they had the 

opportunity to make their first rate change when the Sask Party 

formed government. It has been that way. And I’ll tell you, 

historically that’s not the way it has been. Historically we have 

enjoyed amongst the very lowest natural gas rates for 

consumers in all of Canada, amongst the very lowest in all of 

Canada virtually every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a sad, sad day to be standing here and to 

have so much ammunition to talk about a government budget. 

What a sad situation. I can’t believe that we have a government 

that is so callous to working people. They’ve fired, fired . . . 

I can’t believe we have a government, Mr. Speaker, that 

balances the budget, how? They take 30 million out of the 

forest fire fighting budget out of the Department of 

Environment and say, oh well this year — despite the fact that 

in BC [British Columbia] they’ve had an incredibly dry year — 

we’ve not had a huge amount of snow in the North where the 

forests are. Despite that, they’re talking a gamble, taking a 

gamble this year that they’re going to be able to pull 30 million 

out of the forest fire fighting budget. 

 

We have a government . . . Well, and you know what? The 

thought just occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, maybe, maybe that’s 

not an unreasonable thing for a Sask Party government to do. 

We have a member from P.A. [Prince Albert] in here that said a 

vote for Hickie, in his campaign the quote is, a vote for Hickie 

is a vote for the mill. Well that mill is long, long gone under the 

Sask Party government. Long, long gone. 

 

We have a forestry industry, or we used to have a forestry 

industry that was proud, that provided tens of thousands of jobs 

throughout this province, that provided some opportunity for 

people, primarily people of the North. But people, certainly 

Prince Albert, where I was this weekend for the New 

Democratic Party convention, Prince Albert is feeling the 

effects. It’s a beautiful city, but you cannot strip all of those 

jobs out of the pulp mill, all of those great-paying jobs out of 

the pulp mill and the forestry industry. People that lived right 

near Prince Albert, you can’t strip that out of that economy 

without the people of Prince Albert feeling it. And so maybe 

it’s reasonable, maybe it’s reasonable if you have so little 

respect for the forest, that you’d pull 30 million from 

firefighting. 

 

What’s less reasonable, what’s less reasonable, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the Sask Party would have a motion at their annual 

convention. We just came through our annual convention. They 

have . . . It was one of five. One of five motions. Can you 

imagine? They were stellar motions, I’m sure, because one of 

the five motions was that the Sask Party government would 

create a forestry centre in Prince Albert. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, if I have a look of bewilderment, 

it’s because I can’t believe that the member for Prince Albert or 

the Minister of Environment or any of the other bright lights in 

the Sask Party wouldn’t have realized, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t 

have realized there’s a forestry centre in Prince Albert. And my 

goodness, it was built under the New Democratic Party 

administration. But my goodness, that doesn’t mean that they 

can’t give some credit for things that at least happened, or at 

least not give us the opportunity to stand up and crow and say, 

we cared about the forestry sector enough that we built the 

forestry centre in Prince Albert. 

 

And then one of their five Sask Party resolutions says, we 

should build a forestry centre . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes. Good point. Mr. Speaker, I want to say of this budget, of 

this budget, which is what we’re discussing . . . SCN. SCN, at 

least, you know, I’ve made some comparisons — the Sask Party 

to the Grant Devine Conservative Party. Grant Devine was a 

builder, for heaven’s sake. He put together SCN. He ran up 

debt, but he at least had some things to show for it — SCN, 

Saskatchewan broadcasting corp. And it’s gone, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s gone. 



4536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

But along with what is gone at SCN, distance education which 

was provided out of SCN, now is going to be picked up 

SaskTel. Now when we pay our phone bill, SaskTel is going to 

. . . part of that will be the distance ed. And distance ed is 

something that has to be delivered. Well at least that’s what 

we’ve always operated under the belief on this side, that we 

needed, we needed to look after all of Saskatchewan and 

provide, as much as reasonably possible, services. 

 

We need things for my grandchildren that live near a small 

town. And this is not my ones in, my children that live in 

Estevan. This is my children that live in another part of the 

province and farm, and my grandchildren who are attending a 

small school that relies on distance education for some of the 

courses, some of the classes. 

 

This small school, Mr. Speaker, where they have some 

teachers’ assistants, this small school where there’s some 

teachers’ assistants . . . And I want to tell you that those TAs 

[teaching assistant], the teacher, the principal, the parents are 

concerned. They’re all concerned. They’re all concerned that 

the TAs are going to be cut, á la the Sask Party study and their 

memo saying they’re going to cut drastically the number of 

teachers’ assistants. 

 

And the parents whose children are being helped by teachers’ 

assistants, and the teachers who recognize that help and who are 

so grateful because it gives them the opportunity to make sure 

that those individual students learn what they can, and it allows 

the teacher to make sure that the other students learn what they 

can, these people are all very, very concerned. I can tell you 

they are. I know it first-hand. 

 

I know it first-hand, Mr. Speaker. I’ve a daughter who’s a 

teacher’s assistant. I’ve a daughter. I’ve a daughter being hurt 

by this very Sask Party. I see her community hurt by this very 

Sask Party government. I tell you, she lives in a constituency 

that currently is held by the Sask Party, but they don’t deserve 

to get re-elected there. They do not deserve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list of things goes on and on with respect to 

this government. I did not get, I did not get, and I want to . . . 

The government, the government got elected on a promise that 

they were going to address the shortage of doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan. Members opposite will remember this very 

promise that you’re going to fix and resolve the shortage of 

doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I hear, how’s the track record on that one? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s this. In the spring of 2007, spring of 2007, there 

was 84 vacancies in rural Saskatchewan, doctor vacancies. Well 

what’s the situation today? I wish it was improved, but there’s 

125 — 125 vacancies. It’s more than 50 per cent. It’s 50 per 

cent plus two doctors, if you do the math. It’s more than 50 per 

cent. Two of them were last week’s since the numbers that we 

last saw. If you check the website from the Ministry of Health, 

it’s getting worse and worse and worse. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you can use whiteout. The government can 

use whiteout in the budget all they want, but they can’t hide the 

fact that rural hospitals have to put garbage bags over their 

signs when they’re out of order, when they’re out of order 

because there’s no doctor there. They can’t do the emergency. 

Why? No attending physician. And that’s 125 vacancies versus 

84 in the spring right after the Sask Party got elected. 

 

Well you know, they keep saying, I hear the Minister of Health 

saying, we’re working on it. We’ve got a plan and we’re 

working on it. You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s not much 

comfort. I tell you I wish they’d quit working on it, because the 

things they’re working on are just going . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Backwards. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Backwards. Thank you. That’s a much more 

generous way of saying than what the thought entered my mind, 

Mr. Speaker. The things the Sask Party is working on are going 

backwards. 

 

They promised they’re going to open the mill in P.A. Well the 

machinery’s gone. Domtar has left and said no, we’re just 

absolutely not interested. Not at all. No way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got over half the unionized workforce in 

health care facilities that have been operating now a significant 

amount of time without a collective agreement. Instead of 

giving them a collective agreement, what this government has 

chosen to do is introduce essential services that says if you 

strike, if there’s a dispute, if there’s a labour dispute, if we lock 

you out or you go on strike, either way we have to have more 

unionized people at these health centres during the labour 

dispute than there is today when there’s no dispute. 

 

And I just don’t understand how anyone of sound mind can 

think that that’s somehow good public policy. Mr. Speaker, this 

is a Sask Party government that does not understand working 

women and working men, does not understand what their 

inherent rights are. Working people sell their labour, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what they have to negotiate with. They don’t 

own the business. They sell their labour. But it has to be an 

equal and fair exchange. You can’t make it all lopsided, as in 

this case. 

 

You can’t say, oh well the high and mighty government knows 

it all because, you know, Mr. Speaker, government doesn’t 

know it all. Government doesn’t know it all, and we sure see 

that now. 

 

[16:30] 

 

We are seeing a budget, Mr. Speaker, that I want to tell you can 

be trusted. The government can be trusted to declare war on 

working people. They’re showing that. Every day in every way, 

they’re declaring war. 

 

We can trust the Sask Party government to continue delivering 

deficit budgets. They did last year; they’re doing it this year — 

by their own numbers, $622 million this year. Next year the 

deficit is going to go bigger. We can trust this Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, to say one thing and to do something 

completely different. They’ve done it consistently. 

 

We can trust this Sask Party government to take one of the 

biggest issues of the day — the environment — and in 2007 

when the Sask Party was campaigning, they said, yes we agree 

with the New Democrats’ target, 32 per cent reduction in 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4537 

carbon dioxide emissions and greenhouse gases based on the 

year 2004. They said, we agree with it; we will . . . You just 

elect us, and by gosh we’ll deliver on that promise. What 

happened? 

 

Well now the latest is — there’s been two slides later, two 

slides later — the latest is they’re saying, we’ll reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions not by 32 per cent but by 20 per cent. 

And we’re not going to use 2004 as the base year, we’re going 

to use 2006 year with a higher baseline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government that says one thing, and we 

can trust them to deliver something different. Although I want 

to be, I want to be among the very few that points out with 

respect to this promise, this very much watered down and 

reduced promise with respect to the environment, they haven’t 

delivered a darn thing, and I’m afraid they’re not going to. 

They’ve not delivered a darn thing and that’s a shame. That is 

just a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a government that delivered more than 100 pink slips 

in the budget that affect real people, that affect real people — 

my neighbours, my constituents, my family, my friends. We 

have a government that promised in this budget delivered on 

Wednesday last week, that they promised that there would be 

1,700 more reduction, pink slips delivered over the next four 

years — 1,700 more bad news things. 

 

We have a government that said, we trust, we value 

chiropractors. And they negotiated a new collective agreement 

with chiropractors right up to the point where chiropractors 

signed the agreement and it went to the minister for his 

signature. And you know what? The minister didn’t even have 

to tear up that chiropractic agreement, Mr. Speaker. He just 

ignored it, tossed it casually aside, and left the chiropractors 

waving in the wind. 

 

We have a government that says they’re a government of law 

and order. The Sask Party say we’re the government of law and 

order; you can trust us. Boy, we’re the government of law and 

order. We believe in what’s right and what’s good. And then, I 

believe it was Friday, they fired a corrections worker, fired a 

corrections worker — wrong corrections worker, if you could 

accept that there is ever a right one. But the one that they fired 

was not guilty of what they claimed he was guilty of. 

 

Corrections workers aren’t going to forget this government. 

Corrections workers are not. Health care workers are not. I 

predict, Mr. Speaker, that chiropractors are not going to forget 

what this government, this Sask Party government, has done. I 

predict that people, individuals, my neighbours, my relatives, 

myself are not going to forget the promise that was made just 

the other day when the Minister of Finance says, oh yes we 

should look at harmonizing the PST and the GST. We should 

look at harmonizing — the H-word. That was after the budget 

was delivered. That was when he was up in Saskatoon 

speaking, speaking to the chamber of commerce, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But harmonization, despite the fact that what harmonization 

would do . . . Leave aside that it shifts sales tax from businesses 

to individuals. Leave that aside. Leave that it shifts it to me, my 

neighbours, my relatives, my friends, and off the backs of 

corporations. Leave that argument aside. It also, what it would 

do, Mr. Speaker, is it takes away our ability to have exemptions 

of PST. 

 

There’s no sales tax in Saskatchewan today on children’s 

clothing. Children can be clothed without sales tax, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s no sales tax today on educational books and 

material — no sales tax on that, Mr. Speaker. There is no sales 

tax today on medication and health supplies — no sales tax on 

that at all today, Mr. Speaker. And if we harmonize, that’s all 

gone. The ability to exempt individuals is all gone, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a Sask Party government that can be counted on to say 

one thing and do another. And it’s just straight up because of 

the track record. It is straight up. Mr. Speaker. We have a 

government that’s increased individual income tax 75 million, 

increased tobacco tax 36 million, increased sales tax 56 million; 

at the same time, decreased corporate income tax by $118 

million without, without I point out, in the absence of a tax cut 

for those same corporations. The 118 million lower corporate 

income tax isn’t because of a tax cut. It’s because of a spiralling 

downward economy. That’s what it’s from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a budget where the renewable resources, 

we know what the total take is in the year just ending. We know 

within a few thousand dollars from the budget document. And 

what the government did, they missed on one item alone — 

potash — by $2.1 billion last year. But what they did is they 

took last year’s total of non-renewable resources, that total 

number, and then they added 20 per cent for the coming year. 

That’s how much revenue they’re projecting we’re going to get, 

a 20 per cent increase on non-renewable resources in one year 

alone. I hope it’s there. But based on the track record, I don’t 

think so. I hope it’s there. But, but the track record speaks of 

something completely different. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where a government was 

elected to fix, amongst other things, to fix the shortage of 

doctors in rural Saskatchewan, a situation where there was 84 

vacancies in the spring of 1987; a situation where today there’s 

125 vacancies. 

 

A hundred and twenty-five vacancies today. It’s more than a 50 

per cent increase. And they say they’re fixing it. They’re 

working on it. They’re fixing it. They’re working on it. Trust 

us, they say. Trust us. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I know, I 

know from all of my experiences in life, every fibre of my 

experiences says you can trust the future to be a repetition of 

the past, by and large. You look at what they’ve done in the 

past, and that’s what you can reasonably expect to be happening 

in the future. 

 

And this is part of why — I’ll say it again — why we like the 

leader-to-leader comparison. Our leader, successful farmer, has 

been for many, many years. Our leader, successful business 

person, vice-president of government relations for a 

multinational corporation, Nexen. That’s our leader’s track 

record. What’s the Sask Party leader’s track record? Two failed 

businesses, some time in government under Grant Devine 

where he learned all about finance under Grant Devine. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, you look at, you look at the leaders and, 

you know, you judge what they’ve done in the past and what 



4538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

they’re doing today, and that’s a pretty good indication of 

where they’re going to be next year and the year after and the 

year after. 

 

The future tends to be something of a continuation of the past. 

We’re very proud of the leader-to-leader comparison. We invite 

people to do it, Mr. Speaker. We very much invite people to do 

it. We have a history of successful business. We have a history, 

on the government side, of two failed businesses. We have a 

leader, the Premier, Mr. Speaker, that couldn’t sell country 

music to the people of Swift Current. I’m not sure how that 

qualifies one to be premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to, I have to tell you that I am hugely, 

hugely disappointed with this budget. Disappointed in that it 

affects myself, my family, my neighbours, and my friends. This 

is a budget that is hurt at every turn. It’s hurt and it’s harm and 

it’s damage and it’s a budget that really deals fundamentally 

with the trust issue. It deals absolutely, totally with the trust 

issue. And, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out in my speech the areas 

where that trust has been broken. 

 

My premise is simply put: that we live in a democracy and that 

the 1,700 people that are going to get pink slips over the coming 

four years aren’t going to forget quickly who gave them the 

pink slip. The 100 people that got a pink slip as a result of the 

budget the other day . . . 

 

This is a budget that was delivered, you know . . . While the 

Premier says Saskatchewan isn’t participating in the recession, 

the worldwide recession, if we’re not participating in the 

worldwide recession, why on earth would they pick 100 people 

and say, you’re out of here? How does that work, Mr. Speaker? 

How is this a government for the people? How does this work? 

Why would you fire 100 people on last Wednesday? Why 

would you do that, Mr. Speaker? It just defies logic. 

 

We live in a democracy. I’m very grateful for that. It’s a great 

system. And, Mr. Speaker, I lived through the first term of 

Grant Devine; I lived through the second term of Grant Devine; 

I am determined with every fibre of my being to do everything I 

can to make sure that we’ve lived through the first term of the 

Sask Party government, and the people of Saskatchewan aren’t 

left to clean up after the second term of the Sask Party 

government. 

 

This budget shows in virtually every way a government that has 

run out of ideas, a government stripping the retained earnings of 

the Crown corporations, driving up the cost to consumers in 

those very Crown corporations. This is a government that isn’t 

even being consistent with what it said when they were in 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it was a matter of at least being consistent with 

what was said then and now, I could respect we have just a 

philosophical difference. What we have is a budget that is 

harmful in every way to the people of Regina Coronation Park. 

I say that is a shame. And I wish that if I could stand here and 

speak for three more hours that the government would say, 

we’ll change the budget. I don’t get a sense that that’s 

happening. I just don’t get a sense of that happening, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have to rely on everything that happens every day between 

now and the next election that’s scheduled for 2011, in the fall 

of 2011. I’m not going to forget this budget. I didn’t forget the 

last budget, but I’m not going to forget this budget. I’m not 

going to forget what the Sask Party government is all about. I’m 

going to do everything I can to make sure that New Democrats 

are the ones that are able to build Saskatchewan and create a 

great future. 

 

I am going to be voting with my colleagues with respect to this 

budget. We are not in favour of this budget which hides much 

debt, which hides many of the problems for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I thank you for the opportunity to have shared 

my thoughts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to rise to speak to my government’s third budget. And I’d like 

to begin by doing what a lot of us do, and that’s thanking our 

family and our staff. We don’t get to see our family a whole lot 

in this job. It takes us away from home. We miss piano recitals 

and school plays and birthday parties and those sorts of things, 

and I want to thank my family for their understanding and, Mr. 

Speaker, for their support of me while I’m away. 

 

I’d also like to thank my staff, both in my office in Regina — to 

Krista, Kelly, Drew, and Cam — and to Whitney in the 

constituency office. And I know I’ve talked a lot about Whitney 

before. He has been a constituency assistant for 16 years. I’m 

his third MLA. And, Mr. Speaker, he does a phenomenal job 

and takes care of things while I’m down here. So I’d like to 

thank my staff as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget will enable Saskatchewan to continue 

to lead Canada in growth. Saskatchewan is currently setting the 

standard for population growth and for job growth, and I find it 

interesting that the member opposite had just said that our 

economy is spiralling downward out of control. And I don’t 

know if he’s picked up a newspaper lately or listened to any 

kind of economist or projections for our province, Mr. Speaker, 

but we are leading the country. Our economy is not spiralling 

out of control. And I think that just goes to the NDP’s continued 

doom and gloom and not having a positive outlook for our 

province. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I go home on the weekends and the attitude of the 

people in my constituency is so positive and so upbeat. And I 

think the only people in this province who believe that our 

economy is spiralling downward out of control are the 20 

people sitting across the aisle from us today, Mr. Speaker, 

because they certainly aren’t speaking for the rest of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, but many of my colleagues will likely 

reference their children and family. I think all of us sitting here 

have children or grandchildren or nieces and nephews and, Mr. 

Speaker, it was their future that we had in mind when we 

considered the budget this year. I’m an auntie and I think it’s 

the best job in the world. You get to spend a lot of time with 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4539 

your kids and play and spoil them and then hand them back 

over to their parents at the end of the day. And I think it really 

is the best job. 

 

I have six kids. I joke with my sister and brother that they’re 

really mine. I just let them raise them for me. And Jasmine, 

Sharmaine, Dylan, little Ben — and he doesn’t like being called 

little Ben, but he’s little Ben — Mileva, and Noam, and they’re 

all so incredibly different, but such great kids. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think sometimes it’s so easy to get caught in the 

bubble that is this building. And when we go home and spend 

time with our kids, it really brings us back to what’s actually 

important in our lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just this last weekend I gave one of my cars to my niece, 

Jasmine. She turned 16 a couple weeks ago, and I had promised 

her that she could learn how to drive on my car when she turned 

16. And I’m not quite sure how she got to be that old because I 

don’t think I’m aging. But as a friend of mine said I’m not old, 

old things just keep happening to me. And so Jasmine turning 

16 was a bit of rude awakening for me, but she has her learner’s 

permit. So on Saturday we went for a drive. I showed her how 

to put gas in the car — gas that I paid for — and showed her 

how to check the oil and change a tire. And so I think she’s 

going to do pretty well. 

 

Her world is pretty carefree right now. She’s only 16 but, Mr. 

Speaker, over the next two years she’s going have to make 

decisions on what she wants to be, where she wants to go. And I 

know that she wants to travel, but she also understands that an 

education is important. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s for kids like Jas that we’re continuing to 

invest in education. Jasmine has big dreams. She’s interested in 

journalism. And I think a few of you will remember her from 

last year. She was here for a take your kid to work program and 

asked to spend the day with me, and so she got to hang out in 

the rotunda after question period. And I want to thank Wayne 

Mantyka for showing a lot of interest. And he let her hold the 

microphone for CTV [Canadian Television Network] in the 

scrum and did some B-roll with her and did an on-camera 

interview and gave her a bit of an indication of what a 

journalistic career would be like. And she was very excited 

about being able to do that, Mr. Speaker, and I know that with a 

good education she’s going to be capable of doing anything that 

she wants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget, we have invested additional money 

in elementary and high schools, money that will go to school 

boards for delivering of education, as well as continued 

investment in education capital so our kids can be educated in 

safe places. And, Mr. Speaker, we had a lot of positive feedback 

from the budget. Again I know the NDP are negative about it, 

but the actual average people in this province seem to have 

received it pretty well. The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 

said: 

 

We were glad to hear the Minister emphasize that 

education is a priority, and we agree it is an investment in 

the future of our children and the future of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sandi Urban-Hall of the Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association said, “In today’s budget we recognize that 

we are a priority for the government. Overall, we’re pleased.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the people who are in charge of educating our 

children are pleased with what our government is doing. They 

see that it’s a positive step forward, that we have an investment 

in education in our province and that we will continue to do 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also invested in post-secondary education. 

We know that tuition rates are an ongoing concern for students, 

and we had additional monies in this budget, Mr. Speaker, to try 

to keep tuition rates reasonable for students in Saskatchewan to 

make sure that education remains attainable. And, Mr. Speaker, 

while there were some cutbacks in certain areas in the budget, 

we made sure that we had a focus on education. It’s going to be 

a benefit to our province. It’s the one thing that’s going to help 

us to come forward with an innovation agenda and make sure 

that our children are educated. And I think it’s one of the best 

ways that we can make sure that our province continues to 

move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going back to one of my kids, we’re also making 

sure that we look after those who need a little bit of extra help. 

My nephew Dylan is nine and he is autistic. He’s a great kid, he 

has an amazing sense of humour, and he is an absolute joy to be 

around. Mr. Speaker, our government has invested $3 million 

annually for autism services, which is exponentially more than 

the previous government invested. 

 

And then in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, on top of that, we 

invested an additional $2.5 million for a pilot project for autism 

services. And, Mr. Speaker, Theresa Savaria of the autism care 

centre said of this budget and this continued investment: 

 

It’s the most exciting day of my life. I have been here for 

20 years and there’s a huge recognition of the needs of 

children and their families. And we’re going to provide 

something that has been needed for a long time. This is a 

huge boost for people with autism and for their families to 

have another $2.5 million added to the $3 million from 

2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note, I spend a lot of time with Dylan, as much 

as I can. And like I said, he’s a great kid and there is so much 

potential in him. Autistic kids are capable of learning and 

contributing to society; they just learn differently, and they need 

a little bit of extra help. And, Mr. Speaker, as Dylan’s auntie, I 

want to say thank you to my government for their recognition of 

the needs of these children and their parents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, families know that they have to budget within 

their means. We have taken the same approach with this 

provincial budget. There have been reductions, and we have 

sought to find efficiencies while continuing to deliver the 

necessary services for Saskatchewan residents, services that 

they expect. 

 

And one of these areas is health care. We know that an 

opposition party’s job is to oppose, but we would hope that 

opposition is based on factual information. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that sadly isn’t always the case. The NDP are trying to say that 

wait times are increasing. Mr. Speaker, we know that the wait 

times increased under the NDP, and they are coming down 



4540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

under our government. The Health minister today laid out a 

plan for the continued reduction of surgical wait times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an effort that is a priority for the Health 

minister. And we have made a commitment to have wait times, 

surgical wait times reduced so that people won’t have to wait 

any more than three months over the next four years for surgical 

wait times. There is over $10 million allocated in this budget to 

go towards that goal and, Mr. Speaker, we believe it’s an 

achievable goal. 

 

And we know that the NDP don’t like goals. When asked about 

targets for nursing, I think it was nursing recruitment under the 

NDP, the then Health minister, the member for North 

Battleford, said they weren’t going to set targets because they 

were pretty sure they weren’t going to meet them. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re not afraid of targets on this side of the House. 

And we set targets for nursing and recruitment, and after just 

over two years we are almost, almost there, Mr. Speaker. And 

we think that with the right level of determination and 

dedication we can reach those goals. And as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re not afraid of setting those targets, as opposed to 

the NDP. 

 

I think one of the most frustrating things in government is to 

hear somebody tell you, you can’t do it any differently because 

it’s always been done that way. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe 

that there are always new and better ways of doing things. And 

we are committed to finding those things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about my own ministry, the 

Ministry of Environment. And in my ministry we are not taking 

the it’s-always-been-done-that-way approach. I want to thank 

my deputy minister, Liz Quarshie, for her incredible leadership, 

determination and dedication. 

 

We have been working on transforming the ministry into a 

more user-friendly ministry. And currently we have legislation 

before the House that will enable the ministry to move towards 

a results-based regulatory system. And there are funds in this 

budget to help us get there as well. 

 

And I listen with interest to the opposition members, I think it 

was last week in response to those Bills that are before the 

House, fearmongering about what this meant. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to read something into the record. It says: 

 

An outcome-based approach to environmental legislation 

and regulation will assist industry to plan and invest in a 

manner that achieves strong returns and reflects a strong 

commitment to environmental accountability. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan is committed to work with industry to 

modernize and streamline its legislative and regulatory 

process, especially those affecting provincial economic 

development. 

 

The information goes on to say: 

 

While focusing on environmental outcomes, the model 

will minimize the regulatory complexity and 

administrative burden, support innovation, facilitate 

adoption of best management practices, and maintain a 

competitive business climate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that really sounds like something our government 

stands for and would do, but, Mr. Speaker, it’s an NDP green 

strategy from 2007. So while they stand in this House and 

fearmonger about the benefits or, in their estimation, the 

non-benefits of results-based regulatory system, it was 

something that they proposed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the only difference between the NDP and us 

is they talked about this and never did it. And I know that that’s 

what the NDP’s approach is on a great many things, Mr. 

Speaker, is they talk about it but don’t ever implement these 

things. So a glossy brochure yet again with some promises on 

things that they were going to do and absolutely no 

follow-through on getting those things done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think that this is the right approach for the 

province and it will enable us to have a more streamlined 

approach while offering even greater environmental protection. 

Making sure that we are successful in this initiative takes every 

staff in the ministry to be part of this. And I want to thank the 

amazing men and women in the Ministry of Environment for 

their leadership and guidance and input as we make this happen 

and move forward with our legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been able to find efficiencies in my 

ministry while continuing to deliver on our core services. And I 

understand that there might be concern on paper for the fire 

budget. There was some concerns raised today in the House. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will take those concerns at face value that 

they’re a legitimate concern. But I do have some worry, Mr. 

Speaker, after seeing a press release sent out last week by the 

member for Cumberland. And I hope he’s listening as the 

information, I hope he’s listening because the information in 

that release, Mr. Speaker, was absolutely erroneous. 

 

The fire budget from 2009-2010 to 2010-2011 has been reduced 

by almost $30 million. But this is due to two very separate 

things. One is the reduction of capital expenditures from last 

year to this. We’re in the final stages of the phase two of our 

aerial fleet renewal, so we actually just don’t need as much 

money this year as we did last year because we’re at the end of 

the phase two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there’s also a reduction on the operational side of $10 

million. We went through a review to look at the actual dollars 

needed to fight an average fire in Saskatchewan, and realized 

that we could do it within that $10 million reduction. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, and I said this earlier in the House, by the end of 

2009-2010 fiscal year, the Ministry of Environment fire 

protection branch will have returned almost $20 million in 

operational funding alone. That was above and beyond what 

was needed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a $10 million cut when we’ve already returned 

$20 million, we know that there is more there than what is 

required for an average fire season. And I note with interest, 

Mr. Speaker, that the member for Cumberland claimed in his 

press release that this was a reduction of $12 million in wages 

alone. This is absolutely not the case, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4541 

sure if he wilfully put out these erroneous claims, or if the 

NDP’s researchers don’t know how to read a budget and the 

member for Cumberland simply signed his name onto this press 

release which was not well researched. But regardless of the 

circumstances behind that press release and the misinformation 

and the NDP’s claims, the fire protection branch is being 

funded at levels required to insure the safety of people and their 

property in the North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I heard with interest the concerns from the 

opposition members about staff that had been laid off. There is 

some positions that were eliminated and that sort of thing. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, for all of their concern about people, particularly 

within the Ministry of Environment, in 2004 the member for 

Saskatoon Centre was the Environment minister at the time. In 

2004 they cut 200 jobs. They closed nine rural and northern 

environment offices, and they closed six northern fire bases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time his response to an interview was, and I 

quote, “We have our priorities and we have to support those 

priorities.” According to the NDP, Mr. Speaker, the people in 

the Ministry of Environment, the northern offices and northern 

fire bases were not of any concern to the NDP. It was not one of 

their priorities because they apparently had absolutely no 

problem cutting 200 people out of this ministry alone, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I believe from the comments of some of my colleagues 

who would’ve been here in 2004 — I was not — that that year 

there was 700 people cut from government, Mr. Speaker. So 

while they can claim to be concerned about the people, the 

public service, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have the record to stand 

on. The member for Saskatoon Centre got rid of 200 jobs in the 

Ministry of Environment, Mr. Speaker. But I guess, in the 

absence of their own policies, they resorted to fearmongering 

and misinformation. And, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely 

unfortunate. 

 

And speaking of policies, I would like to discuss our 

government’s climate change policies. We actually have one, as 

opposed to the NDP. Mr. Speaker, this budget sees the 

continuation of our campaign promise to commit $15 million 

per year to our Go Green Fund. This fund offers financing to 

enable people to go green and make the changes necessary to 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Being now 5 p.m. the House is 

recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4511 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4511 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4511 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Rulings on Points of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4511 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4512 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4513 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4513 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4513 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4513 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4513 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4513 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4514 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4514 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4514 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Ordination of Bishop Donald Bolen 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 

 NDP Convention in Prince Albert 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4515 

 Youth Science Month 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4516 

 Harmonized Sales Tax 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4516 

 Kidney Health Month 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4516 

 Treatment of Working People 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4517 

 Support for Project Hero 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4517 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Harmonized Sales Tax 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4517 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4517 

 Spending Forecasts 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4518 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4518 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4519 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4519 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4519 

 Financial Reporting Practices 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4520 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4520 

 Health Care Provision 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4521 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4521 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4522 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4522 

 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4523 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4526 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4530 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4538 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


