




















































Hansard: May 05, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 56A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 5, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5385 

 May 5, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, with leave to make a statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has asked for leave to 

make a statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise in the House this afternoon to apologize. In no 

way did I intend to mislead this House or anyone else by my 

comments. As the Minister of Health, I want nothing more than 

to improve the health care system for the Saskatchewan people, 

and I strive to do that each and every day. But my integrity 

means everything to me, as I believe it does each and every 

individual in this Assembly. I would never intentionally mislead 

this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — And I thank the Minister of Health. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — And members, before I recognize the Premier 

and the Leader of the Opposition, it‟s my pleasure to bring to 

your attention that seated on the floor of this House are a 

number of special guests. We are pleased to have with us today 

the Olympians, Paralympian, and mission staff from the 2010 

Vancouver Winter Olympics and Paralympic Games. 

 

By leave of this Assembly, I will call upon the Premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition for remarks, and then I will recognize 

the members of the Assembly as they introduce their 

constituents. 

 

The Chair recognizes the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

colleagues. We are joined by Saskatchewan heroes today, 

Olympians and a Paralympian and coaches and officials who 

did Canada so proudly at the Vancouver Olympic Games and 

the Paralympic Games and also represented the province of 

Saskatchewan so very well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Premier Campbell was in our province last week, as you know, 

and obviously he had a lot to do with the Olympic Games. He 

reminded all of us in Saskatchewan these were not just 

Vancouver‟s games. They weren‟t just British Columbia‟s 

games. They were Canada‟s games. 

 

And it was sure easy to get a sense of that as we watched with a 

great deal of pride our athletes performing from across the 

country. But especially we were watching out for the 

Saskatchewan athletes that we had a chance to honour just a 

little bit earlier today. 

 

I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition and members of 

this Assembly for joining us in the rotunda a few moments ago 

as we were able to present a small token of our appreciation. 

Just for those who would want to know about the gift we 

presented to each of the Olympians and to our Paralympian, it 

was a watch with the provincial coat of arms on it. And we 

know it‟s probably not suitable for training, but I think it is 

suitable for . . . I think it‟ll be fit for a reminder of a province 

that is just so very, very proud of each and every one of these 

athletes who inspired us all and set a great example for 

Saskatchewan young people and Saskatchewan people of all 

ages. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it is important to point out that 

they are wearing, as they should, their Olympic coats today — 

the red and white. But we know underneath the coats at the 

Olympics was quite a bit of green. And Colleen reminded us 

today that even at some of the women‟s hockey team‟s 

practices, overtop of her Canadian practice jersey, she had 

Andy Fantuz Saskatchewan Roughrider jersey. And we know 

that there were different manifestations of that Saskatchewan 

pride at the Paralympics and at the Olympics because of all of 

you and because of our officials that were there contributing, 

and the coach that has joined us today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know members will want to introduce . . . 

Well the Leader of the Opposition will want to say a few things, 

and members will want to introduce their Olympians and 

Paralympians from their constituency. And we want to make 

way for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I just want to say how proud we are of each and every one of 

them. And we‟re grateful to them for their example and their 

inspiration. And we want to welcome them to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure and 

an honour to join with the Premier, the member from Swift 

Current, in welcoming the Olympians and coaches and trainers 

and those involved in this very, very successful Olympics; that 

the people here not only represented our province with dignity 

and a great deal of success, but the pride that you represented 

on behalf of all Saskatchewan people is recognized today. 

 

And I want to thank the Premier for that, for arranging this day 

in the Assembly. And earlier today when we had a chance to 

talk to you individually and present small tokens on behalf of 

the opposition, I know the Premier did the same on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems like only a few days ago we were here in front of the 

Legislative Building when the torch was being ran through the 

province. A small crowd. It was a cold day, and a number of the 

members were there. The torch went on to many of the small, 

large communities, seen by thousands on its way to Vancouver 



5386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

and when it arrived of course it represented the spirit of 

Saskatchewan and Canadians to the athletes who represented us 

there. 

 

And to see these now homegrown talented people here in the 

Legislative Assembly, it gives hope to all of us, and hope 

especially to young athletes across the province. My daughter in 

particular, Hannah, who is very interested in meeting with 

figure skaters when she‟s up in Calgary later this year in the 

first two weeks in July, skating with Skate Canada. And she 

gets great hope from watching. And I know thousands of other 

Saskatchewan young people get great hope from watching the 

success and spirit that you have brought to this province. 

 

So in the spirit of today and the co-operation that you see 

between government and opposition, we want to thank you for 

representing our province with great dignity and success. And 

you are a model for all of us, and again, especially our young 

people. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to 

introduce Cori Bartel. Cori started curling at the age of 10 and 

is now the lead with Calgary‟s Cheryl Bernard team, which 

represented Canada at the 2010 Winter Olympics. The women‟s 

team performed admirably, under great pressure, and brought 

home a Silver Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, my constituent, Ben Hebert. Ben plays lead on 

Kevin Martin‟s rink, and as I‟m sure we are all aware, they kept 

us hanging on the edge of our seats for a little bit, when they 

won the Gold in overtime. Thank you, Ben, for a great job. 

 

And as all of you know, sports reporters over and over again 

state that the Martin team has the strongest front end. Ben is 

part of that front end. Thank you very much for all you do, for 

making us so proud. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to introduce Lucas Makowsky, speed skater, who 

competed in the Canadian men‟s pursuit in the 2010 Olympics, 

where they won Gold. Lucas was born here in Regina and 

currently lives in Calgary, where he is training with the national 

speed skating team. Lucas Makowsky. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased to welcome Regan Lauscher to her legislature. Mr. 

Speaker, Regan placed 15th in the women‟s singles luge event 

at the 2010 Winter Olympics. She is a seven-time Canadian 

champion and three-time Olympian. I ask that all members join 

in welcoming her to her legislature today. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 

introduce Meaghan Simister, one of the successful recipients at 

the Olympics. She competed in the 2010 Winter Olympics in 

the women‟s single luge event, and is actually a two-time 

Olympian. Outside of luge, Meaghan is completing her political 

science degree at the University of Calgary. I want to welcome 

her to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — Members, it‟s my pleasure to introduce one 

of my own constituents, Colleen Sostorics. Colleen is a 

three-time Olympic gold medallist, winning her third Gold 

playing defence on the Canadian women‟s hockey team at the 

2010 Winter Olympics. Colleen‟s hometown is Kennedy, and 

she is now living in Calgary with her family. I recognize 

Colleen Sostorics. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very proud to 

introduce Vaughn Chipeur, who competed at his first Olympics 

in men‟s singles figure skating at the 2010 Winter Olympics. 

He‟s an up-and-coming competitor and he told me he‟s taking a 

bit of a break from the sport right now after a hard effort at this 

year‟s Olympics, and I think it‟s well deserved. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m proud 

to introduce Colette Bourgonje, who has lived in my 

constituency for several years. And in fact we are teacher 

colleagues from Saskatoon Public School Division. Colette has 

competed at 2010 Olympic Winter Games and came home with 

both a Silver and a Bronze Medal in her ninth Paralympic 

Games. Her list of accomplishments are truly great, as overall 

she‟s won 10 medals. Colette. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Rosetown. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, I‟m pleased to introduce Kaspar 

Wirz, who has been the head coach of Canada‟s Para-Nordic ski 

team since 1996. Kaspar was Colette Bourgonje‟s coach in 

wheelchair racing from ‟93 to ‟97 and he now coaches her in 

Para-Nordic. I‟d ask all members to please give Kaspar a warm 

welcome to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

introduce to you and through you to all members, Yves 

Belanger who served as chief starter with the sport of speed 

skating. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to introduce today Mr. 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5387 

Morley Bruce to all my colleagues. Mr. Bruce serves as a 

corner judge in the sport of speed skating. Congratulations and 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m happy to 

introduce and welcome Ken McArton who is an umpire with 

the sport of curling at both the 2010 Olympics and Paralympic 

Winter Games. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I am pleased to introduce Jeff Whiting who served as a 

spotter with the sport of cross-country skiing at the 2010 

Paralympic Winter Games. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to introduce Ms. Arleen Day who served as an umpire 

in the sport of curling at the 2010 Olympics. Mr. Speaker, 

Arleen told me a few minutes ago that she — I‟m sure with her 

tongue planted firmly in her cheek — that she would especially 

watch Ben Hebert when his skip, when we would hear his skip 

holler, go Benny. And I‟m pleased to introduce her and ask all 

members to welcome her. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to introduce Mr. Mike Makowsky who is here in a 

double capacity today. He has served as the assistant starter at 

the sport of speed skating in the 2010 Olympic Winter Games 

and of course, he‟s the father of Lucas Makowsky. Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my privilege 

today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, an entire gallery full of young people from 

southwest Saskatchewan. There isn‟t an Olympic team member 

among them yet, but I think every one of them would salute the 

well-known and celebrated Hayley Wickenheiser from 

southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Today we have with us two school groups, one from Gull Lake. 

We have 21 grade 4‟s and 13 grade 10 students. They travelled 

some very difficult road conditions to be here today. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The previous trip was cancelled because of serious snow, and it 

happens to be that kind of situation again today. With those 

students are Adele Kirwan and Neal Boutin and the chaperones 

Blaine Kirwan, Lea Buchelur, Rob Myers, Karen Bye, and the 

driver — who I understand went through difficult 

circumstances just to get to the school — Lorna Irish. So I‟d 

like to have my colleagues welcome that group to the Assembly 

today. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, from the Eastend 

School, making their annual trip, are 17 students from grades 11 

and 12. They again are in the west gallery accompanied by 

teachers Marie Hanson and Shelley Morvik, and Don Ham is 

the driver. I understand they left five inches of snow behind 

them to make the trip today. And this is their annual trip. I‟d 

like my colleagues once again to welcome the students from the 

Eastend School as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, there 

are a number of our Olympian athletes and coaches who 

couldn‟t be here today, and we want to make sure their names 

are also read into the permanent record into the Hansard of this 

place. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the names and 

acknowledge again the example and the inspiration provided to 

all of us by Mr. Dennis Balderston, who coached the women‟s 

curling; Ms. Hayley Wickenheiser, originally from Shaunavon 

Saskatchewan, women‟s hockey; Ryan Getzlaf, men‟s hockey; 

Patrick Marleau, men‟s hockey, who‟s currently otherwise 

engaged with his old Olympic coach, Mike Babcock, coach of 

the men‟s hockey team from Saskatoon; Brenden Morrow, 

men‟s hockey; Lyndon Rush; as well as Andrea Bundon, 

Paralympic guide for the sport of cross-country skiing, 

 

Mr. Speaker, we honour and thank these athletes and coaches 

and officials as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to join in the introductions today, and I‟d like to ask 

the Assembly to welcome to their Assembly a group from 

Sacred Heart Community School. They are seated up in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are here with certainly the great 

work of Sacred Heart Community School, but they‟re here 

particularly through their connections with the Dream Brokers 

program, the Canada Games 2005 Building Dreams and 

Champions legacy program. 

 

They set forth a goal to engage young people, particularly in the 

inner city and particularly working with the Regina Catholic 

and Public School Boards and Sask Sport to engage young 

people to give then a chance at their dreams in terms of sport. 

And certainly one of the beneficiaries of the proceeds from the 

pavilion is the Dream Brokers program, and we recognize that 

and appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With these 24 good-looking students from Sacred Heart 

Community School — and some of them were here just a few 

weeks ago, Mr. Speaker — we have the Dream Broker-in-chief, 

Sarah Honeysett, if you could give us a wave Sarah. We‟ve got 

Denise Zuck, the community school coordinator with Sacred 

Heart — does a lot of great work — and Dan Cozine, the grade 

6 teacher. And I don‟t know if Karen Buchholz also made it to 

join us? I don‟t see her here as well. 

 



5388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

Anyway two quick introductions right at the end, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re also accompanied by Joe Daniels who‟s the Aboriginal 

sport consultant with Sask Sport and was there when the Dream 

Brokers program got started. And I know different people that 

were here today for the program helped get that under way. Joe, 

it‟s good to see you here at your legislature. 

 

And they‟re also accompanied by someone who played a key 

role in the proceedings out in the rotunda, Dale Holmes, the 

president of Sask Sport — you know, former stand-out 

basketball player with the University of Regina Cougars, but 

most importantly with the Thom Trojans, Mr. Speaker. So 

anyway, please join me in welcoming these people to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 

with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition and all 

members in welcoming our Olympic and Paralympic athletes 

and coaches and officials that have joined us today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I also want to join with the member from Elphinstone in 

welcoming Mr. Dale Holmes, the volunteer president of Sask 

Sport and the other officials that are here from Sask Sport, Mr. 

Speaker. They were a tremendous help to the Government of 

Saskatchewan and to the province of Saskatchewan as we 

obviously had a presence at the Olympics with our 

Saskatchewan pavilion which was, I think, an overwhelming 

success, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one other introduction that I‟d like to make, and I think the 

person responsible for that success, is Dr. Don Clark who‟s 

joined us in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, and was a driving force 

behind ensuring that Saskatchewan‟s pavilion was such a great 

success and also a major force in why we were able to, instead 

of breaking even on the pavilion, Mr. Speaker, we were actually 

able to return about $45,000 into the legacy fund on top of the 

400,000 that was provided by corporate and city sponsors. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

to all members of the legislature, it gives me great pleasure to 

introduce in the east gallery some of the participants from 

today‟s International Day of the Midwife picnic. Although 

organizers had planned to hold the event outside, due to the 

lovely May weather, they were able to move it inside to the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus room. 

 

The room was filled with about 70 moms, dads, grandparents, 

children, and other supporters of midwifery, and they all wanted 

to come out to celebrate midwifery here in Saskatchewan but 

also to encourage the government to ensure that all women, 

rural and urban, have access to these important services if they 

so choose. 

 

So some of the picnic participants, I‟d just like to call your 

name out, if you want to give us a little wave. I‟m sorry if I 

miss anyone here — Sara Beckel; Erin Beckel; Ryan Snell; 

Brenda Powell; Sonya Duffee; Arie Seguin; Elise Seguin; Lily 

Fyfe who is a very good friend of my daughter, Hennessey. Hi, 

Lily. Leanne Scott; Maria Guidos-Albert and baby Ezrah; 

Janice McCaskill; Sylvie Roy; Joanne Havelock; Anna Rose 

and her children Mahalia and Ezekiel; and last but not least, 

Christie Langen who is a doula and a massage therapist and a 

yoga instructor here in Regina and actually happens to be one of 

my dearest and longest friends and who was part of the team 

that I had supporting me in the birth of my second daughter. So 

I‟d ask all members to join in welcoming this group to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to welcome friends of ours — 

Arlene and Ernie Burtniak from Abbotsford, BC [British 

Columbia]. They travelled through a lot of rough weather to get 

here, not only through BC but also through Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. Arlene and Ernie taught school in Saskatchewan 

and Australia and northern Canada, and they are part of three 

chapters of retired teachers who are now in British Columbia. 

Arlene is on her way back to Kelvington, which was her 

hometown, to visit her mom who is going to celebrate her 100th 

birthday this year. 

 

So I‟d ask my colleagues to please welcome Arlene and Ernie 

to their legislature. Welcome back to Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today in the west gallery are two young business 

people that have decided to come to the legislature today. I‟d 

like introduce Doug Taylor who is the owner-operator of 

Superior Vacuum in Swift Current, along with Tyne Gardiner 

who is a successful business person in real estate in Red Deer, 

Alberta, where he not only sells real estate. He manages real 

estate and he also buys real estate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Tyne is my nephew, my sister Leta‟s son. As you can tell, Mr. 

Speaker, we come from a very tall family. We have several 

people over six-foot five. I have eight nephews, many of them 

are quite tall men, and many of them are very successful 

entrepreneurs. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome Tyne 

Gardiner and Doug Taylor to the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. And I‟d ask all members to join me in the 

welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you it‟s my 

pleasure today to introduce Thomaso, Rosa, and Esther Lirusso, 

and Walter Rea who hail from their hometown of Nelson, BC to 

visit family right here or close to Regina in the town of 

Balgonie. I hope you enjoy a wonderful time here in our 

province. And I‟d like everyone to join me in welcoming 

Thomaso, Rosa, Esther, and Walter to the Saskatchewan 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5389 

Legislative Building. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

legislature, I‟d like to introduce some trade unionists who have 

joined us here in your gallery: Clarence George from 

millwrights; Chuck Rudder from the insulators; Gary Vieser, 

IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] 2038; 

Lorne Andersen from the sheet metal workers; and of course no 

stranger here, Terry Parker from the building trades. I‟ll ask 

everybody to welcome them to the legislature here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

join the member opposite in welcoming Terry Parker and his 

colleagues. Certainly we know the significance of trade unions 

within the contemporary area of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these individuals to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, and to 

all members of the Legislative Assembly, I‟m pleased to 

introduce Heather Malek in the west gallery. Heather is a film 

editor and television editor who believes this government has 

made a poor policy choice in privatizing SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] and continues to be disheartened 

with the process. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming Heather to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in your gallery I‟d like to introduce to you and all 

members of the legislature Shannon McArton — if Shannon 

would give us a wave. Shannon is past president of Agribition 

and works tirelessly promoting Agribition and has helped, 

through volunteers like herself, to make the show what it is 

today. And through the Ministry of Agriculture, we owe her a 

deep debt of gratitude, and also on behalf of farmers. 

 

So I would ask all members to welcome her and thank her today 

for her contribution to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — Members, if members would allow, I‟d also 

like to extend an invitation to Colleen‟s parents, Lanny and Jean 

Sostorics from Kennedy who have joined us today. And we all 

know the importance of not only parents but volunteerism. And 

both Lanny and Jean have contributed greatly to making sure 

there was an arena available that Colleen could skate in and 

allow her to move forward with her career in hockey. So 

welcome Lanny and Jean. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

rise on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the condition of our highways throughout this 

great province. This petition pertains to Highway 310, and this 

petition states that the condition of 310 Highway has 

deteriorated to the point where it‟s a safety hazard for those 

who have travel on it each and every day. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

As in duty bound, the petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands, and it speaks to the issue that many residents realize the 

habitat protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands or one third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in its natural state and that the government 

currently has proposals that will repeal the schedule listing of 

these designated lands. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of concerned citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants in the province of 

Saskatchewan. As we know, the government‟s data shows the 

growing number of students that require additional support in 

order to succeed in school, and we also know that educational 

assistants provide support to students with special needs 



5390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

including learning disabilities and behaviour problems. We 

know that this government has published a document where 

they are considering changes that would drastically reduce the 

number of EAs [educational assistants] in the province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Ituna, 

Pleasantdale, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so present. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre.  

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Saskatoon. And we know that many tenants are 

seeing alarming rates of rent increase and a shrinking number of 

available situations for them to rent. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more people 

in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, and that the government 

also implement a process of rent review or rent control to 

better protect tenants in a non-competitive housing 

environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the city of Saskatoon. 

I do so present.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for students in 

contemporary Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates.  

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

Saskatoon and it was collected at the Western College of 

Veterinary Medicine. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. Mr. Speaker, the petition is being 

circulated and signed because of the exorbitant amount that 

Duck Lake citizens pay for clean, safe water. And it‟s causing 

them hardship, and in fact leadership from the community is 

telling me that it‟s forcing people to move out of their 

community. And I‟ll read the prayer:  

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfill its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan.  

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Asquith, 

Tisdale, and Rosthern. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres.  

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition with respect to another water issue in rural 

Saskatchewan. The government ministry has directed that the 

customers may no longer treat non-potable water using methods 

approved by Sask Health; and that Furdale residents dealing in 

good faith with SaskWater for over 30 years have paid large 

amounts for their domestic systems and in-home treatment 

equipment. The alternative water supply referred to by 

government ministry is a private operator offering treated, 

non-pressurized water at great cost with no guarantee of quality, 

quantity, or availability of water. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its commitment, its promises to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

in support the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, we all know 

the members of the building trade unions have a proud history 

of craft union certification in Saskatchewan and we also know 

that the existing construction labour relations Act, 1992 has 

provided a stable environment for labour relations in the 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5391 

construction industry. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the 

results of a stable labour environment provide for quality work, 

safe construction sites, and benefit all people. The building 

trades, Mr. Speaker, also have contractor support in 

apprenticeship, a system of training which results in a highly 

skilled workforce. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by people in Regina, Moose Jaw, 

Saskatoon, Coronach, Ogema, Melville, Yorkton, Norquay, 

Weyburn, Lumsden, Buena Vista, Regina Beach, Dysart, 

Balcarres, Milden, Bruno, Lanigan, Estevan, Assiniboia, 

Martensville, Warman, Shaunavon, Wilkie, Gray, Esterhazy, 

Battleford, Richardson, Moosomin, Maryfield, Melfort, 

Whitewood, Moosomin, Rocanville, Welwyn, and Spy Hill. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I again 

rise with a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government‟s disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads:  

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Prince 

Albert, and Porcupine Plain. And I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits put forward by the 

Sask Party in the two years and billions of dollars of debt 

growth under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Canora, 

Pelly, Rhein, and Saskatoon. I so submit.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 

International Day of the Midwife, I‟m pleased to rise to present 

a petition in support of midwifery here in Saskatchewan. This 

petition is signed by citizens concerned that despite this 

government‟s commitment to midwifery, very few women in 

the province actually have access to this very important health 

service. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions;  

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan‟s health 

regions as well as independent positions;  

 

And, furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives.  

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens throughout 

Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Saskatchewan Olympians and Paralympians Honoured 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with great 

pleasure that I‟m able to rise in the Assembly today and to give 

praise to our most recent Olympic heroes. A ceremony was held 

at the Legislative Building today to honour and congratulate all 

of the Saskatchewan athletes, coaches, and officials on a very 

successful 2010 Winter Olympic and Paralympic showing. At 

the ceremony the Premier said: 



5392 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

Over the course of four weeks, our athletes were in the 

hearts and homes of all Canadians, especially those here at 

home in Saskatchewan, and we cheered them on all the 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lost in all the excitement and pageantry of the 

Olympic Games are the years of training athletes need to reach 

the Olympics. This commitment takes time, and this is where 

the support of their friends and loved ones can best be seen. In 

order for an athlete to be at their best, they must make a total 

commitment to their sport. Having loved ones that understand 

this fact is one of the most important aspects of being able to 

maintain focus and to train appropriately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to be a world-class athlete you need to 

have world-class support from friends and family. So I would 

like to extend a thank you to the families of these great athletes 

for giving them the support they needed. Mr. Speaker, our 

Premier said it best at the ceremony for the athletes. I quote, 

“They truly did Saskatchewan proud. They competed at the 

highest level and represented our province and our country, so 

today we are celebrating their legacy.” 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it is wonderful that we have 

today had the opportunity to honour our 2010 Saskatchewan 

Olympic and Paralympic athletes, coaches, and officials. 

 

When Canadians across this great country rally to support our 

Olympic and Paralympic athletes this past February, no place in 

the country had a stronger sense of pride than right here in 

Saskatchewan. We sent a talented team of athletes to the games, 

many of whom returned home with some extra weight in their 

luggage — Gold, Silver, and Bronze Medals marking their 

world class achievement. 

 

The accomplishments of all Olympic athletes will not be 

forgotten. Along with the many successful athletes we sent to 

the Olympic and Paralympic Games, many coaches, officials, 

and volunteers offered their time and energy. Thank you to 

those who not only insured the games ran smoothly but also 

overflowed with the community spirit and true enthusiasm we 

are known for in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Olympic Games brought us together as a community of 

athletes, a province of supporters, and a nation of Canadians. As 

John Furlong, leader of the Vancouver Games organizing 

committee put it: 

 

I believe we Canadians are stronger, more united, more in 

love with our country and more connected with each other 

than ever before. These games have lifted us up. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition, thank you to all the 

Saskatchewan athletes, coaches, and officials for your athletic 

achievements, your true integrity, and your willingness to 

continue to give back to our province and country. You have 

made us truly proud. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Liberation of the Netherlands 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks an 

important day in the shared history of Canada and the 

Netherlands. Sixty-five years ago today, the Canadian Armed 

Forces liberated the Netherlands from Nazi Germany in the 

Second World War. Two days later, Germany finally 

surrendered. 

 

To mark the occasion, a memorial ceremony was held Tuesday 

at the Sherbrooke Community Centre‟s Veterans Village in 

Saskatoon. The ceremony was attended by honorary consul 

Judie Dyck from the consulate of the Netherlands, along with 

Legion representatives and about 30 Second World War 

veterans from Saskatoon and area who fought in Holland. 

 

The theme of this year‟s ceremony was Bonds of Friendship. To 

illustrate this theme, more than 2,000 students, including 

students from Waldheim School, are visiting the Netherlands 

this month to help maintain the strong bonds forged during the 

Second World War between the two countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s absolutely important for the younger 

generations to understand their nation‟s role in liberating the 

Netherlands. The Dutch have shown their gratitude to Canada‟s 

soldiers by erecting a memorial bridge in the city of Zevenaar at 

the site where Canadian soldiers died liberating that great 

nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in remembering all 

of the Canadian soldiers who gave so much to liberate the 

Netherlands 65 years ago. To the students of Waldheim School, 

may you have a safe and enlightening trip. And to the Dutch 

throughout the globe, happy liberation day. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Democratic Process 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we saw a crystal clear 

indicator of our Premier‟s disrespect for the traditions of this 

Assembly, the democratic process, and the intelligence of 

Saskatchewan people. The fact that a minister of the Crown 

may have misled the House in itself marks a serious lack of 

respect for the institution upon which our democratic society is 

based. But the fact that the Premier backed up his minister and 

tried to cover up this culture of deceit is shocking. 

 

At the same time, for the Premier to pre-empt the debate and 

make the authoritarian decision that his caucus members would 

vote against the motion calling for a committee to review the 

matter further, he took his pattern of poor judgment to a new 

low. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrat MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] were requesting that a committee examine the 

matter of the Minister of Health misleading the Assembly. By 

voting against the motion and forcing all caucus members to do 

the same, the Premier flaunted his now highly visible and 

absolute disrespect for this Assembly. Once again he refused to 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5393 

accept anyone‟s opinion beyond his own. 

 

By ignoring the rules, traditions, procedures, and processes of 

this institution and denying the members of this Assembly the 

ability and opportunity to get to the truth of this matter, the 

Premier has shown that he doesn‟t care about the democratic 

principles of the Assembly or the desire of the people of 

Saskatchewan to have confidence in their duly elected 

government. Thanks to this poor judgment, the public is still 

left wondering what to believe and who to trust. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there is more good news about our province. In 2009, close to 

33,000 women were self-employed in Saskatchewan. This has a 

significant and increasing impact on Saskatchewan‟s 

employment and economic activity. For these women, this 

week has been proclaimed Women Entrepreneurs Week. 

 

Small business is the backbone of our province, and women are 

not only major participants but they‟re helping lead the way to 

others. An example of a female-run business is the Curry Pot. 

The Curry Pot specializes in processing tasty samosas, 

chutneys, and mouth-watering curry. The Curry Pot products 

are proudly made right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week I had the pleasure of attending the grand 

opening of Healthy Food Balance. Healthy Food Balance is a 

health-conscious store run by Croatian-born Danijela Tomic. 

Danijela immigrated to Canada 11 years ago and has been 

caught up in our province‟s entrepreneurial spirit. 

 

These are a couple of examples of female-run businesses that 

are providing the people of Saskatchewan with valuable 

services. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan businesswomen 

appreciate a balanced, forward-looking, and responsible 

government. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

International Day of the Midwife 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, today is the International Day of 

the Midwife. This is an opportunity to celebrate midwifery and 

to bring awareness of the importance of the work midwives do 

to as many people as possible. 

 

Midwives are health professionals who provide primary care to 

women and their babies during pregnancy, labour, birth, and the 

postpartum period. The midwifery model of care promotes 

normal birth, enables women to make informed choices, and 

provides continuity of care and support throughout the 

childbearing experience. 

 

In 2008, Saskatchewan proclaimed the final sections of The 

Midwifery Act based on the hard work done by the previous 

NDP government. The NDP took the first necessary step of 

establishing the Saskatchewan College of Midwives in 

legislation and committing to fund it once implemented. But 

today, more than two years after the Sask Party government‟s 

proclamation of The Midwifery Act, access to midwives is 

limited. Health regions are not adequately funded and health 

care for mothers and families is being neglected. 

 

Currently there are fewer than 10 registered midwives in all of 

Saskatchewan, and five of them are in Saskatoon. This is not 

enough to provide services throughout the province. But if this 

government continues to starve our health regions and ignore 

the needs of women in this province, it will be impossible to 

recruit more midwives. 

 

Today we call on the Sask Party government to immediately 

deliver on its commitment to roll out a midwifery program that 

offers Saskatchewan women appropriate options for midwifery 

care. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members in the gallery are welcome to 

be here, but they‟re asked not to participate in any form of the 

debate on the floor of the Chamber. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Mental Health Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, May 3rd to the 9th is Mental 

Health Week. This year‟s theme is Building Your Mental 

Health: One support at a time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one to five individuals will experience a mental 

health disorder during their lifetime. Mental illness is a pressing 

concern in every Saskatchewan community, and our 

government recognizes the overwhelming effects mental illness 

has on individuals, families, and communities. 

 

Our government understands the need to act on mental health 

issues and we are committed to putting the needs of patients 

first as we build stronger families and stronger communities. 

 

Finding new and creative ways to address these issues is 

essential. Mr. Speaker, we are currently providing 24-hour 

mental health counselling through HealthLine. We have 

recently developed a promotional campaign to reach those 

suffering from thoughts of depression and suicide, and we have 

also provided 14.9 million to the new Irene and Leslie Dubé 

Centre for Mental Health in Saskatoon. 

 

In closing, I would like all members to recognize the dedicated, 

hard-working, and compassionate individuals who provide 

services and support to those facing mental health challenges. 

It‟s a demanding job, one that requires very special people to do 

it well. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



5394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

Health Care Issues 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are over 100 

people waiting for a kidney transplant in Saskatchewan and our 

program has not been operating since July of 2009. On April 

13th of this year, the minister was asked to explain the status of 

the program and he tried to spin the tale that the program is 

short cardiovascular surgeons, when in fact it had the same 

complement of health care professionals as when it was up and 

running. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister did nothing to get the program 

operational until he was embarrassed into looking at it when 

Sandi Poochay, Stacey Simms, Justin St. Louis, and their 

friends and family came to the legislature demanding action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can anyone believe him now 

that the program will be up and running by July? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been working 

very diligently with the Saskatoon Health Region, the Ministry 

of Health, and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from . . . Order. 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the complement of 

physicians that are there in Saskatoon will all agree, all agree 

that the program that was conducted in the past was not 

sustainable. Whether it‟s cardiovascular surgeons, whether it‟s 

nephrologists, Mr. Speaker, they realize that the program was 

not sustainable. We‟ve had conversations with the health region 

and some of the surgical team. There‟s more work to be done. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re working to attract some new 

transplant specialists into that area so that we can have a 

program that is sustainable well into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, for months the minister misled 

chiropractors and patients to believing he would continue to 

fund chiropractic care. The minister even went so far as to have 

a news release printed announcing a deal between himself and 

the chiropractors, saying, “I am pleased that we reached a deal.” 

On March 9th, two weeks before the budget, when asked if 

funding would be available, the minister continued to lead the 

public on saying, “We‟re looking at all those expenditures . . . 

and on budget day, you‟ll know the answer to that question.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the minister continue to cruelly lead the 

125,000 patients per year that use chiropractic services, and 

their chiropractors, into believing that funding was still possible 

in the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — Over a period of time Speakers have 

acknowledged different terms that are used in the Assembly in 

reference to members, and the use of the word mislead has been 

ruled out of order on numerous occasions, and we can go back 

through a litany of time. I would ask the member to apologize 

and withdraw the use of the word mislead. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I apologize and withdraw the comment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the chiropractic 

situation in our province has been debated over the last number 

of weeks, since the budget for sure and also before the budget 

when there was certainly some concern from the chiropractors 

as to whether they would be continued to be funded, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we know that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If members want to hear the answers, 

members will at least allow the minister to respond. I recognize 

the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our province now is 

aligned with the Prairie provinces, with Alberta and British 

Columbia. British Columbia only covered 10 services for low 

income. We‟re at 12 for low income. It‟s only Manitoba that 

covers services up to 12 visits, Mr. Speaker, for their citizens. If 

you go to Eastern Canada, chiropractic services are not 

subsidized whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

following along with the wishes of other provinces, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It was a tough decision; absolutely it was a tough decision. 

Never have I doubted the efficacy that the chiropractors bring to 

the health care system. That is not the issue, Mr. Speaker. But, 

Mr. Speaker, we are covering for low income, Mr. Speaker, 

which is more than many other provinces do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I believe I mentioned to the minister in 

committee this week that my mother used to say, if all your 

friends jumped off the bridge, would you jump too? Well the 

minister has jumped off the bridge and taken all those 

chiropractic patients with him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on February 3rd of ‟09, the minister announced 

152 million to build 13 long-term care facilities as part of his 

government‟s ready-for-growth initiative. Nine months later, he 

cut 122 million from the projects and tried to slide out of it by 

saying the communities weren‟t ready to build. Mr. Speaker, 

the minister . . . Why should families and communities waiting 

for long-term care believe him now on these projects? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as we move forward and 

as communities move forward with the planning and 

fundraising — because they are responsible for 35 per cent of 

the share of any long-term facility that will be going up in the 

province — our money will be there, absolutely, Mr. Speaker, 

like it will be there for the children‟s . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5395 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Yesterday afternoon I 

asked the Opposition House Leader to join me. I explained 

some of the guidelines in regards to interference. And I‟m going 

to start calling members if members . . . with outbursts, undue 

outbursts. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the money will 

be there. The provincial government‟s money will be there once 

a community is ready to go, just like it will be there for the 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

propaganda put out by that opposition to say that the children‟s 

hospital . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Propaganda that was put out by that 

opposition has done nothing but jeopardize that project, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re hearing from the foundation on a daily basis on 

how their fundraising is affected because of an irresponsible 

brochure put out by that opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, what jeopardizes all those projects 

that we‟ve just talked about is that government‟s inability to 

manage money, to make plans, and to budget and to tell the 

people what‟s actually in the budget. It‟s their fault. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy the minister talked about the children‟s 

hospital because to date he‟s done nothing but cut the funding 

to the hospital and the foundation. In committee on Monday, I 

asked the minister specifically, where was the money? He said 

it‟s in CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], 

in Crown Investments Corporation. I asked, where would I find 

it if I looked? He didn‟t know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how are Saskatchewan people supposed to just 

believe the minister that the money will be there when it‟s 

needed? If he really has the money for the children‟s hospital, 

then put it into trust in the health district and cut out any more 

doubt. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the health region right 

now, the Saskatoon Health Region is going through a study to 

determine the best location, whether at City Hospital or at RUH 

[Royal University Hospital]. There is about a 16-person team 

that is looking at that, Mr. Speaker, and when that decision is 

made and the scoping plans are done and they‟re ready to go 

into the ground with construction, Mr. Speaker, our government 

will be there. 

 

But what we won‟t do is what the former government did in 

Preeceville and in Humboldt, that announced in seven years and 

eight years in a row — and boy, were there ever big 

announcements — just before an election, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

not how our government‟s operating. Our money will be there 

when the project is ready. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has failed to negotiate 

with over 25,000 health care workers. He‟s failed to negotiate 

with the doctors in a timely fashion. He ripped up a contract 

with chiropractors. He had to be embarrassed into even 

beginning to deal with the kidney transplant program. He‟s cut 

$122 million for 13 long-term care facilities that were promised 

to rural Saskatchewan. He‟s cut the funding for the children‟s 

hospital. And he‟s releasing personal patient information to 

health foundations without consultation with the Privacy 

Commissioner, let alone the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has lost all credibility. Why should 

anyone trust that he can deliver on any of his promises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when our government 

came to power two and a half years ago, Mr. Speaker, we had a 

lot of work to do. Mr. Speaker, the human resources situation in 

our health care system was in shambles, Mr. Speaker. That 

former government and especially that critic who used to be the 

head of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — When that government left office, Mr. 

Speaker, and especially that critic who used to be the head of 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, absolutely turned their back 

on nurses across the province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

signed a partnership agreement, a strong contract, and we see 

more nurses working today in Saskatchewan than any time in 

the history of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve got more doctors working in this province than at any 

time, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve increased it by 164. And we‟ve got 

more midwives working in the province. Under that 

government there was none. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on March 10th, 2009, the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour was 

asked if any business entities or construction firms were 

consulted in the drafting of Bill 80. He said no. 

 

To the minister: does he stand by those words today? Again, 

were there any business entities consulted in the drafting of the 

legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m delighted to stand for 



5396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

the first time in this House during question period. That‟s more 

than 80 question periods. This is the first question on Bill 80, 

Mr. Speaker, the first question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re moving forward with this Bill. We‟re 

moving forward to ensure that there‟s greater choice for 

workers. We‟re moving forward to ensure that there‟s greater 

competition within the sector, thereby saving the people of this 

province great deals of public funds. Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

ensuring there‟s greater clarity regarding the issue of 

abandonment and, Mr. Speaker, we‟re moving forward to 

ensure that we have a robust construction sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite know very well there has been extensive 

public hearing and public debate on this issue, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟re looking forward to passing this Bill at the end of this 

session. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister hasn‟t 

been out to some of the meetings to what the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying about Bill 80. He hasn‟t been there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 10th, 2009, the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association wrote to the government to ask for 

changes to the province‟s construction industry labour 

legislation. The two changes they requested, new rules around 

abandonment and changes to allow employers to choose which 

unions will represent them, are the main features of Bill 80. 

 

This letter was tabled with the construction and land 

development sector team of Enterprise Saskatchewan on 

February 5th, 2009. To the minister: how can he claim that no 

business entities were consulted when Bill 80 reflects the 

agenda of the Saskatchewan Construction Association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, public hearings have been 

held. They were held on June 17th, on June 18th, on the 23rd 

and 24th of that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I‟d ask the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres to allow the minister to respond without 

interference. I recognize the minister responsible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to continue with this update. I 

appeared before that committee on June 24th. I then appeared, 

as the members opposite will know — they were rather 

rambunctious that day — on November 26th of 2009. 

Regarding consultations and feedback, Mr. Speaker, there were 

more than 78 — 78 — letters received from the ministry alone, 

never mind those that went to the committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are a number of stakeholders that have had an opinion in 

and around this legislation, Mr. Speaker. We‟re happy that it‟s 

moving forward. We anticipate it will pass by the end of this 

session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this is probably not the 

minister who should talk about consultation. He‟s got the 

attention of the United Nations on that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee conducted public hearings on Bill 

80, heard many excellent presentations. But the fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, this government decided to proceed with Bill 80 based 

on the advice of just one organization. They made a bad 

decision and put forward bad legislation because they failed to 

consult with workers in the building trades, major stakeholders, 

Mr. Speaker. Then they tried to cover up the fact that they 

drafted the Bill based on advice of one organization. 

 

To the minister: instead of trying to cover for a bad decision 

like his colleague, the Minister of Health, will he now admit 

that failure to do proper consultation led to a bad decision and 

withdraw Bill 80? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, on March 11th, 2009, the 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada 

offered this press release. It was entitled, “Saskatchewan 

changes „a giant step forward for construction workers‟”. In that 

press release it said: 

 

The Saskatchewan government‟s proposed changes to 

rules governing unionization in the construction industry 

will give workers more say in their working conditions, 

and it will help Canada‟s employment picture, says one of 

Canada‟s largest private sector unions. 

 

The announced changes allow construction workers, 

instead of governments, to decide who represents them at 

the bargaining tables. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is just one example, Mr. Speaker, from the 

CEP [Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of 

Canada], one of Canada‟s foremost unions, that they think 

Saskatchewan‟s moving in the right direction. They‟re 

supportive of Bill 80, as are a number of stakeholders right 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. We‟re looking forward to 

passing this legislation at the end of this session. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, clearly and again, as we 

see here today, there‟s example after example of why this 

government and how this government has broken the trust with 

Saskatchewan people. But the most fundamental example of 

broken trust is what the Premier has done to the finances of our 

province. 

 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5397 

The Premier inherited a surplus of $2.3 billion. But he 

mismanaged that entirely and has run up deficits of more than 

1.3 billion. And over the course of the past year, the Premier 

drained 700 million from our rainy day fund and stripped $1 

billion, more than $1 billion from our Crown corporations. 

 

To the minister: with such financial mismanagement in two 

short years, why should Saskatchewan people have any trust in 

this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, when this government 

took office, we faced daunting tasks in terms of . . . daunting 

tasks in terms . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I guess one has to 

wonder whether the member wants his question answered. I‟d 

ask opposition members to allow the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there were all kinds of issues that were left outstanding 

by the previous administration that cried out for address from 

this government. Mr. Speaker, we made sure that we looked 

after the infrastructure of this province. It was an important 

thing because you can only have a defeatist agenda if you don‟t 

provide for the infrastructure of the province. We‟re a growth 

province, and we intend to stay that way by supporting 

infrastructure spending, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also realize it was very important not to leave any of our 

citizens behind, especially those who are most vulnerable. So 

we decreased taxes by $300 million to the most vulnerable 

people in the province. And I don‟t hear anybody on that side of 

the House suggesting that we shouldn‟t have done that, Mr. 

Speaker. We also made sure that we were going to address 

needed infrastructure investments in health care and education 

and highways and water and sewage plants and those sorts of 

things. And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day this government 

and this province is $2 billion better off than what it was when 

we took office from that government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose the daunting 

task of having too much money, billion dollar surpluses, and a 

booming economy was just too much for that minister and that 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Despite his pathetic financial mismanagement, the Premier has 

plastered his face on billboards all over this province and made 

false claims about the state of our debt. The Premier‟s own 

budget documents refute the message on those billboards. The 

budget documents show that total debt will increase 55 per cent 

and Crown debt will increase 116 per cent by 2014. But the 

Premier‟s billboards tell a very different story, and they leave 

Saskatchewan people with the wrong impression about our debt 

and the management of our finances. 

 

To the minister: is it any wonder Saskatchewan people are 

losing trust in this government when the Premier tells 

Saskatchewan people something that doesn‟t even match his 

budget documents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, clearly the 

province is better off with the fiscal prudence that we‟ve 

demonstrated as a government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that when we took office the . . . 

Mr. Speaker, it is very clear when we took office that we had to 

make some expenditures on needed programs and initiatives 

across this province. Mr. Speaker, we know that it‟s important 

that this happens. We know it‟s important that we continue to 

exhibit fiscal prudence. We‟re the only province in Canada that 

budget over budget has reduced their expenditures as we 

demonstrate living within our means. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

important, and all the investments we made in the people of 

Saskatchewan and programs for the people of Saskatchewan are 

as important as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know how the 

minister stands here with a straight face and tries to cover off 

for the Premier‟s mismanagement of our finances. The Premier 

and his government have not only attempted to hide the extent 

of their financial mismanagement from Saskatchewan people, 

they have also made false claims about the state of our 

economy. We heard it here today about a growth agenda of the 

Sask Party. 

 

The Premier‟s Finance minister said to the P.A. [Prince Albert] 

chamber that Saskatchewan wouldn‟t take part in the global 

recession. The Premier is constantly pretending that the 

economy has grown under his leadership. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

our GDP [gross domestic product] shrunk by 6.3 per cent in 

2009, and a quote in the Leader-Post summed it up well. I 

quote: “. . . we just lost all of the gains we made . . .” 

 

Back to the volume, trade volume of 2005: the fact is the 

economy has shrunk under the Sask Party. After mismanaging 

our finances and making false claims to cover up their 

incompetence, how can the Premier or anyone else over there 

not recognize that they‟ve broken the trust with Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has said all along that we were not going to 

participate any more than we had to in the global recession and 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask, I would ask the member 

from Regina Rosemont to at least allow the minister to respond. 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that the world 



5398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2010 

economy faced the biggest recession in the history of this 

country and this world since the 1930s and, Mr. Speaker, we 

have always said that Saskatchewan would be affected. But 

anyone who uses some simple logic and looks at the facts will 

recognize that we went into the recession later and we‟re 

coming out of it stronger and faster than any other jurisdiction 

in Canada and maybe in the world. Mr. Speaker, that‟s the 

simple truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the GDP numbers, it certainly is a fact that 

potash particularly has been very severely hit by the global 

recession, and it‟s indicated from the fact that 47.9 per cent 

drop in GDP on the mining industry, particularly in potash. You 

can‟t have that kind of a significant drop in one single industry 

and not have it affect the overall economy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while that was happening, the industry itself 

was investing billions of dollars into the future of the province 

of Saskatchewan‟s potash industry. And members opposite 

should be grateful for that commitment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Performance of Government and Opposition 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier, and it deals with the secretive nature of this 

government and the huge changes that are being made in this 

province without consultation. And whether it‟s Bill 80 or other 

legislative changes to labour law — some of them being 

commented on by the organization, the ILO [International 

Labour Organization] or a branch of the United Nations — or 

the wildlife habitat or changes to SCN, all of these changes 

occurring without consultation with the public. 

 

During the last election, Mr. Premier, you promised, and in 

your pamphlet and book on being more accountable, the Sask 

Party said, and I quote: “A Sask Party Government will provide 

Saskatchewan people with more transparency and 

accountability than any previous government . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: how is it possible 

that you promised a more open government and we end up with 

what we saw yesterday where we foster, and this Premier has 

fostered a culture of deceit and ministers bringing, ministers 

bringing statements that are questionable to this Assembly? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member‟s aware of casting 

aspersions against another member using the word against . . . 

but spoken directly about the member, not about the 

government. It was about . . . I heard him about the Premier. I 

heard it about the Premier. 

 

Order. And I will . . . Order. Order. I would ask members to be 

mindful of how they place their comments. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in this 

Assembly, the member that just asked a question, the Leader of 

the Opposition, said, on his feet, on the record, that he had 

submitted 100 agricultural questions and only received answers 

to 40. That wasn‟t true. He stood on his feet in the Assembly. 

The actual truth is, is the Minister of Agriculture got 60 written 

questions from that member; 54 of them had already been 

answered. 

 

A few weeks ago, another NDP member said this government 

had closed beds. That was not true, Mr. Speaker. The member 

for Saskatoon Eastview made comments attributed to Dr. 

Shoker in Saskatoon which we know, subsequent to a 

conversation the minister had with Dr. Shoker, that those, the 

reflection of those comments were not true. The member for 

Nutana has alleged that this minister is doing away with 

educational assistants. It‟s not true. 

 

Since the election in 2007, Mr. Speaker, together with the help 

of the people of this province, we‟ve kept 104 promises that we 

made . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There may be time for one more 

question if the members come to order. The Premier can wrap 

up his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, since the election, we‟ve kept 

over 100 of the campaign promises. The book that he read from 

is almost complete. We‟ll finish them off by the end of next 

year, Mr. Speaker. The most important promise that we made is 

that we would keep this province moving forward, that we‟d 

lead the nation in economic growth. That‟s what‟s happening 

today in Canada. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what the public‟s not so 

concerned about is whether or not this promise or that promise 

was accepted specifically. The question is all of the things that 

he is doing, that he promised not to do. That‟s the problem. 

 

The minister, the minister in opposition did not promise to 

waste the money of the province, the $2.3 billion, and not build 

the children‟s hospital. In fact, he promised to build it and it‟s 

not built. So when people say where is it, where‟s the money 

and where‟s the hospital, they‟re serious about it. And the 

Premier laughs. 

 

But I‟ll tell you that the people of the province are not laughing 

when it comes to the lack of consultation, when it comes to the 

fact that the children‟s hospital is not built, that SCN is being 

wound down. 

 

The question to the Premier is this: why does he not live up to 

his word of being open and accountable and carrying out those 

promises he committed to, to the people of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, every commitment that‟s been 

made in this Assembly by the children‟s hospital, by this 

government, Mr. Speaker, is being followed through today. 

There‟s $500 million at CIC. The foundation knows the money 



May 5, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5399 

will be there as they need it. The region knows the money will 

be there as they need it. Unlike members opposite, we don‟t just 

issue press releases. We actually set the money aside, prepare 

for the budget . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the most important 

commitment we made to the people of the province was to 

provide prudent management. $6.8 billion was the debt of the 

province when we took over. It‟s now 4.2 billion. There was 1.2 

billion in the savings account left to us. There‟s now . . . 

Actually there‟s going to be news very soon about how the last 

budget . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I find it somewhat offensive 

that the one member would just be continually interfering with 

the ability of the Premier to respond. I ask the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres to allow the Premier to finish his 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the net 

improvement in the bottom line of the province of 

Saskatchewan of $2 billion and growing, and more will come 

on that in the weeks ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most important commitment we made was that 

Saskatchewan would grow, that we would aspire to lead the 

country. Mr. Speaker, we set our job creation record in the 

middle of that recession. We set our job creation record; we set 

our population record. 

 

The province is moving forward. That‟s why they supporting 

the government and wondering what planet members opposite 

are living on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,586 through 1,589. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,586 through 1,589 are tabled. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I 

would like to move adjournment of the House for committees 

this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of the Assembly for the work of committees to 

proceed. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The Assembly stands adjourned . . . 

Order. This Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow 

morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:49.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5385 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5385 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5385, 5387 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 5385, 5386 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5386 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 

  Harper ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5386, 5387 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 

  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5386, 5389 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5386 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5386 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5386 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5387 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5387 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5387 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5387 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5387 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5388, 5389 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5388 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5389 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5389 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5389 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5389 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5389 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5389 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5390 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5390 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5390 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5390 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5390 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Olympians and Paralympians Honoured 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5391 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5392 

 Liberation of the Netherlands 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5392 

 Democratic Process 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5392 

 Women Entrepreneurs Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5393 

 International Day of the Midwife 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5393 

 Mental Health Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5393 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care Issues 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5394 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5394 

 Labour Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5395 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5395 



 

 Management of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5396 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5397 

 Performance of Government and Opposition 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5398 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5398 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5399 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


