




















































Hansard: November 01, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 3A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5705 

 November 1, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

a friend and a good friend of working people right across 

Canada, the national director of the United Steelworkers, Ken 

Neumann who’s with us here today. Of course the Steelworkers 

under Ken’s direction have been working on keeping control of 

Canada’s resources, whether it’s in Sudbury or Hamilton or 

Timmins, and of course today, concerned about workers at 

Allan and other parts of the province as it relates to the mining 

of potash. I know, Mr. Speaker, that all members will want to 

join with me in welcoming our friend, Ken Neumann, here to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

Opposition Leader in recognizing Mr. Neumann and welcoming 

him to the Assembly. We appreciate and value the work of the 

United Steelworkers and appreciate how much the potash 

transaction means to workers in our province. Jobs are 

something that’s absolutely critical in all parts of Canada, but in 

particular this transaction has a significant impact. And we 

certainly welcome and appreciate his input in this matter and 

would like to welcome him to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like 

to introduce a person sitting in your gallery, Noah Evanchuk, 

who is a lawyer here in the city of Regina, but has been 

working very hard over the past year since nominated as a New 

Democratic Party candidate in the constituency, federal 

constituency of Palliser. I know Noah and his wife, 

Anna-Marie, his daughter, Mila and fairly new son, Isaac have 

been regular visitors to Moose Jaw. And I know that New 

Democrats support him and look forward to be able to cast their 

ballot in the next federal election. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake, 

the Minister Responsible for Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure in joining with the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition in welcoming Mr. Noah Evanchuk, proving that 

NDPers and small “c” conservatives really can be friends. Noah 

was my roommate for three years in law school, and my 

colleagues are encouraging me to tell stories, Mr. Speaker, but I 

think I better not. So welcome, Noah. Good to see you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west gallery 

here this afternoon are two constituents of mine that I want to 

introduce, if I may, to members through you, Mr. Speaker. They 

are constituents, but more importantly, they are my Uncle Frank 

and my Aunt Maxine. Uncle Frank and my dad, I think they 

were in business together for 40 years, Mr. Speaker. And our 

families are very close as a result of the fact that we both lived 

there and basically that we’ve grown up together. So I’d ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Frank and Maxine to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments, the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to welcome two of my constituents — my 

parents, Des and Sharon McMillan, who are sitting in your 

gallery. This weekend I was back in my constituency and was 

looking to get to Regina on Saturday, and I thought I could 

hitchhike or find multiple different routes. And they took pity 

on me and thought they’d like to come down and watch us in 

action here today. So please welcome my parents to the 

legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of the people in Wawota and area, who are 

very concerned about the closure of five beds in the Wawota 

Deer View Lodge. They have many family members who are 

being taken outside of their community, that they feel is very 

unfair and very dangerous. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to stop the closure of these beds. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is the first 500 of many, Mr. Speaker, and they’re from 

Wawota, Kenosee Lake, Moosomin, Carlyle, Earl Grey, 

Langbank, Maryfield, Whitewood, Kennedy, Rocanville, 

Fleming, Wapella, and Carnduff. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. We know citizens living in poverty have long 

identified affordable solutions. Recent national and provincial 

initiatives, including the Saskatoon health disparities report and 

the Canada Without Poverty, Dignity for All campaign call for 

a comprehensive elimination strategy. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 



5706 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come 

from Rosthern, Christopher Lake, Meadow Lake, Saskatoon, 

Martensville. And, Mr. Speaker, one signed it, homeless. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well a new session 

and still no fix to the graduate retention program. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition with respect to the future of Saskatchewan’s 

potash resource, in that Saskatchewan has a thousand-year 

supply of the world’s highest quality potash, but the people of 

Saskatchewan are the owners of this strategic resource and 

deserve the maximum benefit from its development, mining, 

processing, and sale. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to publicly demand 

the following terms and conditions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan of any foreign owners bidding to take 

over PCS: to ensure Saskatchewan people receive the 

maximum net benefit, a golden share and preferred shares 

so that the public participates in both the corporation’s 

future decision making and its profitability; public 

guarantees and a strengthened head office presence; 

support for Canpotex, and a long-term target for potash 

production and employment; Saskatchewan representation 

on the board of directors; public agreements to ensure no 

loss of royalties; public commitments to meet world-class 

standards of corporate and social responsibility; and an 

independent potash review commission with the power to 

monitor and enforce all of these terms and conditions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks from 

Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, November is Prostate Cancer 

Awareness Month. The NDP [New Democratic Party] MLAs 

[Members of the Legislative Assembly] are wearing the official 

ties and scarves of Prostate Cancer Canada in order to draw 

attention to prostate cancer and to honour those who were taken 

from us far too early. We also wear them today as a sign of 

solidarity with all those who are currently battling prostate 

cancer. One such individual joined us in the Legislature earlier 

today to talk about the issue of potash and control of our 

resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Federal NDP leader Jack Layton revealed earlier this year that 

he has prostate cancer. We have seen that the same 

determination and optimism which characterizes his work and 

his life has characterized his battle with this disease. And 

through it all, Mr. Speaker, he has remained a passionate and 

effective voice for the issues that matter to Saskatchewan 

people and to all Canadians. Today we salute Jack for that, and 

we rally around him and every other man who is fighting 

prostate cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one in six men will develop prostate cancer. It is 

important for men to discuss prostate cancer with their doctors 

when they turn 40 and to go for annual examinations and PSA 

[prostate specific antigen] tests after the age of 50. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, we raise the awareness of prostate 

cancer. We honour those whose lives have been cut short 

because of the disease, and we stand shoulder to shoulder with 

all the men who currently battle prostate cancer. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Health Care Providers’ Week 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my honour to 

recognize October 24th to the 31st as Health Care Providers’ 

Week throughout the province of Saskatchewan. During that 

week we took time to recognize the thousands of health care 

providers throughout the province. Their dedicated service to 

their profession ensures the people of our province receive the 

highest quality of care. 

 

Saskatchewan’s health care system employs nearly 37,000 

individuals, and it is comprised of 26 self-regulated professions. 

In 2008 and 2009, health care providers delivered nearly 76,000 

operating room surgeries, over 80,000 CAT [computerized axial 

tomography] scans, 4.2 million family physician visits, 540,000 

immunizations, and over 47,000 mammograms. 

 

Last year these same health care providers were absolutely 

essential in protecting the people of Saskatchewan from the 

H1N1 influenza by delivering the largest pandemic vaccination 

process in the history of our province. No doubt 

Saskatchewan’s health care providers can be counted on, no 

matter what the situation presents. Their consummate skill and 

professionalism ensure that everyone who wanted a vaccination 

received it in a timely manner. 

 

I invite my fellow members to join with me in honouring the 

dedicated service of our health care providers to the people of 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5707 

our province. And to our health care workers, your skills and 

commitment enhance the quality of life for Saskatchewan 

people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Snowbirds’ 40th Anniversary Celebrations 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 

that I rise to offer congratulations to the Canadian Forces 

Snowbirds on the completion of their 40th anniversary season. 

For 40 seasons this dedicated group of men and women has 

performed with skill, professionalism, and teamwork, delighting 

audiences across Canada and around North America. 

 

This weekend’s 40th anniversary celebrations kicked off with 

the Snowbirds’ traditional year-end show, normally performed 

for family, friends, and colleagues at their home base at 15 

Wing Moose Jaw. This year’s audience was considerably 

larger, with many dignitaries and special guests, including 

many former Snowbird pilots and technicians and family 

members in attendance. 

 

The flawless Snowbird performance many would agree was the 

best show ever, set the stage for a remarkable weekend. I was 

pleased, along with the member from Moose Jaw North and 

Wood River, to attend a number of the weekend events 

associated with the celebration including the year-end show, the 

change of command ceremony for the honorary colonel, the 

unveiling of a commemorative wall honouring fallen 

Snowbirds, the presentation of sacrifice medals, and the Red 

and White banquet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 40th anniversary marks a milestone in the 

team’s history and was an opportunity to celebrate the tradition 

that has been inherited through 40 years of teamwork. 

 

I ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating the 

Snowbirds on this 40th anniversary and wishing them many 

more years of success. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

2010 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce hosted the 27th Annual 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards, otherwise known 

as ABEX, at the Delta Regina. 

 

The most coveted prize of Business of the Year went to 

Regina-based Jay’s Moving & Storage Ltd, which also won the 

service category. 

 

Jay’s began as a family-owned and operated trucking business 

in 1964 and has since grown to 12 offices and warehouses, with 

a staff of over 400 and a fleet of over 600 trucks and trailers. On 

Saskatchewan’s new road, businesses like Jay’s have paved the 

way for success. 

 

Other winners from the ABEX Awards include NetSecure 

Technologies of Regina for the new Sask product. Their 

SmartSwipe technology protects online consumers. Exit Realty 

Fusion won for the New Venture Category by showing positive 

performance of profitability, job creation, and market growth 

within 3 years. Border Line Feeders Inc. of Ceylon won the 

Community Involvement Award for their exceptional support of 

arts, culture, and education. Their community investment 

program is part of the successful attempt to make Saskatchewan 

a better place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ABEX Awards are a wonderful opportunity to 

recognize Saskatchewan excellence. I ask all members to join 

me in congratulating all of the winners. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Provincial Debt 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In last week’s Throne 

Speech, the Sask Party government continued their trend of 

providing information about the state of our provincial debt 

that’s simply inaccurate. Saskatchewan people deserve to know 

the truth; instead they’re treated merely to false rhetoric. The 

truth about our debt is printed on page 62 of the Saskatchewan 

Party government’s own budget summary document. It shows 

very clearly that the government debt is on the rise; in fact will 

go up by 55 per cent or $4.2 billion by 2014. That’s the truth 

about our provincial debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Sask Party government would prefer to keep that fact 

from Saskatchewan people. Here’s what one columnist had to 

say about the Sask Party’s rhetoric propaganda when it comes 

to the true state of our debt, and I quote: 

 

The debt graphic presented by Wall’s strategists in their 

own propaganda was at best misleading and at worst 

downright deceitful for trying to pass off General 

Revenue Fund debt as being the same thing as overall 

Saskatchewan debt which again is on the rise. 

 

That’s the columnist’s assessment, Mr. Speaker. Again the 

quote: “at best misleading and at worst downright deceitful.” 

Despite the Premier’s desperate attempt to hide the true state of 

our provincial debt from Saskatchewan people, the truth is this: 

debt is going up, and Saskatchewan people will be paying the 

price for years to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

125th Anniversary of Depot Division 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

bring attention to a great organization celebrating their 125th 

anniversary. 2010 commemorates the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] Depot Division’s 125th year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Depot Division has had a profound impact on 

more than 59,000 members that have trained there. The reason 



5708 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

for this is Depot’s ability to balance its history and traditions 

while keeping a keen eye onto the future. Depot was in the 

forefront when they welcomed the first female troop in 1974. 

Mr. Speaker, Depot Division was one of the first police 

agencies worldwide to include human relations training in their 

program. 

 

One hundred and twenty-five years after its inception, Depot 

Division remains in a unique position to share changes for 

generations to come. Their pledge to the nation and future 

generations is to maintain a standard of excellence and to serve 

in a way that will continue to instill pride and a sense of 

ownership in all Canadians. 

 

I would ask all members today to join me in recognizing the 

RCMP Depot Division. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Photo Identification Requirement for Voting 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this government is very good at 

coming up with grandiose ideas and policy with very little 

follow through. Take for example carbon capture, the dome, or 

a surgical care centre, but they are perhaps even more adept at 

pushing through legislation which is unnecessary, and even 

worse, that hurts the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In their latest version of yet another recycled Throne Speech, 

the government is attempting to make it more difficult for 

Saskatchewan people to vote. They wish to make it a 

requirement to have photo ID [identification] to show up and 

vote, Mr. Speaker. This is an attack on democracy as well as the 

people of Saskatchewan. This legislation also targets specific 

groups, marginalizing and further disenfranchising the voting 

public. First Nations and Métis, senior, and students will find it 

even more difficult to cast their ballot. 

 

It seems a strange coincidence that these people would also 

likely not vote for a Sask Party government, which has 

routinely ignored them over the past three years. This 

legislation will only help to drive down voter turnout and 

silence those who would criticize this conservative government. 

Voter apathy is already a crisis in North American democracy, 

and it is legislation like this, which blatantly attacks the 

democratic right of not just these targeted groups, but all 

peoples’ rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Fixed election dates are one thing, but fixing the voter turnout 

and silencing critics of the government before an election year 

is quite another. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question’s 

to the Premier. Last week on Thursday, the Assembly passed a 

unanimous motion calling on the federal government to stop the 

sale of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to BHP, and 

there was a lot of anticipation that the Premier would carry this 

message to the Prime Minister and to Ottawa, lobbying for that 

sale to be stopped. 

 

Over the weekend, the Prime Minister announced that the 

Premier didn’t have to bother going to Ottawa. My question to 

the Premier is: how does that work, that the Premier responsible 

for this most important issue is refused a meeting with the 

Prime Minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, we want to thank members opposite for supporting 

the motion last week of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell this Assembly that there’s plenty of 

evidence right across the country that the position of the 

province of Saskatchewan to stand up in defence of this very 

strategic natural resource is very well known. From coast to 

coast. Mr. Speaker, the position of the province of 

Saskatchewan has received the support of the premiers of 

Alberta and of Quebec and of the province of Manitoba. We’ve 

received the support as well of business leaders across this 

country. 

 

The federal government understands with absolute clarity as to 

the position of this province with respect to this takeover, that 

of opposition to it. Mr. Speaker, there were no decision-maker 

meetings being taken by any federal officials from here on in 

until the decision is made. But, Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in 

this Assembly knows the position of this province has been 

made abundantly clear and is understood by every Canadian, 

including the Prime Minster. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the 

head of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, Perrin Beatty, 

today encouraged the sale to go forward, we now have the 

largest business organization in the country urging the Prime 

Minister to allow the sale of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan to BHP to go forward. 

 

In light of that and in light of the fact that the Prime Minister 

will be making a decision in the next few hours, in the next few 

days as to whether or not this sale will go forward, in the event 

that the sale is allowed, can the Premier indicate what taxation, 

royalty, and agreements we’ll put in place, that the government 

will put in place, to protect Saskatchewan owners of this 

resource if the sale is allowed to go through? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say . . . And the 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition has highlighted a group in the 

country that wants the federal government to approve this deal. 

There are many other groups including, I would say, the 

steelworkers who are welcomed here today as guests and other 

business leaders from across this country, who are of course 

saying to the federal government something quite different — 

including all members of this Assembly through our work last 

Thursday. 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5709 

Mr. Speaker, to the member’s question — it’s an important one 

— just this morning, Mr. Speaker, there were meetings with the 

task force that has been set up by the government to look at 

every angle and every nuance of this particular takeover, 

including the contingency that the federal government provides 

a yes to the agreement. Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of 

specific instruments being looked at, being considered by 

finance officials as to the best instrument to make sure the 

people of the province are protected from a revenue standpoint. 

 

I’ll make this assurance to the Assembly. We’re fighting for no, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re fighting for the interests of this industry. 

We’re fighting for the resources of the people of the province. 

And if this deal is forced on us, Mr. Speaker, we will take steps 

to protect the revenue interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the members of 

the opposition, and I believe the people of Saskatchewan, are 

pleased that the Premier is fighting for the ownership and the 

control of the resource to stay in Saskatchewan. What most 

people are saying though is they wished he would have started a 

little earlier than seven or eight days ago. 

 

The fact of the matter is this issue has been on the front burner 

in the economy of Canada for the last two months. But my 

question to the Premier is this. We have made the comment 

over and over again that regardless of whether the sale is 

allowed, which we voted not to take place . . . But if the sale is 

stopped, this is a huge opportunity for the people of 

Saskatchewan to gain more from that most precious resource, 

potash. 

 

Can the Premier tell the Assembly today if the pledge made to 

Saskatchewan by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, if 

this sale is stopped, can you guarantee that there will be, in 

writing, a guarantee that the pledge to Saskatchewan by the 

Potash Corporation will be in place, will be signed on, and will 

have penalties included, if in fact that agreement and deal is 

broken to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, members of Executive 

Council and officials within the Government of Saskatchewan 

have been focused on this issue since we were informed of the 

hostile takeover by BHP Billiton the night before it went public, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell members of this House, as I’ve said publicly in the 

past, that I immediately began to seek the counsel of other 

premiers who have served in this capacity, including Premier 

Romanow and Premier Calvert, Premier Devine as well as 

Premier Lougheed. Mr. Speaker, we undertook to retain the 

services of one of Canada’s finest legal firms in terms of their 

experience with the Investment Canada review process and 

M&A [mergers and acquisitions] work in the country. 

 

We’ve established a task force government-wide that’s looked 

at this potential takeover from every perspective. And we have 

been developing contingency plans since we first heard of this 

particular takeover, Mr. Speaker. 

And Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also well respected and well 

known across the country that the province of Saskatchewan is 

well-prepared on this file. We have made a case not just to the 

federal government but to the country, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 

made it clear that with the support of members opposite, we 

will continue to stand up for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The deathbed 

conversion to socialism was well known only after his 

shakedown didn’t work, so people of Saskatchewan don’t buy it 

at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Globe and Mail reported recently that PCS 

[Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] has agreed to pay any 

penalty tax that executive Bill Doyle might incur in the case of 

a sale of PCS. Again, this executive stands to earn over $500 

million if this sale is approved. Does the Minister of Energy and 

Resources agree that a company with that kind of money to 

remunerate its executives with could be asked to give just a 

little bit more to Saskatchewan people in the form of royalties? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it would be helpful if the Assembly was aware of what 

happened in 1994 with respect to the past Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan reorganization repeal Act, which was assented to 

in May 19, 1994 and removed all of the restrictions except the 

head office provision. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition at that time lobbied members of 

the opposition at the time. There were no public hearings by the 

NDP with respect to it at that time. And in addition to that, once 

that golden share was removed by the Leader of the Opposition, 

he went on to further lobby members of the opposition at the 

time to repeal and move the head office of Wascana Oil at the 

time, and comfortably made a position for himself eventually 

with Nexen. So it would be instructive if we also knew what 

Nexen pays head officials, as he claimed he was with them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — He can avoid the question all he wants, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s clear they have no plan when it comes to 

potash or extracting a little more for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now PCS has made public concessions in the newspaper, 

volunteering to do more for Saskatchewan people than the 

Premier’s willing to ask of them. Now does the minister agree 

that paying this company or having this company paying a little 

bit more to Saskatchewan people for royalties, health care, 

education, and highways might be a good thing in light of the 

fact that their CEO [chief executive officer] is going to make 

$500 million off this sale alone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 



5710 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member in 

his preamble said that the Government of Saskatchewan has no 

position. Yet on Thursday, yet on Thursday he stood in his 

place along with all of his other colleagues and voted in favour 

of the position that this government has. 

 

So while he is saying the government has no position, he votes 

in favour of the position that the government has, which clearly 

indicates that he really doesn’t know what the NDP’s position is 

with respect to this. 

 

And we all know, Mr. Speaker, that publicly traded companies 

have the right within their operation to make the decisions with 

respect to remuneration exactly the same way that they made 

the decision with respect to remuneration for the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Funding for Health Regions 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, on Thursday last week I 

questioned the minister about cuts to health services that are 

affecting the people of Saskatchewan because of his 

government’s failure to properly fund the health regions. And 

the minister said, “. . . we have said from the outset is that we 

do not want to see any patient delivery care affected.” 

 

To the minister: how does he believe that cutting lab services, 

ambulance services, home care services, chiropractic care 

funding, long-term care beds, acute care beds doesn’t affect 

patient care? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I said last week that we 

have a record amount of spending in health care never seen in 

this province at $4.02 billion, Mr. Speaker, a far cry from any 

money that was . . . a greater increase than any spending under 

the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have seen 

health regions throughout this province look at their budgets 

and look at the efficiencies that they can find within their 

budgets. There have been great gains made in the past year 

when it comes to premium time care, when it comes to sick 

leave, Mr. Speaker. Health regions have a done great job in 

reducing those costs. 

 

Some of those costs are reduced on a direct proportion to the 

amount of nurses that our government has been able to recruit 

into this province, a commitment made for 800 more nurses 

working in Saskatchewan over the next four years. I’m proud to 

announce we’re at over 830 nurses working in this province 

more, in just three years, Mr. Speaker. Under their government 

they absolutely would have ignored the plight of nurses within 

this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The minister has the same answers he had last 

spring. Perhaps he should have spent time actually going out to 

rural Saskatchewan instead of tracking me out there. 

 

Last week the minister said that five beds in Wawota Deer 

View Lodge are only possibly going to be closed. I was in 

Wawota this summer and the beds are empty. The Save Our 

Beds committee in Wawota told me that they met with the 

health region last Wednesday and “this was the worst meeting 

so far . . . it was a very unproductive 50 minutes. The beds are 

closed they said, and they are going to remain closed.” 

 

To the minister: will he stop playing games with the people of 

Wawota and give them a straight answer? Are these beds 

permanently closed? Because the possibility of closures is long 

gone? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very, very 

interesting, very curious this opposition’s new-found care for 

rural Saskatchewan. For 16 years they absolutely ignored rural 

Saskatchewan. No, that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. They did not 

only ignore rural Saskatchewan; they closed 52 hospitals in 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they laid off 

hundreds of nurses, and we lost many, many doctors out of this 

province because they closed facilities. Mr. Speaker, the issue 

in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, they certainly ignored 

rural Saskatchewan, and now to have this new-found love for it 

is pure hypocrisy. Certainly the issue around Wawota is a 

concern. The Save Our Beds from Wawota met with the health 

region on Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I was made 

aware of the results of that meeting on Thursday. The health 

region says they’re standing by their decision. They’re closing 

three long-term care beds and two respite beds. They feel that 

they have enough beds within the health region to suit the 

demand of long-term care in that area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, last week Wawota heard there was 

a possibility of closures. Now the minister is saying 

categorically that they are closed, that he’s not going to 

intervene at all. They’ve only been in government three years 

and already abandoned rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Wawota isn’t the only community I visited this 

summer that is losing long-term care beds. Canora, Melville, 

Kamsack, Esterhazy, Carlyle, and Muskeg Lake, to name a few 

that are all losing their long-term care beds because of this 

minister and this government’s failure to properly fund the 

health regions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan 

how many more long-term beds are being cut in these 

communities because of his government’s failure to give health 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5711 

regions the money they need to operate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to start my 

answer by quoting a former NDP MLA, a retired physician, Mr. 

Speaker, a pretty good grasp of the health care file and a pretty 

good grasp of the politics of that member opposite and 

especially the leader. And the quote goes on to say . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I heard somebody from 

the opposition benches yell across, who writes this material? A 

former NDP MLA writes this material, Mr. Speaker. Let me go 

on to quote what he said. He said, and I’ll take it from the top: 

 

It is sheer hypocrisy for Judy Junor to carp on about 

health care. She and the present Leader of the NDP were 

both part of a cabinet that spent 15 years shredding rural 

Saskatchewan services [Mr. Speaker], with closing 52 

rural hospitals, firing 660 nurses, and leaving 52 rural 

doctors with no place to work. 

 

Former NDP MLA Lewis Draper, Mr. Speaker. It’s a little 

hypocritical for them to have this new-found love for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I think the people of Wawota will now have a 

new definition of hypocrisy to have in their community. I mean 

the minister said possible closures; now he’s saying absolutely. 

I don’t think somebody . . . Somebody out there is not going to 

be very happy with the minister’s answers, basically, that are 

recycled from last session. There’s nothing new in the letter that 

the minister read. We’ve certainly heard that before. I think 

he’d be well served to go and get new quotes because these are 

pretty stale-dated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the demand for long-term care is increasing and 

the minister’s plan to deal with the increasing need, we’ve seen, 

is to break the promise to build the 13 long-term care facilities 

that he had put out in the ’09 budget and took away the funding 

in the 2010 budget. 

 

I visited 10 of those 13 communities, and all across the 

province families are being separated from their loved ones. 

They’re being sent to communities way far away, and these 

people are suffering because they cannot have somebody with 

them in their last days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why are the minister and his government forcing 

families to be separated and seniors to suffer because of his 

government’s failure to manage the books? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I’m very proud of the record of our 

government, Mr. Speaker. Of the 13 long-term care facilities 

that we announced, one has been moved ahead. Watrous had a 

groundbreaking, and there’ll be many more next spring, Mr. 

Speaker. As communities have come up with their money, as 

the plans are being formulated, many, many more of those 

communities . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I ask the members to allow the 

minister to respond to the question from the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, many of those facilities, 

the member would’ve toured the old facility that was looked at 

under their government for many, many years with very little 

repair. The deterioration is staggering, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

our government has moved ahead by announcing 13. We have 

the money in place. When the communities are there with their 

money and the functional plans are ready, those facilities will 

be built. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would say that under the old Saskatchewan 

and the NDP, they could care less about rural facilities, Mr. 

Speaker, because they did very, very little. And in the new 

Saskatchewan, facilities are going to be built, Mr. Speaker. 

Long-term care residents are going to be living in higher class, 

in better facilities than they ever did under the watch of the 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Voter Identification 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The people 

of Saskatchewan very much value their right to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about 

the government’s proposed legislation which will result in a 

lower voter turnout and disenfranchise many Saskatchewan 

voters. Why would the government propose legislation that will 

take away from Saskatchewan people’s right to vote? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re well 

aware that in other jurisdictions, the Government of 

Saskatchewan . . . The three largest provinces, Ontario, Quebec, 

and British Columbia all have this type of legislation. And I 

want to assure the members and the citizens of this province 

that there is absolutely no intention to disenfranchise anyone. 

But there will be, Mr. Speaker, a positive obligation on each 

and every voter to establish their identity and their right to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it can be done by a number of ways. Clearly the 

preferred way will be by way of photo ID, but we will through 

regulation, Mr. Speaker, ensure that there are a number of other 

different options so that people are not disenfranchised or not 

able to vote. However, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Justice may 



5712 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there will be an obligation 

on people to establish their identity, so they would be 

well-advised to have their affairs in order so that they are able 

to establish their identity and comply with the regulations. 

There will be, Mr. Speaker, an extensive consultation to ensure 

that appropriate alternate methods are available for people that 

cannot afford it or otherwise have photo ID. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, if, as the minister is trying to 

indicate, that is the process that will be used, the legislation 

would not be required, Mr. Speaker. You’d simply have to put 

into the current regulations that photo ID would be one of the 

options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just point out to the minister as well, 

one of the examples he used is the province of Ontario. The 

provincial government provides two pieces of photo 

identification free to every citizen, Mr. Speaker — not in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the groups affected is senior citizens, the 

very people who built this province, who took the time to 

ensure that this province is the great place that it is today, Mr. 

Speaker. Many senior citizens no longer have drivers’ licences, 

no longer have photo identification, Mr. Speaker. They’re a 

group of people in our province who have worked hard and 

built this province and made it the great province it is. Why 

does this government want to disenfranchise senior citizens? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I share the member’s 

sentiments with regard to senior citizens. I am rapidly 

approaching becoming a senior citizen myself. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there is absolutely no intention on the part of this 

government to disenfranchise senior citizens. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the process for senior citizens 

to obtain photo ID is in fact already in place. Senior citizens in 

our province are already, and have been for some time, entitled 

to obtain from SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

photo ID at no charge to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in response to the member’s question, we 

already had that situation addressed before we even announced 

this legislation or announced that we were taking steps. So his 

point is valid but the answer is there, and it exists already, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member should know, many senior citizens don’t have ready 

access to SGI dealers in order to get photo identification, Mr. 

Speaker. In many remote and rural communities, access is 

denied; it’s not accessible in those communities readily, Mr. 

Speaker. Those in senior citizens’ homes don’t have access 

readily. So, Mr. Speaker, every senior citizen has to have the 

same right, the same right to have that vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other groups that are hurt and disenfranchised by 

this government in this move, Mr. Speaker, are both Métis and 

First Nations people, those who live in remote communities, 

those who are steadfast critics of this government in many 

ways, Mr. Speaker. Why does this government want to take 

away the right to vote from those who are critical of the actions 

of this government, our Métis and First Nations people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this 

government has got good support from senior citizens and 

within our First Nations and Métis communities, and it would 

not be our desire to disenfranchise . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition members 

to allow the minister to respond to the question. The Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — It would not be the desire of this 

government to disenfranchise seniors or any other group. That 

is why we will have other methods enshrined in regulation, so 

that there will be other options that are available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a given now in our society that when you go 

somewhere, you are expected to produce ID. You open a bank 

account, you have to produce ID. You rent a hotel room, you 

want to a see a doctor, a variety of other things, obtain a 

prescription, you are required to produce identification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying to people is, you should plan 

for this over a period of time. For senior citizens the photo card 

is already available at no cost. If you do not have access to a 

driver’s licence, an ordinary citizen who is not of senior age 

would be entitled to get a photo ID from SGI without incurring 

any significant cost because it’s available for $10 for each and 

every other citizen, Mr. Speaker. It is the intention of our 

government to ensure that each and every other citizen is going 

to be able to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Resignation of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 

inform members that the member for Cypress Hills has resigned 

from the position of Deputy Chair of committees on October 

31st, 2010. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 

Assembly to move a motion appointing a new Deputy Chair of 

committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5713 

leave to move a motion to appoint a new Deputy Chair of 

committees. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That Mr. Fred Bradshaw, member for the constituency of 

Carrot River Valley, be appointed to preside as Deputy 

Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Government 

House Leader, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That Mr. Fred Bradshaw, member of the constituency of 

Carrot River Valley, be appointed to preside as Deputy 

Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

indeed a great pleasure for me to rise today in order to move the 

Throne Speech in this, the 16th Throne Speech that I’ve been in 

attendance at. But before I do, I’d like to offer my 

congratulations and the congratulations of this caucus to the 

new member from Saskatoon Northwest for his election in 

September. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this place is an interesting and wonderful place in 

many ways — some of them not so much and others very, very 

memorable. I think on Thursday last, we had a memorable day 

when we all voted unanimously to protect the rights of 

Saskatchewan citizens in the potash industry. That’s very, very 

important. There’s been other times in this Assembly when 

things have not been that memorable in a good way. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s indeed a great honour and privilege to serve in this 

institution. 

 

Before I get into the text of my Throne Speech, I would like to 

take this opportunity to express my gratitude for some very 

important people, firstly to Carole and the family. In over the 16 

or 15 years, going on 16, that I’ve been a Member of the 

Legislative Assembly, I can’t count on the family occasions that 

you’ve had to miss in order to discharge your duties in the 

Assembly. And I know members on both sides of the House 

have experienced this in many times in their own careers, and 

we couldn’t do that without the support and love of our family 

and our spouses. 

 

And so I would like to take this opportunity to publicly thank 

Carole for 15 years of being at my side in this endeavour. And 

actually it’s closer to 20 years because I ran unsuccessfully four 

years before getting elected in ’95. So it’s going on 20 years 

that we’ve been involved in politics in Saskatchewan, and it’s 

been something that we have been very important to us.  

 

So . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, my colleagues are 

reminding me that it is my only wife, and not my current wife 

which I think is one of those not-so-memorable occasions that I 

spoke of earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also thank my constituency 

assistants, Laurie Hookway and Peggy Gordon. Without their 

help and dedication over the years, you couldn’t discharge your 

duty and keep your office organized. And that’s always very 

important. 

 

I’d like to thank my constituency association and the many 

members that have participated in that over the years. And as 

well, without the help and support of these individuals as 

volunteers in this game of or profession of politics . . . 

Sometimes it seems like a game, other times as a profession — 

unfortunately not enough of the latter and too much of the 

former. 

 

And finally I’d like to thank the people of the Melfort, and 

before that the Melfort-Tisdale constituency, who I’ve had the 

pleasure to represent over these many years, and point out that 

they’re a very particular bunch. They represent a big chunk of 

northeast Saskatchewan, a very big chunk of the entrepreneurial 

section of the province with many short line dealers and 

manufacturers, with many entrepreneurs, with men and women 

who are raising their families, who are farming, who are raising 

livestock and cattle and poultry and hogs, who are farming 

grain farms and expanding their operations and believing in the 

future of this province. And I would like to thank the people of 

my constituency. 

 

For me today, it’s a little nostalgic, and I think over the course 

of this Throne Speech, it’ll be bit a nostalgic for others in this 

Assembly who will give their last presentation in regard to a 

Throne Speech. 

 

But it’s an honour for me to move this very important Throne 

Speech. And it’s an honour for me to speak to the Throne 

Speech that’s going to move us down the road in a direction 

that the Saskatchewan Party government has embarked on and 

which is being so welcomed by the people of the province. I’m 

very proud to stand with my Saskatchewan Party government 

colleagues and talk about the direction of which we are heading 

into the new years going forward.  



5714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

We touched on many initiatives in our Throne Speech, of what 

we have accomplished and what we’re in the process of 

accomplishing, and I want to make sure that I talk about a few 

of them because over the course of the debate I know a number 

of my colleagues will speak on many of these topics. And so I 

don’t want to hog the limelight and speak to everything, but I 

want to talk about some things that are important. 

 

The first one I’d like to speak on is one that’s very topical 

briefly, and that’s the potash industry. Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome BHP’s proposal to build a new mine in the Jansen 

Lake area. It is important in the province. It’s important to my 

constituency because it happens to be in the constituency of 

Melfort that the physical mine is going to be built. I’ve been out 

there on several occasions and seen some of the work that is 

going on. And it is indeed a project that the people of that area 

are very much hopeful will go forward and become an integral 

part of the potash industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so we have to say it’s not about BHP, and it’s not about 

their desire to expand and to move into the potash industry as a 

corporate initiative. It’s not about that. It’s about the particular 

transaction of the potential hostile takeover by BHP of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and what it means for the 

impact of this province and indeed this country. 

 

In the whole exercise the government did a thorough and a 

careful review of the proposal, and they came to three pretty 

important conclusions that I’d like to speak briefly about each. 

Mr. Speaker, about the jobs. BHP’s stated initiative of running 

the new acquisitions flat out and becoming a price taker instead 

of a price setter is very problematic to the industry. And, 

according to the Conference Board, it places over 750 

permanent direct jobs and over 8,000 person-years of 

construction jobs in jeopardy. And, Mr. Speaker, that simply is 

an unacceptable reality. 

 

The reality is as well is that there’s a potential great negative 

impact on the royalties of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I for 

one know very clearly what impact decreased royalties of 

potash can mean to a provincial budget, as we went through that 

exercise a couple of years ago. And it wasn’t fun, I can assure 

you. But if we have this situation go forward, the potential for 

reduced royalties are very real in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And perhaps most important of all, there’s strategic 

implications of this initiative being allowed to go forward. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan has a tremendous share of the potash 

reserves of the country. Indeed this one transaction could end 

up with the company that is foreign owned controlling a third, 

30 per cent, of the potash of the world. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

believe Saskatchewan has a responsibility to that same world to 

ensure that this strategic resource of potash, which speaks so 

intimately about fertilizer and food and food production and 

feeding the world, should remain in the hands of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And just as BHP is doing and moving in the direction they are 

because of a responsibility they feel to their shareholders, the 

people of Saskatchewan are behind the Government of 

Saskatchewan because they are our shareholders and the people 

of Saskatchewan are the owners of the resource. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember very well the pressures that came on 

the province of Saskatchewan as a result of the worldwide 

recession that we have just come through experiencing. Mr. 

Speaker, it was a very, very serious economic downturn in the 

world, and I think without the interventions across the world 

that there would be much more serious consequences that 

would have happened. Mr. Speaker, we have come through it 

relatively unscathed. 

 

The Speaker: — Does the Leader of the Opposition want to 

speak? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member from Melfort for giving up a spot so I can introduce the 

Leader of the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce a good friend and a 

friend of Canadians, Jack Layton, who has joined us today. Jack 

is in town today to talk about potash and control of resources. 

And of course one of the main issues that our leader has 

stressed, both here and across Canada, is how Canadians can 

benefit more from controlling in a greater way, through 

royalties and talk of potential ownership, many different ways 

that Canadians can get involved in resource ownership and 

taxation and royalty. 

 

And we’ve had many discussions. And I just want to say to you, 

Jack, welcome to the Legislative Assembly. I know you’re 

working hard, everyone knows, fighting some pretty serious 

health issues but winning. Because I just want to say, with the 

support of your family and Olivia and others, you know that 

Canadians are on your side in that struggle. And I believe in the 

next federal election they’ll be on your side in other areas as 

well. So welcome to our Assembly, and I wish you all the best. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Deputy Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to 

introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you to the members for also allowing leave. And I’d 

like to join with the Leader of the Opposition in extending, on 

behalf of government, extending our welcome to the Leader of 

the New Democratic Party. 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5715 

As indicated by the member opposite, it is a very important 

time in the province of Saskatchewan as made clear last week in 

the debate here in the Legislative Assembly. And we want all 

people, all leaders in the federal parliamentary system to 

understand the position of Saskatchewan, to understand how 

important this is. And we extend first of all a thank you to you 

for being here in the Legislative Assembly and continued 

expressing that point of view on behalf of Saskatchewan 

people. So again, welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to 

have interrupted my remarks to welcome Mr. Layton to our 

Assembly. Welcome, sir. 

 

As I was saying, that Saskatchewan largely escaped the 

downturn of the economy over the last couple of years. And 

that is good fortune, good planning, and good luck I suppose all 

wrapped into one. But at the end of the day, Saskatchewan, 

while we went into the worldwide recession later than anyone, 

it seems that we’re coming out quicker than anyone. And that is 

a very, very hopeful thing. 

 

For example, some statistics I would like to share, that our 

population is at an all-time high of 1,045,622 souls. This 

represents an increase of 4,877 persons from April 1st, 2010 

and that’s a very good sign. Four point nine per cent in 

September 2010, the unemployment rate is tied for lowest in 

Canada. In September there were 528,000 people working in 

Saskatchewan, which is 6,300 more than September of 2009. In 

the first nine months of 2010, employment in Saskatchewan 

increased by an average of 5,900 compared to the same period 

in 2009. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as we look at it going forward there’s still 

a sense of optimism in Saskatchewan and a belief that our best 

years are in front of us. And in fact a survey of Regina and 

Saskatoon employers indicated that 91 per cent in Regina, 100 

per cent in Saskatoon believe that staffing levels are going to 

stay or increase into the new year. And that’s very, very 

promising indeed. 

 

We had some challenges with the weather this year, Mr. 

Speaker, as everyone remembers. It sort of is interesting that 

we’ve talked about establishing in the province a rainy day 

fund. Well if anything happened this year, it certainly rained. 

And it rained and it rained and it rained, and that created some 

great difficulties for almost everyone in the province from east 

to west and north to south. Our farmers watched in frustration 

as they were unable to get into a great deal of their cropland as 

they watched the rain soaking their fields and soaking their 

opportunities to get a crop in in a timely manner. And so that 

has created a great deal of stress over the course of the summer, 

as a great percentage of Saskatchewan grain cropland was not 

seeded. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And the government responded, Mr. Speaker, by creating a 

special excess moisture program of $30 an acre, that it was 

eligible acres. And it was the largest provincial agricultural 

disaster program in Saskatchewan history. And the crop 

insurance program has paid out over $250 million to date, and 

that is an important way that we can help our farm families get 

through this rather unique climactic circumstance. 

 

It also created hardships in a number of communities across the 

province, from flooding that happened with the excessive 

moisture that was going on, and right from Yorkton to Maple 

Creek and North Battleford and right across the province. There 

were many communities that experienced rather severe 

flooding, and that certainly created challenges as well. 

 

Changes were needed and made to PDAP, the provincial 

disaster assistance program. And they included bringing in 

adjusters and other professionals to help flood-stricken areas in 

the province so that their adjustment could be done in a timely 

fashion. Deductibles for private claimants were reduced from 

20 per cent to 5 per cent. The maximum amount of financial 

assistance available to principal resident claimants increased 

from $160,000 to $240,000. The maximum amount of 

assistance to eligible small business, non-profit organizations, 

boards, and primary agricultural enterprises increased from 

$160,000 to 500,000. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of 

improvements to this program that have been of great assistance 

to the people that have suffered these disasters. And the 

Saskatchewan government was there to help these people at 

their time of need, and I’m very, very proud of that. 

 

Throughout all of these challenges, you were able to see the 

strength of the people of Saskatchewan and their determination 

to move forward bravely into the future. And that is a testimony 

to the strength of the people of this province, when they face the 

kind of weather challenges that we faced this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the ongoing and important topics of 

discussion and debate in the province is health care. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the most prideful things that I was ever able to 

do in my term as a member of the Legislative Assembly was to 

set aside $200 million for a children’s hospital for 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. And I was very, very pleased to 

see that that money was transferred this summer to that project, 

and it is moving ahead promptly and favourably. And I think 

that in time we’ll all look back at this as something that we can 

be very, very proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud of the fact when the Premier 

stood up and said that the province of Saskatchewan would be 

willing to fund clinical trials to establish if the liberation 

procedure for multiple sclerosis was indeed a viable option. I 

think right across this province, over the course primarily of this 

summer, all of us in our communities, I’m sure, have 

experienced friends and neighbours who have availed 

themselves of this liberation procedure somewhere in the world, 

and many have returned with anecdotal stories of a great deal of 

improvement in their condition. 

 

And I think it’s only appropriate that Saskatchewan, that seems 

to have the highest percentage of people in the country with MS 



5716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

[multiple sclerosis], would lead the way in terms of finding the 

clinical resources necessary to make sure that this liberation 

therapy is indeed used appropriately and can be properly 

channelled to make sure that MS patients have the answers they 

need going forward. And that if it is proven to be a useful 

therapy, that we can look forward to the day that this useful 

therapy would potentially be provided for right in our own 

country and our own province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other announcement I heard this summer with 

a great deal of satisfaction was the announcement that we have 

not only exceeded our target of 800 registered nurses — 

increasing the number of registered nurses in the province by 

800 — we’ve exceeded that. And it’s some 830-odd, I believe, 

is the number currently. And I think right across this province 

in our hospitals, in our health care system, long-term care, we 

see the results of these extra registered nurses in the system. 

And I am sure that it is helping with the overtime that’s needed 

to be worked and making the work life of our registered nurses 

a lot more viable. 

 

And so it’s great to see that the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] and government partnership that has worked to get this 

reality has laid the foundation of positive and collaborative 

relationships of creating a much more stable and 

patient-oriented health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s goal of providing stable, 

high-quality health care services was also important in not only 

looking to the issue of nurse recruitment and retention, but also 

physician retention and recruitment. And a three and a half 

million dollar recruitment strategy for physicians right across 

this province was initiated, and Mr. Edward Mantler has been 

hired as the CEO of a physician recruitment agency and has 

made the whole process of looking for needed physicians much 

more organized and professional in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I’m sure that’s going to bring forward some 

great results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t take a few words to 

talk about the proposed STARS [shock trauma air rescue 

service] program in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a good number of years ago, I had the opportunity 

to see a STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] mission in 

action across the backyard of our children in Calgary, where a 

STARS helicopter landed on a schoolyard and picked up a lady 

who had been hit by a bus and had a brain injury. And it 

happened to be rush hour in Calgary, and so the ground 

ambulance was unable to transport her to appropriate care in a 

timely manner. And so the STARS helicopter landed just 

outside the backyard of our kids in Calgary. And from that 

moment on, I was fascinated about the potential of this service 

and what it could do to make the situation on emergency 

measures more effectively dealt with in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, STARS in Alberta is a model that I think that we 

can build on and work with in order to move forward with an 

improved EMS [emergency medical services] system in 

Saskatchewan. Currently we have a very good fixed-wing 

service that has been around for an awful long time. I believe 

it’s the oldest air service for emergency measures in Canada and 

perhaps even in North America. And Lifeguard, as it’s known, 

has provided and does continue to provide and will continue to 

provide important services for the fixed-wing service in 

Saskatchewan. Working in collaboration with the current 

fixed-wing program and the ground ambulance program, the 

rotary program will round out and make much more 

professional the opportunity to provide needed emergency care 

services to the people of Saskatchewan in a timely manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that an indication of the support of this 

concept is coming from companies like Crescent Point Energy 

who have pledged $5 million over four years to this project and 

who, indeed with other companies in Alberta, have become 

major contributors to make sure that this service that is so 

important to their companies and their companies’ employees is 

going to be possible in Saskatchewan, not only for people living 

on drilling rigs and commercial enterprises, but also in rural 

Saskatchewan. Not only people who live there, but people who 

travel through rural Saskatchewan are going to benefit from this 

enhanced emergency service as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in STARS currently in Alberta, STARS operates a 

24-hour, seven-day-a-week program. On each flight, a 

paramedic and a flight nurse, advanced trauma nurse, are crew 

members, both with critical care skills, and two pilots on every 

mission. In addition, at about 20 per cent of the calls, an 

emergency trauma physician is also included as the response 

team. And that’s a model that I think will serve us well in 

Saskatchewan as it has in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we move in as many areas as 

we can, and that we understand some of the sensitivities of the 

province. Our government understands that we have a 

responsibility to the land and to be good stewards of the land, 

not only for ourselves but our children and their children in 

turn. So we must protect the habitat, like the Great Sand Hills in 

the Southwest. 

 

We must make sure that we protect our forests and green 

spaces. And it’s important to note that our government wants to 

double the wind power capacity to 400 megawatts by 2015, so 

it’s important we also make sure that our electrical generation is 

also green. Mr. Speaker, more than anything I’ve mentioned in 

Saskatchewan that has changed, I think it’s important to say that 

what is really changed is our attitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the attitude of the people of Saskatchewan have 

moved from the former government of a have-not province to 

the current government where they say, why not. Mr. Speaker, 

they’re here to build their lives and the future of the province 

and there is nothing that will deter them. And we certainly want 

to make sure that the Government of Saskatchewan is there to 

facilitate those changes and that new wonderful change of 

attitude from have not to why not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected, we used to say you could 

tell when it was a holiday season — Christmas and Easter — 

because you’d see all the Alberta plates in the driveways of our 

communities. They were our children who are coming back for 

the holiday with their family. 

 

Now when you see Alberta plates, it’s probably someone who is 

moving to Saskatchewan to seek their fortune here instead of in 

Alberta. Our kids are not only coming home, they’re staying 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5717 

home, and they’re building this province with us. And this is a 

tremendous new and exciting opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is many other things that could be spoken 

about in this Throne Speech, but I would like to say that I am 

proud of this government. I’m proud of everyone that has 

contributed to the direction of this government. And I’m 

particularly proud of our Premier who’s led us through these 

challenging three years. And I look forward to seeing him lead 

us into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to move, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has pleased to 

address us with at the opening of the present session. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Melfort, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great honour to stand in 

the House to second a motion put by the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 18th, the voters of the constituency of 

Saskatoon Northwest gave me the distinct honour of electing 

me as their MLA. As each member of the honourable House 

knows, it’s an honour and a privilege to be given the trust of 

your constituents to represent them in this Assembly. Their 

confidence is truly humbling. 

 

Saskatoon Northwest is a very diverse constituency. Not only is 

there a significant urban component, but there is also a 

significant rural component extending north of the city 

wrapping around the city to the south to include Pike Lake. The 

constituency also includes the majority of Saskatoon city’s 

industrial properties, which in great measure help speed the 

economic prosperity of this great province. 

 

In addition to thanking my constituents for their support, I’d be 

remiss if I didn’t thank my family for the great sacrifices from 

the days that I sat on the public school board to my seven years 

on city council. Without the remarkable support of our families, 

we’re unable to properly serve. Mr. Speaker, to the many 

people who helped with my campaign I extend my sincere 

thank you. I’d also like to thank the other candidates for a 

respectful campaign. A vigorous campaign is a sign of a strong 

democracy. 

 

I’d also like to publicly thank you my partners for not only 

recognizing my desire to serve the public, but for providing me 

with their support and guidance throughout my time in public 

life. And, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier and the members of the 

government caucus for providing me their encouragement and 

support. Without that encouragement and support, I would not 

have the honour of addressing this Assembly today. And to the 

hon. members of this legislature, my sincere thank you for the 

unanimous support of the Bill, which was passed last week 

allowing me to take my seat. My pledge to my constituents and 

this legislature is that I will do my best to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan to the best of my ability. 

 

As we look forward to the upcoming session, it’s important to 

look down the road that’s led us here, Mr. Speaker. The Throne 

Speech made mention of the expansion of emergency medical 

services within this province, particularly the co-operation with 

the shock trauma air rescue service in Alberta. While this 

province already possesses high rate ground and air ambulance 

services, they do have their limits. Slippery road conditions, 

which our province is notorious for, can make a treacherous 

journey which is not a luxury in a time of need. Even highway 

closures can result in people of Saskatchewan not receiving the 

medical services they need and deserve. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the advent of human flight represented a major 

innovation for civilization. More importantly, when this 

innovation was utilized for the purposes of medical treatment, it 

meant that geographic location did not limit the level of care 

that a patient could receive. Air ambulance services meant that 

all of Saskatchewan could access emergency medical services 

within a reasonable time frame. But airplane ambulances do 

face obvious limitations. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, our government intends to advance and 

enhance ambulatory services throughout Saskatchewan with a 

helicopter-based system that would supplement existing air and 

ground ambulance services. The STARS program will save 

lives. With 25 years of success in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, my 

heart is warmed by the stories of those who have lived, whose 

lives have been saved by this service. 

 

Two stories highlight that. In 2001 Jason MacLeod was hit by a 

drunk driver. It took emergency services over an hour to 

extricate him from his vehicle. Mr. Macleod was in such critical 



5718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

condition that a STARS helicopter had to meet the ground 

ambulance he was travelling in and rush him to hospital. To 

quote Mr. MacLeod: 

 

If it wasn’t for STARS, I wouldn’t have made it. With my 

vital signs, I was in very, very critical condition and if I’d 

been driven, I would not have lived. 

 

STARS has had a profound impact on Mr. MacLeod and he is 

now a nurse at the Foothills hospital and is waiting to gain the 

emergency experience necessary to one day join the STARS 

team. 

 

Kelly Hulstein, another grateful patient of the STARS program. 

In December of 1985, she and her twin brother Travis were 

born two months premature. If it hadn’t been for the STARS 

program, she would not have survived the long ground 

ambulance ride from Lethbridge to Calgary. 

 

These are but two of the lives saved from the invaluable 

STARS program. Mr. Speaker, while incidents of acute trauma 

are unfortunate, I’m encouraged by a program like STARS 

which has proven to mitigate the damage of such incidents. 

 

Another great step forward for this province can be seen in our 

Premier’s commitment to investigate claims of what is now 

being commonly referred to as the liberation procedure. The 

unconfirmed benefits of MS liberation procedure offer hope to 

the patients of MS sufferers and their families. For months no 

one has had the courage or fortitude to take the bold step in 

investigating the medical viability of treatment therapy. 

 

Our Premier was the first to announce that Saskatchewan would 

host clinical trials and fund the research needed to test the 

liberation theory. Premier Wall was moved by the stories of MS 

patients willing to travel to the farthest reaches of the globe and 

to receive this treatment in less than desirable facilities. He was 

also compelled to action by the debilitating effects of this 

disease, the high rate of incidence within the province of 

Saskatchewan, and the amount of dollars Saskatchewan 

families were willing to spend on hope and promise that the 

procedure appeared to provide. 

 

Our Premier remained committed in the face of a federal 

government that refused to participate or help fund the trials, 

even though a sample larger than Saskatchewan would be 

needed. Instead our Premier brokered co-operation among other 

provinces willing to move forward on MS research. As of 

today, our government is the first of its kind to fund clinical 

trials of MS liberation procedure. Our Premier’s leadership has 

also caused the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador to 

spend $320,000 on an observational study of MS patients who 

have undergone the treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s bold step in the direction of research 

and innovation will likely influence more governments within 

Canada and around the world to participate in this all too 

important field of research. Hundreds if not thousands of 

Canadians are seeking solutions to MS outside the country. 

They are spending thousands of dollars because they’ve been 

told by others that the liberation procedure works. The truth is, 

we don’t know if it works and we don’t know if it doesn’t work. 

What we do have is a theory, a cohort of MS patients who have 

sought the treatment outside of our borders, and they are 

coming back with a variety of results. We owe it to them and all 

those who might be afflicted with MS in the future to 

investigate this claim. 

 

Skepticism is healthy, Mr. Speaker, especially within scientific 

research, but inaction masquerading as skepticism is not. It is 

our hope, it is the hope of our government that more and more 

jurisdictions will increase support for MS research regardless of 

their own personal views on the efficacy or validity of the 

procedure. This is not a political football, but an opportunity to 

let the science dictate what directions government should take 

when it comes to addressing the symptoms of MS. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our government has made no promises on 

the validity of the MS procedure. We did promise to fund 

research into MS liberation procedure, and that’s what we have 

done. We put up $5 million for clinical trials. And as duly 

elected officials, we are obligated to ensure the well-being of 

those we represent, and our funding of clinical trials into MS 

procedures is another example of our commitment to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of revenue sharing, this 

government will fulfill its promise of 1 full per cent of the 

provincial sales tax made to our municipal partners. Mr. 

Speaker, the fulfillment of this commitment recognizes the need 

for municipalities to have stable and committed revenue and 

further recognizes the commitment of this government to our 

municipal partners. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to return to the road that has led 

us here today. For decades Saskatchewan has travelled down 

the all too familiar road of mediocrity and squandered potential. 

Previous governments were always taking Saskatchewan down 

the same old road, yet expecting to arrive at different 

destinations. In 2007 the people of Saskatchewan signalled that 

they were willing to take a different path. Their desire for a 

better future for their families was a cue for our government to 

embark upon a road less travelled. And in this year, 2010, the 

Saskatchewan Party government will take another step along 

the road less travelled. We maintain a strong resolve, an 

unrivalled compassion, and a clear vision guided by our 

anticipation and confidence that Saskatchewan will achieve 

further greatness. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Pardon me. Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I like Massey Place just fine, Mr. Speaker, so 

thank you for the recognition. 

 

It’s a pleasure today, Mr. Speaker, to stand and join the debate 

in our responses to the Throne Speech that was delivered here 

in the Assembly a few short days ago. It’s a pleasure to be back 

after the summer break and our time in our constituencies and 

to be in the Chamber once again debating the issues in this 

venue that are truly important to Saskatchewan people. 

 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5719 

It was, on a personal front, Mr. Speaker, it was a tremendous 

summer. My wife and I, we welcomed a baby daughter to the 

world and we named her Ingrid. So we’ve been enjoying that 

new stage of life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like to say hello to my grandma, Ferne Vincent, 

living in Outlook. I know she watches this channel faithfully, 

and I appreciate all of her prayers and support. 

 

I’d also like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, before I get in to 

my Throne Speech remarks, just to say thank you to the many 

people that allow us as MLAs to do the job that we do. To 

Donna, my main constituency assistant, as well as Ruben and 

Bev who help out in the office, as well as the caucus staff here 

in Regina who provide tremendous support and work very long 

hours, I’d like to thank them. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the people of 

Saskatoon Massey Place. Over the summer we all have the 

opportunity to spend time with our constituents, whether they 

be people directly involved in the NDP or whether they’re 

average individuals not involved in partisan politics but have 

views that they want to share. It’s good to hear from them, 

whether it’s at a barbecue or on the doorstep with summer door 

knocking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with all members in the 

Assembly in welcoming the new member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. The member just gave his maiden speech. And I’m 

sure it’s an important time for an individual as well as a family, 

so I do offer him my congratulations. And I would also like to 

. . . As he’s aware of now, the environment in this Chamber is 

perhaps a little different than council chambers, but I’m sure in 

no time he’ll feel right at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech which was delivered last 

Wednesday . . . I’m going to be honest right off the top, Mr. 

Speaker, that I won’t be supporting this Throne Speech for a 

number of reasons. 

 

The title of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was “The New 

Road.” But I think I found it interesting the following day in 

The StarPhoenix, when they were speaking of this Throne 

Speech, the title of one editorial there was, “Wall’s new road 

pothole-ridden.” And that was from Thursday, October 28th. 

And there clearly are a number of potholes that this government 

is hitting now in its third year, going into the final year of its 

mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s a number of areas that stand out in the Throne Speech 

that I will be addressing today. And the first area that I’d like to 

speak to, Mr. Speaker, is the issue of potash. Now this will 

certainly be an issue that probably all members in the Assembly 

in their response to the Throne Speech will be addressing. 

 

What I have found most interesting about this discussion, Mr. 

Speaker, on the issue of potash, is how it has demonstrated how 

members opposite are ideologically adrift at present, how 

members opposite are currently taking an approach that is so 

contrary to what most of them have espoused for many years 

when it comes to their ideological foundations and the approach 

that they have taken as a ruling party at present and an 

opposition party for some time. 

Of course there are a number of players involved in this potash 

story, but we have to look closely at the role of the Premier at 

the present. If we look at the Premier’s track record, Mr. 

Speaker, when it talks . . . when we look at remarks that he has 

made over the past years in the role of government in a modern 

economy, steps that he has taken, it seems contrary to this 

new-found position that he has taken on the issue of potash and 

say no to the possible takeover of PotashCorp by BHP Billiton. 

 

We can all remember — it was among my first days in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker — the very first piece of legislation that 

was brought in by this Sask Party government was The Potash 

Development Repeal Act. And they made a show of it. They 

invited industry individuals into the gallery, and they talked 

about this new-found era of this and that, Mr. Speaker — the 

normal rhetoric one might expect in the Throne Speech, 

especially in a government in its first days in power. But it 

appears that three short years later, Mr. Speaker, after all this 

talk that the Premier made about this and that, the actions he’s 

taking now is contrary to some of the things that he said back in 

those days. 

 

So I know for my issue with this is that it’s hard to take the 

Premier, it’s hard to take the words of the Premier seriously 

when this conversion which he has had so recently goes against 

what he has talked about for such a long period of time. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, it certainly goes against the philosophical 

. . . the words the members opposite have said for many years 

on the issue of what sort of role government ought to have in 

ensuring that the benefits of the resources in the province are 

maximized for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it would be interesting to see how the members opposite, 

how they actually feel on this position when the door is closed 

and they’re able to have a frank discussion. We know members 

opposite do read polls very well and very closely. We know that 

their position can evolve quite rapidly, based on what they are 

reading in the polls. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Premier’s new-found belief that it’s appropriate for his 

government to say no to this takeover is more based on polling 

than opposed to any sort of deep conviction he has on this issue. 

 

If we look at remarks that members opposite have made over 

the years, there’s quite a bit of evidence to suggest that the 

Premier’s not alone in this new-found desire to take a proactive 

step and ensure that benefits are maximized for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Wood River in his Throne Speech . . . This is 

the member who at length, any chance he’s given, goes on 

about talking fighting communism and the evils of the left and 

any sort of government involvement in the economy. This is his 

bread and butter of any speech when he’s able to give it, Mr. 

Speaker. In his Throne Speech the member said — this is page 

116 from March 26, 2001: 

 

And part of my duties, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a fighter 

pilot was I was part of a defensive structure in the free 

world to defend against the spread of communism. Now 

isn’t that ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

He goes on to say, “An economy controlled by the government 

rather than business, I totally disagree with.” 



5720 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, now perhaps the member opposite, he is on the 

more extreme end of his caucus. I actually think he represents 

more of the norm within caucus, but it’s clear he’s gone on 

record any chance he has very early on, stating his opinion of 

what sort of involvement the economy . . . what sort of 

involvement government ought to have in the economy. 

 

Another individual, Mr. Speaker, an individual who’s served in 

cabinet at different points and is no longer in cabinet, in his 

maiden speech, the member from Thunder Creek near Moose 

Jaw, in his maiden speech on page 118, he said, “It is our duty 

as residents of Saskatchewan to see that government ceases to 

be master and tax collector and begins to be the facilitator for 

economic development and prosperity.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have talked now of the Premier talking 

about the possibility of a special tax if a deal were to go 

through. If we have the Premier talking about how government 

ought to take a stand here and stand up for the people of 

Saskatchewan, I think many people would understand my 

hesitancy to take members at their word on these issues when 

we look at their track record of statements in so many instances 

and that they have told and conveyed a very different story. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how this makes members opposite 

feel as MLAs but also, Mr. Speaker, members of Executive 

Council who are working for the Sask Party government at this 

time. We can recall . . . When I think about a government who 

has lost its way, I’m taken back to the remarks that the Premier 

once made about how he saw it as a huge advantage to him that 

he was part of a government that had lost its way. Now he was 

talking about the former Grant Devine administration and the 

charges and the convictions that ensued out of that period of 

time, that dark period of time for Saskatchewan people. Well 

the Premier talked about how this for him was a benefit because 

it allowed him to see what not to do and the errors of when a 

government loses its way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a new generation of tiny 

Tories in Executive Council who are working now and someday 

may make a similar remark about how it was a problem . . . or a 

similar remark how it’s a benefit that they were a part of a 

government that had lost its way. Now they’ll be speaking 

about it in ideological sense based on a conservative world view 

of the role of government in the economy. 

 

And let me be clear; I support the NDP position when it comes 

to saying no about the possible takeover of PCS by BHP. But in 

the same way that we’ve seen the Harper Conservatives in 

Ottawa betray their philosophical and ideological roots on many 

issues, we see a similar instance happening now here with 

members opposite. And it’ll be interesting to see how that 

affects the rank and file and the average member within the 

Sask Party. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think when we look at the potash issue, it’s 

clear that members opposite have been making up their 

approach as they go along. They’ve been trying to buy time, 

buying time to read the polls and come up with some sort of 

position that is opportunistic for the short term but is certainly 

not a reliable position, in my opinion, when we look at their 

track record over the years. So on the potash issue, in my 

opinion, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are certainly 

ideologically adrift. 

 

The next issue I’d like to speak about, Mr. Speaker, is the issue 

of long-term care facilities which is mentioned in the Throne 

Speech. Now this is an interesting discussion because it comes 

out of . . . The issue of long-term care facilities comes out of a 

discussion we were having last session. 

 

And last session, those that follow closely at home, follow the 

news, and members in the Chamber will remember the debate 

that we had, and most likely will continue to have, about the 

proposed . . . or about the Amicus deal in Saskatoon. And we 

talked about, at length here in the Chamber, how the rules were 

not the same for everyone in the province. How with the 

Amicus deal there was a deviation from what had been the 

traditional approach for the development of long-term care 

facilities in the province. 

 

The traditional approach, Mr. Speaker, and for those at home, is 

that the local community raises a portion and then government 

chips in a portion. That the split, the ratio is set. It’s predictable. 

Communities know what to do and they carry on their plans. So 

members opposite can think of facilities in their own 

constituencies where this has occurred. Oliver Lodge is in 

Saskatoon Massey Place and the good people that are the 

backers of Oliver Lodge have been working for years, through 

bake sales, through fundraisers, through planned giving, all 

sorts of initiatives to generate their share of the project. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it comes out through, not in an open way, 

not through a public way and a way of being clear and upfront 

with the people of Saskatchewan. It comes out that there’s a 

sweetheart deal for one group, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t have to 

go and do all the fundraising. Doesn’t have to ask for the 

planned giving. Doesn’t have to do the bake sales. Doesn’t have 

to do the raffles. They, Mr. Speaker, get a special premium on 

the beds that they would be building, a premium that would 

provide additional revenue for the group and thereby pay for the 

facility. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very clear that the criticism of this 

project is not a criticism of the organization that is behind the 

project. Those individuals are very good people and contribute 

a great deal to the province, as does the Catholic Health 

Ministry. The problem, Mr. Speaker, is a one-off sweetheart 

deal with this government with a certain group and how it is not 

fair for the many, many Saskatchewan communities who are 

engaged in the pursuit of a new long-term care facility. And 

then, Mr. Speaker, we learn of untendered contracts and 

different aspects that are just all the more troubling. So in this 

Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, there’s talk of an innovative 

approach to the issue of long-term care facilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at a bit of the record of members 

opposite when it comes to long-term care facilities. In February 

of ’09 there was an announcement of 13 long-term care 

facilities. And there were announcements, reannouncements, 

there was a great deal of fanfare about this, Mr. Speaker. Well 

then just a short time later, last November in ’09, we get word 

that the funding is cancelled and these projects are all deferred. 

So it stopped the train; the community’s hopes were raised and 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5721 

now . . . then notice was given to communities that the funding 

is not there. And now, Mr. Speaker, we hear that it’s an urgent 

issue and the government is once again consulting, consulting 

with these communities. 

 

So it’s puzzling to someone who has been watching the 

budgets, to someone who’s been watching the mid-term 

updates, to have this new concern for long-term care facilities 

after just cancelling the funding for things that they reannounce 

more than once. To me, Mr. Speaker, it shows that it’s more 

about content for a Throne Speech and less about doing what’s 

right in the area of long-term care facilities. 

 

And we’ll look at the financial decisions the Sask Party is 

making. When we talk about this innovative idea for long-term 

care facilities, the Throne Speech is quite vague on details about 

what this innovative approach for long-term care facilities 

means. Causes me to be puzzled about what it is going to look 

like, because there are no details there. Will this mean that the 

sweetheart approach that the government has taken will be okay 

for some communities, not others? Will it be an expansion of 

the sweetheart? 

 

So the question to me is, how would you get on the Sask Party 

sweetheart list? Members at home can come to their own 

conclusions on that one. Or does it mean . . . What does it mean 

for long-term debt implications for the province? Is this a repeat 

of a Grant Devine approach in opening facilities that . . . where 

the funding is not in place at the present time? So when it 

comes to long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, the financial 

mismanagement and doublespeak of this Sask Party to me is 

very apparent. 

 

I’ve talked about potash, how members opposite are 

ideologically adrift. I’ve talked about long-term care facilities, 

which addresses some of the on-and-off-again language and the 

financial mismanagement we’ve seen from the Sask Party. 

 

The next area, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address in the 

Throne Speech is the issue of the environment. Now there have 

been, in the Throne Speech, there’s mention of new steps that 

members opposite, that the government plans to take on the 

environment and some new steps which in and of themselves 

could be good things. We’ll see what the details are like and 

what the legislation looks like and how the government plans 

on carrying this out. 

 

But the Great Sand Hills, of course, it’s a sensitive area. It’s an 

area that Saskatchewan people love. It’s an important area. It’s 

important for the community. It’s important for the people of 

Saskatchewan. It’s important for the wildlife there. That’s a 

good thing perhaps. We’ll see what the legislation in fact looks 

like. But at face value, protection of an endangered area sounds 

okay. 

 

EnerGuide, the extension of EnerGuide, Mr. Speaker, okay, 

well if there’s a plan that does help individuals make some 

steps, again we’ll see what the details are, but this could be an 

okay thing. 

 

What this Throne Speech though, when addressing the 

environment, what it fails to do is take into consideration the 

gigantic missteps that were made in the last session on the issue 

of the environment. And I’m speaking of, Mr. Speaker, of 

course the changes through WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act] that the government made which eliminated 

protection for up to 3.5 million acres of sensitive wildlife 

habitat. 

 

And this was a big issue last session as we talked about it many 

days in the Chamber, and individuals . . . It was a hot topic for 

question period. It was a hot topic for the minister at that time. 

And it was an issue that concerned many, many people in 

Saskatchewan. I imagine there was considerable debate within 

that caucus. But again, it was piece of legislation — the 3.5 

million acres of Crown land, land that’s owned by everyone in 

Saskatchewan, put up for sale, protection removed from the 

land, Mr. Speaker — widely seen as an error by the Sask Party. 

 

I believe it was in the same newspaper article, Mr. Speaker, that 

this issue was being talked about in the editorial piece the day 

following the Throne Speech. And on this issue of how the Sask 

Party in this Throne Speech is completely blind, completely 

ignores the huge error that they made last session by removing 

protection for up to 3.5 million acres of land, the editorial reads: 

 

However, it only serves as a pre-election reminder of this 

government’s utterly boneheaded move last year to 

remove nearly 3 million acres of Crown land from the 

protective umbrella of the wildlife protection Act. 

 

So recognition by many members in the province that some 

huge errors were made last session and some errors ought to be 

corrected. 

 

Well what do we see in this session, Mr. Speaker? We see some 

steps perhaps in some good areas, but steps that don’t address 

the errors, the huge flaws that the government made in the 

previous sessions. So it’s a preference on the environmental 

front that we see, a preference over tokenism as opposed to 

actually addressing, recognizing errors, correcting them, and 

addressing the most important issues. 

 

I won’t get into at length, Mr. Speaker, the cancellation of the 

green fund and any sort of coherent overall plan in addressing 

greenhouse gases. I’ll let another member address that issue. 

But it’s clear that — well in my opinion it’s clear, Mr. Speaker 

— that on the issue of the environment, we see a preference for 

tokenism over real positive change. 

 

This is a little bit of an aside, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s 

important to mention though. There’s another lesson that’s 

learned by the misstep, the misplay that we’ve seen in the 

environment over the past two sessions. The legislation that was 

introduced, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ll back up one second. I think it’s 

important to talk about this because it speaks to how the 

Premier takes responsibility for his actions. It speaks to how he 

can recognize a problem and how he ought to take corrective 

measures. We saw with the changes to the protective land, the 

legislation that the previous minister introduced in the last 

session before the Cabinet shuffle. 

 

The current member from Martensville introduced this 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t her legislation. This was 

government legislation. I don’t think the member from 

Martensville was up late at night and thinking about, oh, how 



5722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

should I take away protection of protected land, up to 3.5 

million acres of protected land? How should I do this? This, Mr. 

Speaker, was a decision. This was legislation that came from 

the Premier. 

 

So the Premier brings forward this legislation, taking away 

protection of land. Protection, Mr. Speaker, that was 

appreciated by the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, by Ducks 

Unlimited, by the nature society . . . many different groups 

supported this legislation. The Premier makes this decision, Mr. 

Speaker, to remove the protection of the land, to put it up for 

sale. 

 

And he asked the former minister of the Environment, the 

member from Martensville, to do some tough slogging. I don’t 

know how the conversation would have gone. But he clearly 

would’ve, I think, would had to have said, I know this isn’t your 

piece of legislation but it’s something we need to do. I won’t 

talk about motives now why he would want this done. But I 

need you to go out and push this through. We need it through. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite pushes it through, says 

all the lines that she’s told to say. And how was she rewarded, 

Mr. Speaker? A female, a strong minister in the cabinet, does 

what the Premier asks. And how is she rewarded for doing this? 

Well, she’s removed from cabinet, Mr. Speaker, and she’s put 

to the back benches. 

 

To me, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how a premier ought to 

recognize the errors that he has made. Take responsibility for 

them. Instead it’s passing the buck to someone else and 

allowing them to be the scapegoat for unpopular and, as The 

StarPhoenix editorial says, boneheaded legislation. I don’t think 

that’s the proper way to handle it. And it would be curious to 

truly know what all the members of caucus and cabinet think on 

that issue. But I don’t expect we’ll be getting the details. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about potash, how I think it shows 

that the members opposite are now ideologically adrift. I’ve 

talked about long-term care facilities, how we see how truly 

financially misguided and messed up members opposite are. 

Talked about the environment, how there may be positive steps 

but it’s a focus on tokenism over positive change. 

 

The last area, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about is the area of 

advanced education and some of the things that are mentioned 

in the Throne Speech on this topic. First off, I’d like to say in 

the last couple of days, Mr. Speaker, since we’ve been back I’ve 

been reading the petition on the grad retention program. And we 

still do not see a correction to the errors that were made when 

the Sask Party changed the program. They left out master’s and 

Ph.D. graduates, some of the people that we truly want to have 

in the province. I think that most people would agree with that. 

And I know I have and many other members have heard from 

master’s and Ph.D. students who were concerned about being 

left out from this program. So the Throne Speech is quiet on 

that and doesn’t mention any sort of desire to fix the misstep, to 

fix the error. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We also see silence, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of tuition. We’ve 

seen over the past two years tuition steadily climb on university 

campuses beyond the rate of inflation. We see no talk about that 

in the Throne Speech and how that may be a concern. 

 

There is talk, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech about a new 

scholarship fund. And I’ll perhaps take a similar tack as I did 

with the environment legislation. This could be a good thing. 

We have yet to see what the details are and to hear from student 

unions on the issue. But again the devil’s always in the details, 

so it’s interesting. It will be interesting to see how the plan 

develops and unfolds in the coming weeks and months. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, if tuition is going up at a steady rate, at 

a rate beyond inflation, and that is costing students a greater 

amount every year, if more dollars are being taken out of the 

left pocket and only a few are being returned through the right, 

it’s still not necessarily a fair approach for all students. So we’ll 

see what the details of the plan are and hear from students on 

that. 

 

So when we come to the area of advanced education, to me, 

similar to other areas where we’ve seen the government act. It’s 

murky on the details, and we’ll have to reserve a decision until 

we figure out what the details are. But we do know the track 

record for Saskatchewan students is that life has become much 

more expensive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about potash, how members opposite 

are ideologically adrift. I’ve talked about long-term care 

facilities, which demonstrates to me that members say one thing 

one day, say another another day, and aren’t quite sure what 

they are able to afford and when they’re able to afford it. I’ve 

talk about the environment, Mr. Speaker, which in my opinion 

demonstrates a favouritism of tokenism over real positive 

change. And I’ve talked about advanced education, which 

suggests that things are still rather murky, and we will wait for 

the details — not a great deal of clarity. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, based on just those four topics, and I know 

members opposite will address different issues as they see fit 

and the issues that stood out to them as positive or blunders in 

the Throne Speech. But because of my observations in those 

areas, I’m not able to support the Throne Speech. 

 

I would though like to move an amendment, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Throne Speech and I’ll read this amendment at this time: 

 

That the following words be added to the government’s 

motion: 

 

This government has lost the confidence of this 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan because of 

the government’s lack of vision for the future of our 

province and its failure to address the important issues 

facing Saskatchewan today in the Speech from the 

Throne, including maximizing the benefits for 

Saskatchewan families from our resources, improving 

the quality of our health care, addressing critical issues 

of affordability, and returning to sound financial 

management. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5723 

Place has moved the following amendment. 

 

That the following words be added to the government’s 

motion: 

 

This government has lost the confidence of this 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan because of 

the government’s lack of vision for the future of our 

province and its failure to address the important issues 

facing Saskatchewan today in the Speech from the 

Throne, including maximizing the benefits for 

Saskatchewan families from our resources, improving 

the quality of our health care, addressing critical issues 

of affordability, and returning to sound financial 

management. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

my honour to second the motion, the amendment to this tired 

old Throne Speech, this recycled Throne Speech from the Sask 

Party government. But following the great speech that my 

colleague, the honourable member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place just gave, it’s really an honour to follow that gentlemen. 

 

My first words, Mr. Speaker, are of course going to be words of 

welcome to the new member for Saskatoon Northwest who just 

not very long ago gave his maiden speech in the Assembly, and 

we look forward to continued contributions from that hon. 

member. And welcome, sir. Congratulations on your election to 

this most honourable of places that we have here. 

 

My second words, Mr. Speaker, are words of gratitude to my 

constituents, the good people of Regina Coronation Park. What 

a wonderful constituency that is full of people that get up every 

day and they think, how can I make my area of Saskatchewan, 

of Regina, of the world a better place. And you know, they 

industriously go about going to work every day and taking care 

of their families, whether that’s children or whether that’s aging 

parents, it doesn’t much matter. 

 

We’ve got the whole mix in Regina Coronation Park. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I truly have been blessed to represent what I honestly 

feel as the greatest constituency in all of Saskatchewan. And I 

know other colleagues on both sides think their constituencies 

are pretty darn special as well. But I really have a special place 

in my heart for all of the good people of Regina Coronation 

Park who, for the most part, are not a group of complainers. 

They’re a group of doers. They’re a group of people that just go 

about their business and make things happen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the Throne Speech, and 

I started by talking a bit about it being a recycled speech. And I 

was reflecting as I was preparing for this. You know, people 

thought that after 16 years in government that the NDP was 

pretty old and tired and you know what — the voters are right. 

I’m not going to argue with that. It was probably . . . Probably 

we were showing signs of being tired and starting to recycle 

some of the things that we believe in and stand for. I happen to 

think most of those things were good things, but clearly the 

Sask Party got elected on a theme of change, on a theme of let’s 

make some things happen in a different way. And they were 

elected with a great deal of goodwill, with a great deal of hope 

and, as I’ve mentioned, a desire for change. 

 

Well the results three years in, Mr. Speaker, are just like the 

recycle circle with the three arrows going around and round. 

And in three years, it’s just zip, zip, zip. Gone full circle 

recycling old promises, and let me just pick one out of the air. 

They talk in this Speech from the Throne about filling a 

promise made to municipalities. Well last year’s promise was 

that municipalities would get the equivalent of 1 per cent of the 

PST [provincial sales tax] guaranteed as part of their stable 

funding. Now this year it’s promised again. Isn’t it amazing? 

You know we keep hearing from government members, we 

keep hearing about all of the promises that are being kept, but 

we never hear a peep out of the ones that they’re unable to 

fulfill either now or never have been an intention of fulfilling 

those promises. 

 

Another thing just before I lose this little tidbit of information 

from my memory banks, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech talks 

about health care. It talks about rural facilities and rural doctors. 

Well the reality is that in — what was the year? — in 2005, 

there was 117 physician vacancies in the province when we left 

office — 117. There was 94 then. Ninety-four. Look at that. I 

look at the numbers and I get them flipped; 94 in 2007 and 117 

today. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Which is best? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Which is best? I hear members heckling, which 

is best? Ninety-four vacancies under the NDP under physician 

vacancies in Saskatchewan, and 117 now under the Sask Party. 

And they ask which is best? 

 

Is it small wonder that people are scratching their heads and 

saying, what a tired government the Sask Party government is? 

What a dismal failure it is. Health care, particularly rural health 

care was one of the pillars that they stood on. Oh they decried 

how the NDP were mistreating them, how we in government 

couldn’t deliver the services. There may be some truth to that, 

Mr. Speaker, in some specific areas. But let’s assume that there 

is some truth to it in physician vacancies — 94 vacancies under 

us; 117, the latest number, under them. 

 

If we were a failure, what does that make the Sask Party 

government? The answer is, a dismal, dismal, dismal, 

unfortunate failure. And the people of Saskatchewan deserve 

better. They deserve more. They deserve a government that they 

can trust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

More recently, we witnessed yesterday in question period and 

in an emergency debate around the issue of potash, Mr. 

Speaker, we had an opportunity to be arm in arm and stand 

united. We did. New Democrats stood together; we voted with 

the government respecting the ownership of Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

There was one thing that we wanted to do to make it absolutely 

beyond any doubt for a long, long time. The one thing we 

wanted to do was to have the Premier go to Ottawa, which he 

was planning to do anyway, and we wanted our Leader of the 

Opposition to join the Premier so that they could go together to 

the nation’s capital and lobby respecting the ownership of 

PotashCorp. Well in a small-minded move, the government said 



5724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

no, we’re only going alone. No Leader of the Opposition. No 

way. This after we had stood in this legislature and voted with 

them, they said no. No, we’re going alone. We don’t want the 

Leader of the Opposition to make it crystal clear that 

Saskatchewan is united in its stance respecting potash. 

 

Well that caused me, Mr. Speaker, to reflect a little bit on well 

what is it, what is it that makes great leaders? And, you know, 

I’ve only been in a position of an MLA for just over 24 years 

now. I’ve seen leaders, I’ve served under some tremendous 

leaders. I’ve seen leaders come and go on both sides of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. I’ve seen some leaders that were better 

than others. And then I reflected, not only in here but in all of 

my life’s experiences, what makes a good leader? And I’ll tell 

you one of the key things that makes a good leader is someone 

that will surround themselves with the very best expertise they 

can, someone that will accept that it’s possible to have someone 

who’s more expert in an area with them as opposed to shutting 

them out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier shut out an expert in the Leader 

of the Opposition, shut out an expert, someone who has served 

in a publicly traded capacity, intergovernmental relations with 

Nexen which is an oil company that serves all around the globe, 

all around the globe. I don’t know how many countries but 

virtually every oil-producing country in the world, and I suspect 

a few more. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And this Leader of the Opposition was the vice-president in 

charge of intergovernmental relations, so he knew his way 

around government. Never mind his experience in this 

Chamber, never mind his experience as deputy premier, never 

mind his experiences here — this is an expert that would know 

what to say and how to deal with the federal government. And 

the government members opposite were so small-minded, they 

denied Saskatchewan that opportunity. 

 

Now I’m going to leave that for the moment and go to the next 

little insult. You know it was August when Billiton announced 

that it wanted to take over PotashCorp. It was August. And 

what’s the latest thing? Now the latest is that the Premier’s 

thrown off going to Ottawa to lobby, that somehow the deadline 

— which the public knew about a week ago — the deadline for 

the federal government snuck up and bit him, and now we don’t 

have an opportunity to go to Ottawa. The Premier lost, 

squandered, wasted the opportunity to go to Ottawa and look 

the Prime Minister, his cousin, his political cousin in the eye 

and say don’t do this. Don’t do this. He lost that opportunity. 

 

Now what a shame because here we are again at the mercy of 

13 federal MPs [Member of Parliament], Conservative MPs 

from Saskatchewan, 13. I’m hearing some terminology, Mr. 

Speaker, that I don’t think is necessarily parliamentary about 

the value, the efficacy of the 13 Conservative MPs whose 

silence is absolutely deafening on this issue, 13 members of 

parliament that the people of Saskatchewan sent to Ottawa to 

represent Saskatchewan’s best interests. Now who’s out of 

sync? Is it the Legislative Assembly, both sides of 

Saskatchewan that’s out of sync with all Saskatchewan people, 

or is it 13 federal Conservative MPs whose silence is 

deafening? Mr. Speaker, what a shame that this resource of 

potash is left to the vagaries because of 13 MPs that are very, 

very silent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues in my constituency that has been 

coming up again and again and again and continually is that of 

affordability. It’s that of just simply people trying to have 

enough payday at the end of the month to make it to the next, to 

get through the hoop, so to speak. Mr. Speaker, the months 

seem to be getting longer between paydays for my constituents. 

There’s an awful lot of belt-tightening going up. 

 

Housing prices, rents have gone up more than $200 a month on 

average in Saskatchewan in three short years, this at a time 

when the government has done precious little on the way of 

affordable housing. I heard some bragging in the Throne 

Speech. The number that comes to my mind was 117. I don’t 

know if that’s the number of new social housing units. I think 

117. It was a very relatively small number anyway, three years 

into a term of government, especially from a government that 

was blessed with an unexpected windfall in excess of $2 billion 

that they seem to have squandered because not only do we not 

have significantly more social housing. We have lost the lowest 

cost utility bundle that people of Saskatchewan had enjoyed. 

 

And I note, I can absolutely see government heads coming up 

because they’re going to say ah, but we just lowered the 

SaskEnergy rate last week, just lowered the SaskEnergy rate. I 

think it was 7 per cent. Well two days later I’m watching the 

news, and Manitoba lowered theirs 12 per cent. Manitoba 

lowered theirs 12 per cent, their natural gas. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is the bundle of utilities 

that Saskatchewan people used to take to the bank, for granted, 

we were going to pay the lowest bundle rate in all of Canada, 

and that has gone by the board. There’s no guarantee of it, and 

in fact there’s been no delivery of it under the Sask Party 

government, no delivery of the lowest cost bundle, period. And 

people are struggling with affordability issues, whether it’s 

paying their power bill, their gas bill, their phone bill, their 

insurance and, as I’ve talked about, their mortgage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, housing, I’d started this little bit about housing 

because housing . . . All of the credible studies that I’ve ever 

seen or heard about say that one of the greatest things that we 

can do to help children have a good outcome is to provide a 

stable home. And by a stable home, this doesn’t even, doesn’t 

even go so far as to say that mom has to be Ms. Perfect or dad 

has to be Mr. Perfect. I’m not trying to make excuses for less 

than perfect parents, but the reality is, as parents, most of us fall 

short at some time or another. Most of us don’t always meet the 

grade. 

 

But the greatest thing that we can do for our youth — whether 

they’re our own children, our grandchildren, our family, or our 

neighbours, our constituents — is make sure that they can have 

stable, affordable housing, decent shelter, and that they aren’t 

forever into this cycle of having to move because the apartment 

that they’ve rented is condominiumized. Or whatever the 

reason, you know, they move into some very poor, ghetto-like 

housing and are of course looking to improve themselves. But 

decisions have to be made very, very quickly when it comes to 

rent because of the very low vacancy rate. 

 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5725 

So for renters it is, it is absolutely imperative that there be some 

supply of affordable, low-cost housing available, or else it just 

keeps driving the market up with respect to rents. And that’s 

what we’re seeing. Not just Regina, not just Saskatoon — you 

see it in all of the cities of Saskatchewan, and I think it’s even 

spilt over into many of the towns and villages in our province. 

So we need to be working on social housing. 

 

Just before I forget it, the latest number, if you care to check on 

the realty market, shows that there’s five, three-bedroom houses 

or apartments for rent in all of Saskatchewan as I stand here and 

speak — just five. I mean if something happened in the last day 

and that doubled, that’d be all the way up to 10. I feel so 

terrible, Mr. Speaker, for any family that needs a three-bedroom 

or larger facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is leaving all kinds of things 

out. It’s not shown much of a charter, if I can describe it, for 

people. It started . . . I remember sitting right here when His 

Honour was reading the Speech from the Throne, and he started 

off bragging . . . well he’s reading the speech, so I don’t want to 

attribute His Honour . . . He’s reading the speech. The 

government prepares the speech and the Lieutenant Governor 

delivers it. 

 

But the speech started by talking about population growth, 

population growth. And we welcome that Saskatchewan has a 

growing population. This is good news. This is really good 

news in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The second thing that was 

said was we have to take steps to protect the economic growth 

of Saskatchewan. We have to protect it so that it continues to 

grow. 

 

Well you have to be very, very selective when you’re a Sask 

Party supporter to know, well when is it that you want to start? 

You want to start before or after the 6.2 shrinkage in one year in 

Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product — 6.2, the biggest 

shrinkage. The economy shrank the most under the Sask Party 

watch than it has shrunk since the 1930s. The biggest shrinkage 

happened under the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the economic growth has been somewhat anemic since 

we’re caught in . . . and we can argue well we’re caught in a 

worldwide recession and, you know, the list of excuses just 

keeps growing by the day. But the harsh reality is, Mr. Speaker, 

that the economic growth has been negative under this 

government in total. Three years in power and the sum of those 

three years is negative growth. And we’re supposed to do, 

somehow do something to protect that growth. I think not. I 

think not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think our job is to point out what’s wrong with what the Sask 

Party government is doing, how they’re failing our constituents 

and their constituents, the people of Saskatchewan. I think our 

job is to point out that there is a better way. There are things 

that can be done. There are things that should be done, Mr. 

Speaker. In the Throne Speech, one of the pieces that caught my 

ear was the bragging about the budget for Agriculture being the 

largest ever. Well, Mr. Speaker, in March when the budget 

speech was delivered there was $99 million cut from the 

budget. I guess that makes this one the largest ever. 

 

There is selective . . . The point I’m trying to make here, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there is selective memory by Sask Party 

government members — a selective memory. They’ll say one 

thing today and something different tomorrow or next year. 

And you know, the people of Saskatchewan deserve more than 

that. They deserve a government that they can trust. The people 

of Saskatchewan are a pretty darn resilient bunch. Overall, 

we’re a pretty darn resilient bunch. We know that the 

government isn’t going to save us from ourselves. We know 

that no government in Saskatchewan can protect us 100 per cent 

from our own idiosyncrasies, our own foibles. We know that. 

 

But we need a government that’s in our corner, and we need a 

government that we can trust. When a government says the 

economy is growing, has grown under our watch, it should be 

true. It should be accurate. The people of Saskatchewan deserve 

that kind of integrity, that personal fortitude, that personal 

honesty. Mr. Speaker, they need not the Orwellian doublespeak 

that we heard in this Throne Speech, but they deserve the truth, 

the unvarnished truth. 

 

Just before I take my place on this important Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on natural disasters. And 

there was reference in the Throne Speech about a government 

being nimble and quick in its response. When there’s a natural 

disaster, you’re now nimble and quick. In the new 

Saskatchewan, it’s nimble and quick. 

 

Well not three weeks ago I heard a relatively young woman 

from Maple Creek talking about them not having a furnace in 

their house. The paperwork was in Regina. The paperwork was 

in Regina, and they weren’t getting an answer. And the 

paperwork had been here for some two to three weeks at that 

point, and they didn’t know if they could get a new furnace. 

They clearly didn’t have the money. 

 

This young mother was the mother of twins, two twins less than 

a year old, Mr. Speaker, and didn’t know how she was going to 

keep her kids warm in the shoulder season, never mind as you 

go into winter. And this is the nimble and quick thing that’s 

being bragged about. She’s not alone. Her and her husband 

aren’t alone in knowing that the new nimbleness and quickness 

is just rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

People in Maple Creek, like people throughout this province, 

understand that there must be rules when there’s an emergency 

response. They know that the first thing you have to do is make 

sure the people are fed and safe. That’s a responsibility I think 

that the provincial government could take on. 

 

But then what they expect is that there has to be rules, but there 

has to be a certain amount of care from the government. The 

government must put the resources in to make sure that, in this 

case, the paperwork could be done so that that couple could get 

on with trying to hire a plumber so they could purchase and get 

installed a furnace in their home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for this and all of the other reasons that I have 

outlined in my speech, and many, many more, I will not be 

supporting this Speech from the Throne. This tired, old 

government, this tired, recycled Speech from the Throne, I will 

not be supporting. I will be supporting the amendment. Thank 



5726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

really appreciate the opportunity to stand up and offer our 

sincere and substantive support on this Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is highlight, as the Speech 

from the Throne reinforced Robert Frost’s famous lines about 

taking a road less travelled, we understand what that means in 

Saskatchewan where this is a journey between those who have 

helped to build our province, Mr. Speaker, and those that are 

inheriting our province. And the road less travelled is one filled 

with optimism today, Mr. Speaker, versus the years of 

pessimism and declining expectations on offer after too many 

years of NDP rule. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we would like to do is highlight some of the 

key aspects in this speech, but I’d be remiss if I didn’t take a 

couple of initial opportunities to first and foremost offer sincere 

congratulations to my colleagues, and most especially the 

Premier and our newest MLA from Saskatoon Northwest, who 

waged a very, very, I think, strategic and impassioned campaign 

and as a result saw his support increase for the individual and 

also for the party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to make sure that I recognize and appreciate the 

people of Saskatoon Greystone, that on an ongoing basis I am 

honoured and humbled to serve these individuals, these 

families, this community in our province as it works with great 

industry and impressive results right across Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, and obviously well beyond. The people of Saskatoon 

Greystone are deserving the very best that this legislature has to 

offer on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. All of us endeavour to 

ensure that their needs are met and certainly I’m among the 

most vocal cheerleaders of this constituency and the people that 

I have the honour and opportunity to represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some key elements that we obviously 

continue to address in the province of Saskatchewan that are 

reinforced and reflected within the Throne Speech. The issue of 

potash. Obviously in a vote taken in this very Assembly last 

week, we’ve seen the Assembly speak with one voice that 

protecting the jobs of the people of this province, ensuring the 

revenues for not just today but for future generations, and to 

ensure that we maintain an eye on the strategic significance of 

this valuable mineral, Mr. Speaker. Obviously we have heard 

from the Premier, from this government, from this legislature, 

this is an impassioned time in the country and in the province 

and the resounding response from Saskatchewan is a simple 

word, no, that is echoing across Canada with great resonance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to ensure that we touch on the 

significance of the clinical trials and our continuing efforts — 

not in isolation, but with many others — to combat MS. There 

are a couple of aspects in this. Certainly we see the significance 

of wedding both hope and science together as offering the best 

opportunities to ensure that we have empirically based data and 

answers for people across this province and well beyond. And 

we know how important it is. 

 

This initiative has also allowed us to begin to participate in and 

hear from others more broadly affiliated with issues of clinical 

trials in Canada. And we have heard from many corners and 

quarters the comment that Canada and all Canadians need to be 

attentive to this, not just in MS — certainly we know how 

significant that is here within Saskatchewan — but actually on 

an ongoing basis across the country. There is more work for 

Canadians and Canadian health researchers to do in this area. 

And the commentary has been that this is a very significant step 

forward: (a) in research regarding the fight against MS; but 

more broadly, a broader fight for healthier communities, not 

just in Saskatchewan, but across the country. 

 

Obviously there are other themes. I’ll select a couple of others 

before getting into some of the details that I’m more familiar 

with, Mr. Speaker, on an ongoing basis because of the 

ministerial responsibilities that I have. 

 

One relates to STARS, and that is the capacity to complement 

the services available today for the people of this province with 

those that have been demonstrated over the course of many 

years in other provinces, and most especially we can point to 

the model, to our western neighbour in Alberta. This is a 

significant endeavour, and certainly we applaud the efforts that 

are under way to ensure that the people of this province have 

access to this very valuable and very important health service, 

especially for emergency response. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to highlight the significance of the 

context of the speech because it allows us to better understand 

this road that we are travelling together. 

 

We can see that within Saskatchewan we have more than 

528,000 people working today, more than 6,300 jobs year over 

year that have been added to the Saskatchewan economy. And 

in fact what we’ve seen is employment records for each of the 

last eight months. Mr. Speaker, importantly we applaud the 

private sector here because we’ve seen that the private sector 

and entrepreneurs have created more than 7,000 new jobs year 

over year, helping to fuel and facilitate the growth that’s under 

way. It’s one of the reasons that within Saskatchewan we point 

to the second lowest unemployment rate in the country. And we 

certainly know that there are more initiatives to undertake to 

ensure that we continue this growth. 

 

But importantly, and as our Premier has said, growth is not 

simply an end in itself; it is a means. And the means, Mr. 

Speaker, can be reflected in some key statistics. For example, 

all-time record earnings based on average weekly earnings are 

at over $852 per week. That’s up almost 6 per cent year over 

year, Mr. Speaker. That is, on average, Saskatchewan wage 

earners are in a better position than they were last year, and 

certainly what we see is the benefits of this growth being shared 

with the people right across the province. In fact what we can 

see is real earnings have increased by more than 5 per cent. 

 

What we have, Mr. Speaker, today on the saskjobs.ca website, 

we have more than 7,300 jobs open and available to the people 

of this province and well beyond. In fact the amount of interest 

in this website has seen more than 7 million people visit this 

site just simply since January 1st, already breaking the 2009 

record of 6.9 million people. 

 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5727 

And what we know, Mr. Speaker, is that this is just one 

instrument, but an important instrument, for us to ensure that 

people across the province, whether it’s sector by sector or 

community by community, are aware of opportunities that are 

available and open. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that within these statistics there is 

more to do, and we know that on a very real, human level, on a 

community level. And certainly we know this applies most 

especially when we look at statistics for First Nations and Métis 

peoples across the province. We certainly recognize, not in 

isolation but in partnership with many others, there is much 

more to do. 

 

What we can see is that we are making some progress. In fact 

First Nations and Métis employment has increased for the fifth 

straight month. That’s up over 1,400 jobs for members of those 

communities year over year. Now what we also realize is there 

is much to do in helping to close the gap, especially in both 

education and employment, when it comes to First Nations and 

Métis people and others in Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s one of the reasons that our government rolled up its 

sleeves and undertook to ensure that there was a sustainable 

response to issues that for too long had been overlooked. In fact 

the basic policy of the NDP previous had been, regarding First 

Nations University, a blank cheque and a blind eye to issues 

that were on the rise, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the reasons 

that we made sure, that we made sure that we were helping to 

address outstanding issues on this key issue. That’s one of the 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, that we ensured that an MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] was signed, Mr. Speaker, that 

there were a number of other agreements put in place. 

 

And while there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker, certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’ve seen, what we’ve seen is most recently a 

new board of directors appointed, and this institution making 

difficult and disciplined decisions as it continues to move 

forward, Mr. Speaker, something that the members opposite for 

too long overlooked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to this, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve just seen is we’ve been able to 

celebrate the opening of a new Aviation Learning Centre in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, that has connected multinational 

corporations from around the world all the way through 

post-secondary programming with the Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technology and SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] programming, all the way 

through to Mount Royal High School. 

 

The government is very proud — very, very proud — to be 

partnering with a variety, with a variety, Mr. Speaker, of 

partners to ensure that after many years of deliberation we were 

able to actually move forward on this initiative. And so we 

have, in one institutional home, we have SIAST commercial 

pilot training programs under way, Mr. Speaker, and at the 

same time we also have an aviation mechanics program under 

way. More than 50 post-secondary students are going to be 

trained in that centre of excellence, Mr. Speaker, supported, 

supported, Mr. Speaker, by multinational corporations, by the 

federal government, provincial government, numerous private 

sector entities, as well as numerous First Nations and Métis 

organizations, as well as a number of other post-secondary 

institutions. 

 

This complements, Mr. Speaker, in fact, a recent opening, a 

recent opening — where I know the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana was also, and there were others present from this — and 

that is the Saskatoon Trades and Skills Training Centre. 

Certainly that training centre appreciates the bipartisan support 

that has seen, that has seen millions of dollars, millions of 

dollars offered, millions of dollars offered, Mr. Speaker, and 

invested into this skills training centre to ensure that there are 

more opportunities in the skills training areas, Mr. Speaker, 

especially for those from First Nations and Métis communities, 

but from a variety of others as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past year we’ve seen an investment of more 

than 5 per cent increase within the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration budget for those 

dollars pertaining to First Nations and Métis learners. We know 

there’s more to do, but substantively, Mr. Speaker, we see that 

there’s progress being made in very, very real and substantive 

ways. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, from there what we can see more broadly is that in 

key areas of post-secondary education, again this has been 

recognized across the country, more than 5 per cent increase for 

post-secondary education this past year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, obviously this is a key area for our province. When we 

look at the track record of members opposite on tuition, Mr. 

Speaker, so for the University of Saskatchewan while they were 

in power, Mr. Speaker, more than 90 per cent increase. At the 

University of Regina more than 80 per cent was the increase, 

and, Mr. Speaker, more than 200 per cent at SIAST. These are 

some key indicators that the members opposite have as part of 

their track record in supporting students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve done is we’ve worked with the 

institutions and our students to ensure that we are keeping 

post-secondary education defined by some key elements. 

Obviously echoing the report that Bob Rae offered in 2005, 

we’re focusing on excellence. We’re also focusing on program 

innovation. And you can see that on an ongoing basis, Mr. 

Speaker, across this province. Mr. Speaker, we’re also putting 

an emphasis on greater inclusion. Making sure, Mr. Speaker, we 

are making sure that with any greater inclusion there’s greater 

affordability, accessibility, and obviously, Mr. Speaker, greater 

equity that can be addressed right across our post-secondary 

institutions. That’s why we were so delighted to be able to 

highlight a new initiative for graduate students, Mr. Speaker, as 

well as highlighting that we’re going to be making some 

progress as it relates to a new scholarship, a new scholarship 

initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we continue to focus on the key advantages of ensuring that 

we’re investing in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, 

again in some areas working to overcome an uneven track 

record offered from the other side, in other areas continuing to 

build on areas where there was some success, Mr. Speaker — 

all focusing on our students. And one of those areas that we’ve 

obviously focused on, Mr. Speaker, the construction is under 

way on the academic health science wings, Mr. Speaker. This is 



5728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

a far cry from the College of Medicine that was put on 

probation when members opposite were in power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve also continued to work to increase the number of seats 

for doctors, Mr. Speaker, those being trained as doctors, as well 

as residents. Mr. Speaker, we are also continuing to invest in 

nurse training, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, just a couple of 

weeks ago here in Regina we saw, the Minister of Health and I, 

what we were able to participate in and see was third-year 

medical students being trained here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, as 

an initial step to help ensure that they’re gaining experience 

with their fourth-year colleagues and residents being trained 

here, right here in Regina. 

 

We also are beginning to see — with an example in Swift 

Current where medical residents are now under way, Mr. 

Speaker — in very real, tangible ways for this province we 

continue to see that there are increased numbers of health care 

providers being trained within the province of Saskatchewan. 

And we know how significant that is for helping to ensure the 

health care of communities right across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is something . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Nutana continues to ask about 

things that are original. Mr. Speaker, here is a point that I hope 

she gives some consideration to, because Tony Blair asks a very 

simple question in his recent book about those jurisdictions that 

are losing people, Mr. Speaker, and those that are gaining 

people, Mr. Speaker. The answer is, under the former 

government what we saw was 35,000 people leave this 

province, Mr. Speaker, in the decade preceding the last election. 

Mr. Speaker, in three years we’ve seen those numbers already 

increase. In fact Saskatchewan — more than 1,045,000 people. 

An all-time high, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Going back to Tony Blair’s very simple question, are more 

people moving into a jurisdiction or more moving out? Under 

the NDP they were moving out. And, Mr. Speaker, under this 

government and the leadership that we see offered right across 

the province, Mr. Speaker, we see a very, very resounding echo 

of optimism when it comes to the road that’s being travelled 

because more people are on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the aspects that I think is most impressive 

about this Throne Speech is that it resonates for people right 

across the province. Certainly as I’ve had an opportunity to hear 

from people, they have understood that this government is 

standing up for the interests of the people of this province. They 

understand that this government is investing more than ever in 

post-secondary education. They understand that this 

government is helping to work with partners in playing a 

leading role on the fight against MS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on file after file, on case after case, they see that 

Saskatchewan is playing a leadership role. Mr. Speaker, this 

culminates in being the fastest growing province in 

Confederation, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a far cry from where we 

were with those individuals in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there’s more to do, the road is ahead, and 

it’s one that’s defined by optimism. And there are a lot of 

people sharing that sense of optimism on the road today, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s one of the reasons that I will be ensuring that 

we support the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, and the 

vision that is represents for the people of this province, not just 

for today, but in the future as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

is indeed a pleasure to stand here and make a few comments 

about the Speech from the Throne. It all has to do with the 

growth of Saskatchewan. And as the growth of Saskatchewan is 

paramount, so is the growth of my community of Moose Jaw. 

And I’d like to say a few things about Moose Jaw. 

 

The new multiplex is certainly going ahead of schedule or at 

least on schedule. I toured it a couple of months ago, and I was 

absolutely amazed at the construction and where it’s been. The 

exterior — the landscaping — is a little bit behind simply 

because of the fact of the weather we had all summer. But it 

certainly is an asset to the downtown sector with the curling 

rink and the skating rink. I think it could be probably best 

summed up with words . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Member from 

Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you again. In regards to the 

multiplex, I think the . . . [inaudible] . . . and the attitude of the 

people of the province or the people of the city could be best 

summed up with the words of my five-year-old grandson as we 

drove past the multiplex about a couple of weeks ago. And he 

saw it and he said, Grandpa, I’m going to be so glad when I’m 

six because that’s when the Moose Jaw Warriors will be 

playing in the new rink. So it just shows the kind of attitude that 

is in the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

On this very day, Mr. Speaker, the indoor soccer field is 

actually hosting its first competition, as it is complete for 

competition. It’s not quite totally finished, but a tour of it just 

last week showed that the field is ready. It’s a nice green turf. 

It’s got a nice walking track, a gym attached on the upstairs, 

concession, as well as a meeting area for meeting groups, and 

an observation deck. 

 

Congratulations to Scott Clark, who is the new manager for 

both the multiplex and the indoor soccer field. Scott comes 

from Ontario, and he’s returning to Saskatchewan where he 

grew up in the city of Regina. 

 

Other things are happening in Moose Jaw. Of course the pork 

plant will be opening up in the near future. The amenities of this 

great city as being the tourist capital of Saskatchewan with the 

tunnels, the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa, the murals, the 

museums — it’s all part of a great place to live. 

 

In part of the community is the Wakamow river valley, 

Wakamow Valley, and our government just spent $314,000 in 

improving the trails there. Along with the Wakamow Valley is 

the new footbridge from the bridge that was taken out in the 

flood of 1997 and is now under construction to be replaced. So 

we’re pretty proud of that as construction and improvements 

come into the city. 

 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5729 

Other things that happen in the Wakamow Valley are the Relay 

for Life, the Harvest Moon Festival. We have the dog jog, the 

moose jog, and the viewing of the Stanley Cup that took place 

in Moose Jaw this past summer. It took place in the beautiful 

Wakamow Valley, as besides the weddings and reunions that 

also take place there. 

 

There’s a lot of things that happen in this community. And I’ve 

got to thank my wife Debbie for accompanying me on as many 

as we can, as we go to a lot of the events like the Festival of 

Trees that is coming up in a couple of weeks. And of course the 

home of the Moose Jaw Warriors, and we’re certainly proud of 

the team and their winning streak of three games now. So I 

appreciate what they do for the community. 

 

I want to acknowledge two special people that work in my 

constituency: Tanya Tuck, who now joined our staff just a short 

while ago — a tremendous little worker, likes to be busy and 

does a lot for the constituency office; as well as Denise Arnold, 

who has been with the office since its inception. In fact it was 

Denise that found the original location, and these two 

individuals work very hard for the people of Moose Jaw, and as 

well as many of the citizens of the province. 

 

It’s interesting to note that the number of concerns that come 

into the office from outside of our constituency far outnumber 

the ones that come from within. So you can see that there is a 

need for good people, and we’ve got them. And they rely on us 

for their help, and we certainly appreciate the work that they do 

in our office. 

 

The Speech from the Throne serves Moose Jaw very well, as 

well as the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it was three 

years ago that the people of the province selected this new road, 

a road of optimism. A road of vision and a road of growth, of 

change, and of fairness. A road to benefit the people of the 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, it was the right road. The road 

from the Speech of the Throne clearly states that we will 

continue to work to improve the lives of the people of this 

province. 

 

Now some of the members opposite have mentioned that it’s 

more of the same. Well I guess we can take that as a bit of a 

compliment, Mr. Speaker. When you have more of the same 

economic growth, that’s great. When you have more of the 

same of population increase, more of the same employment 

opportunities, optimism, enthusiasm — that’s part of what 

we’re looking at in this province. You know, and the Speech 

from the Throne will continue to work to improve the lives of 

the people of this great province moving forward. More of the 

same of what we’ve done. 

 

More of the same would be the municipal revenue sharing 

where we will fully implement the municipal revenue sharing 

formula, that is of one full percentage point of the PST. This is 

the highest operational support ever given to the province and 

to the municipalities by the province, and it’s a great 

opportunity. 

 

Now municipalities can look forward. They can plan long term. 

They know that the support from the province will be there, and 

it will certainly help to increase the infrastructure investment in 

all parts of the province and move us forward. The historic $4.6 

million of revenue sharing in 2010-2011 was an increase of 

64.5 per cent from 2007-08 when the last government was in 

power. 

 

Another thing that’s more of the same is the education property 

tax. We will fully implement the final phase of the education 

property tax reduction plan. Yes, that is more of the same. And 

this is especially good for my community of Moose Jaw simply 

because we have the highest assessment of anywhere in the 

province. Reduction to the education property tax means that 

from 2008-2009, residents of Moose Jaw saw average tax 

reductions of approximately $1,900 on homes assessed at about 

$200,000. That saving was $2,800 on homes assessed at 

$300,000. A Moose Jaw homeowner with a 2008 taxable 

assessment of just over $80,000 paid 486 less in education tax 

in the 2009 and 2010 compared to the 2008 tax bill. This is a 

tax cut of about 31 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can talk about health care for a few minutes — $200 

million for construction of the children’s hospital. What a great, 

what a great asset that is, will be, to this province. Our goal to 

reduce surgical wait times to within 90 days over the next four 

years. It’s an aggressive goal, but it’s a goal and we’ve worked 

toward that already and made some great steps. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the funding of clinical trials for the new MS treatment 

is making Saskatchewan a leader in health care. We can see the 

significance of this research and how it could apply to many of 

our residents. 

 

But what the Speech from the Throne highlighted most was the 

expansion of the emergency medical services through the 

helicopter-based ambulance system, the Shock Trauma Air 

Rescue. It’s all part of improving the health care of 

Saskatchewan people. That’s more of the same, much unlike the 

closing of the 52 rural hospitals that the previous government 

did — 52 rural hospitals closed during their administration. 

 

[16:15] 

 

There’ll be 170 additional education seats in addition to the 130 

already added. The assessment of international medical grads is 

a new system that we’ve developed in Saskatchewan so that we 

can attract the grads from different parts of the world, and they 

can pass those preliminary tests without having to come to 

Saskatchewan to do it. It’s increasing the availability of doctors 

in this province. 

 

And I’m happy to announce that, just last week, the South Hill 

Medical Clinic in Moose Jaw announced the addition of three 

new MDs for our community. The health ombudsman within 

the Office of the Provincial Ombudsman will address health 

issues. And then an additional 100 long-term addiction recovery 

spaces, it will be a welcome asset to this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I think I should mention the Moose 

Jaw Union Hospital. Last year we designated almost a half a 

million dollars — $450,000 — for a study that is currently 

under way. A month ago there was a presentation done by the 

Five Hills Health Region specialists telling us about the new 

concept. It’s from an architectural firm in the United States that 

is looking at a different way of delivering hospital care. In the 

example they use, they would cut down the stay time in the 

hospital just about in half or more than half in some cases. And 



5730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

it’s a new idea that will be the first of its kind in Saskatchewan. 

And there’s only one or two in all of Canada. 

 

When I saw this, I liked it — the work that is being done toward 

this study there. And when I . . . The optimum words that I 

came up with, you will like it. The study will take a little 

longer. They say that it will be out in about June, which was 

different from their original forecast. But it was quite exciting 

about how the modular system will fit together and how they’re 

studying it, how it can improve the service for the people of 

Five Hills Health Region. 

 

We can talk about children and youth. And, Mr. Speaker, in 

past years the exodus of our youth, our prime resource in this 

province, was huge. In fact the chamber of commerce back in 

the late ’90s under their Action Saskatchewan program did a 

survey and found that children in grade 7 were planning to 

leave the province. My son at that time was in grade 7. When I 

went home, I asked him. I said, what’s your intentions after 

graduation? And he informed me without hesitation he was 

leaving the province. 

 

Well fortunately we had some time to turn that around and I can 

say that Brent graduated from high school. He graduated from 

the University of Regina right here and now has a major in 

chemistry and a minor in math, and is working in the education 

system right here in Regina. In fact I’m quite proud to say that 

my four children are employed happily in Regina or happily in 

this province, looking for a living in this province that we call 

home. 

 

Part of the youth retention was from the graduation retention 

program that we brought in just after our election. You know I 

attended the SIAST career fair and colleges from out of the 

province don’t like that one very much. They say it’s a lot 

harder to attract graduates from Saskatchewan now that we 

have the graduation retention program. And now with the 

Speech from the Throne we’ve brought an additional 

scholarship fund that will augment that. Does that sound like 

more of the same? Does that sound like something better? Mr. 

Speaker, as far as youth are concerned, there are more jobs 

available. There are higher average wages. There’s every reason 

to make our home in Saskatchewan, and more of them are 

doing it. 

 

We talk about youth. We talk about daycare spaces. 

Twenty-nine hundred new licensed daycare spaces by the end 

of March this year. That’s an increase of about 30 per cent. And 

since our government came to power there will be 

approximately 525 child care spaces allotted in Moose Jaw 

alone. 

 

In education, the Minister of Education will have the school 

challenge healthy kids program that will introduce 30 minutes 

of physical activity each day. We have an athletic support 

program for high performance athletes to a maximum of $6,000 

a year. 

 

And utility costs. We’ve enjoyed the lowest utility costs, some 

of the lowest in Canada. And we will remain among the lowest 

with the 7 per cent decrease on the average residential natural 

gas consumer effective November 1st — that’s today, Mr. 

Speaker — making life better for our Saskatchewan people. 

With that we’re doubling the wind power capacity to 400 

megawatts by the year 2015. 

 

I like the idea of the new provincial parks, beginning to identify 

locations for the new provincial parks. I enjoyed being part of 

the official campground opening at Buffalo Pound. It was a 

brand new campground that happened in July. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the first new campground this province has seen 

in over 20 years. Tourism is a big part of this province and we 

want to keep that advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should talk a little about potash and it’s been 

talked about a lot. Potash belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We’ve made that perfectly clear. We’ve 

consulted with many and concluded that there would be no net 

benefit for the people of Saskatchewan or for Canada. And I 

think the Premier spoke very eloquently — the answer is no. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it would be a dangerous position to have one 

company control the potash supply for the world, both from a 

resource availability to our province, but having it affect the 

world supply of food. The answer is no. 

 

In agriculture we’ve been responsible. The largest provincial 

agricultural disaster response in the history of Saskatchewan we 

did for our agricultural producers this last year. We’re also 

allotting $30 million over 10 years to restore and repair the 

irrigation infrastructure. Public safety is important; 90 new 

officers and 30 more to come in the next budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got so much to be proud of in this province. 

More of the same is a good thing on the track record that this 

government has done in the last three years — employment, 

social programs, education, health, agriculture, safety, tourism, 

more economic growth, more population, employment 

opportunities, optimism, enthusiasm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I speak in support of the Speech from the Throne. 

God bless Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to speak today on this reply to the 

Throne Speech that was delivered in this Chamber the other day 

— a Throne Speech that the government has entitled The New 

Road. Mr. Speaker, I’ll have a few things to say about titles of 

throne speeches in a short period of time. 

 

But in beginning my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 

once again, thanks for the opportunity to be able to rise and 

speak on behalf of the constituents of The Battlefords first and 

foremost, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of other citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan who I’ve enjoyed conversations with 

over the course of the last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Throne speeches are, on the one hand, not very specific 

documents, Mr. Speaker. Throne speeches are traditionally a 

time when the government lays out an agenda for the coming 

year; some would say the vision for the coming year, Mr. 

Speaker. But on the other hand, throne speeches provide 

individuals within the province, Mr. Speaker, with a road map 

that allows them to make certain plans for the course of the 

year. It’s much like a budget that comes, in our case in 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5731 

Saskatchewan here, later in the year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When a budget is delivered, businesses, individuals make plans. 

Could be tax planning. It could be business planning. It could 

be infrastructure planning within their immediate environment, 

Mr. Speaker. But a Throne Speech is very much the same thing 

in the sense that the citizens of the province are given an 

opportunity to know where this government’s going to take 

them over the course of the next year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, over the last three years, the three throne 

speeches of this government have failed to deliver 

Saskatchewan people with a road map that during the course of 

the year they could make business decisions, could make 

individual decisions, Mr. Speaker. And this Throne Speech is 

not much different. 

 

And I’ll be a little specific about what I mean, Mr. Speaker, in 

talking about what people in The Battlefords have told me. And 

the message out of The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, this year is 

not a whole lot different than it has been in the past. We, 

whether again it’s business or personal matters, Mr. Speaker, 

we in The Battlefords are indeed enjoying a period of 

substantial economic growth. We are seeing construction 

activities taking place around us. We are seeing business 

growth. We are seeing confidence being expressed by 

individuals within our community in investments that are being 

made, in charitable contributions that are being made, in 

support for municipal initiatives that are seeking to further 

develop the growth within The Battlefords. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the issues that the individuals and business 

community in The Battlefords think need addressing by 

government have not been addressed by previous throne 

speeches or budgets, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, are not being 

addressed by this budget. For example, Mr. Speaker, an agenda 

of growth which this government started off in 2007 by saying 

that this was part of their vision. An agenda of growth, Mr. 

Speaker, recognizes that in a growing economy there are 

challenges that are faced by everyone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the most significant challenges that the people in The 

Battlefords face and that I’ve addressed in previous years, Mr. 

Speaker, and still is not being addressed by this government, is 

labour shortage, Mr. Speaker. As of this morning on 

saskjobs.ca, Mr. Speaker, the number of jobs available in The 

Battlefords is listed at 247. Mr. Speaker, this number fluctuates 

from week to week, month to month, Mr. Speaker, but that 

number has remained significantly high over the last four years, 

Mr. Speaker. If you talk with a number of the industries and 

manufacturers that have been in The Battlefords for a lot of 

years, Mr. Speaker, they will tell you that the most significant 

challenge that they face is lack of a skilled labour force. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that having been identified, there are a 

number of things that need to go along with being able to attract 

a skilled labour force. Mr. Speaker, the number one issue in The 

Battlefords that’s keeping people from coming into the 

community to work in these businesses, manufacturers, and 

industry, Mr. Speaker, the most significant reason why people 

aren’t being able to do that is lack of housing. Mr. Speaker, for 

several years now we have noticed a considerable decline in the 

number of rental units in The Battlefords. This Throne Speech 

in front of us, Mr. Speaker, identifies affordable housing as a 

need in the province and has said there’ll be 1,000 affordable 

units built, Mr. Speaker, but the word rental doesn’t appear in 

this Throne Speech. 

 

The new program that the government is talking about is an 

affordable purchase program, Mr. Speaker, an affordable 

purchase program that doesn’t address the issues that the 

business community and the individual community in The 

Battlefords have been talking about, Mr. Speaker. There could 

be a place where you need to have affordable homes for 

purchase, Mr. Speaker. I’m fully supportive of initiatives like 

that. 

 

We in The Battlefords had a My First Home program that was 

going great guns, Mr. Speaker. It was meeting a need in the 

community. It had an active volunteer board that was 

endeavouring to ensure that individuals who wished to own 

their own home had an opportunity to do so. Mr. Speaker, we 

supported that initiative. We worked with the community on 

that initiative, and it was fine. But, Mr. Speaker, there is a large 

number of people for whom that program was not appropriate 

and would not be appropriate into the future. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, individuals who are moving into The Battlefords 

to go to school in order to gain the skills necessary to work in 

the jobs that are currently available, Mr. Speaker, those who are 

moving into The Battlefords to go to school, whether it’s at the 

regional college level or at the high school level, Mr. Speaker 

. . . We have a unique circumstances in The Battlefords where 

we have a First Nations high school, a First Nations high school 

that anyone can attend. It’s overseen by the public and separate 

school boards in addition to the tribal councils. Government has 

been very supportive of that initiative as the previous 

government was. A unique circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You have individuals who are finishing their high school 

diplomas in one form or another, and we have a regional 

college that is delivering skills training, Mr. Speaker — 

something else we all support. But both those schools, Mr. 

Speaker, are losing people to their programs because there is no 

student housing available, no housing available for students. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in Meadow Lake it took a couple of years 

for that community to argue successfully for the development of 

a residence for the regional college in Meadow Lake. Mr. 

Speaker, we have residences at our universities. There should 

be a way to acknowledge, in a growing economy, the need for 

education and skills development. We must be able to ensure 

that students who come from a distance can go to the school 

because they have a safe environment in which to study. That’s 

a home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we could create very easily a residential facility, Mr. 

Speaker, similar to that that was just done in Meadow Lake in 

the community, Mr. Speaker. But no mention whatsoever in this 

Throne Speech, no vision expressed by this government, Mr. 

Speaker, in meeting the needs of young people who are 

interested in furthering their educational requirements, 

ultimately benefiting the labour shortage problem that we have 

throughout The Battlefords. 



5732 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech talks about the road less 

travelled, Mr. Speaker. There is a road less travelled in The 

Battlefords as well, Mr. Speaker — transportation. We have 

seen a large number of people from other countries of the world 

move into The Battlefords. We’ve seen a large number of 

people from First Nations communities move into The 

Battlefords, and we’ve seen a large number of people from rural 

communities around The Battlefords come into the city, Mr. 

Speaker, seeking employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they find a place to live, it is almost always 

in the centre of the community. Mr. Speaker, most of the jobs 

are not in the centre of the community but they’re in our 

industrial park or they’re in Battleford in the industrial park, 

Mr. Speaker. And we have very limited ability within the 

community to move people from where they actually find a 

place to live to where they could go to work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The city of Lloydminster has begun to examine transportation 

of people from the core of the city to the industrial park. Mr. 

Speaker, the people in North Battleford are starting to do the 

same thing. Mr. Speaker, the people in Weyburn are talking 

about the need to move people from the heart of the city to the 

industrial parks where the jobs are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No mention in this Throne Speech about this government’s 

ability to see beyond the roadway that’s in front of them, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s a great need in this province, Mr. Speaker, to 

help our municipalities to develop — outside of Saskatoon and 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, I make that clear — a great need to 

develop a transportation infrastructure within our municipalities 

to assist our communities to meet their own growth agendas. 

 

This government came into office in 2007 saying, ready for 

growth. Everything they’ve done since then, Mr. Speaker, has 

indicated they weren’t ready for the growth of the province. 

And now, four years in, the fourth Throne Speech, the last 

Throne Speech before they go to the public in a general election 

in this province, still no vision about the way to meet the needs 

of a growing province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve mentioned housing. I’ve mentioned labour shortage. I’ve 

mentioned transportation, Mr. Speaker. These are critical parts 

of any growing community and, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure 

that this government — any government in the province of 

Saskatchewan — is willing to work with communities and work 

with the people who live here to ensure that we can achieve all 

of our goals, individual and business goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a personal goal, an individual goal of a person 

living in Saskatchewan today is to improve their quality of life. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech, providing a vision for 

the people of Saskatchewan, providing an opportunity for 

individuals to develop a plan for going ahead, Mr. Speaker, no 

one reading this Throne Speech today or last week or next 

week, no one reading this Throne Speech at all, Mr. Speaker, 

could actually make a personal or business plan going forward 

because we still don’t know what the vision of this government 

actually is. 

 

One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that has been lacking by this 

government over the last few years has been consultation with 

the public. Quite often, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen legislation 

introduced into the Chamber; the public has said, we don’t like 

it, and the government has said, we’ll do some consultation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the single most inappropriate use of consultation 

was last session with the introduction of the wildlife habitat 

land Act, Mr. Speaker, when the government said, here’s 

legislation; we have not consulted. Actually the government 

said, we did consult. But everyone the government said they 

consulted with turned out; they said no, we haven’t been 

consulted on this at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government chose, in legislation, to remove 

vast tracts of land from protected habitat status in the province 

so the government could turn around and sell off that land 

without actually having to be accountable for that sale, Mr. 

Speaker. The legislation angered those who the government 

said they consulted with. It turned out, Mr. Speaker, that 

consultation occurs after the legislation comes in, and I 

understand we may even see some amendments to that Act this 

year, Mr. Speaker, because of consultation occurring after the 

fact. 

 

In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the government is saying, 

we’re going to do that all over again. They’ve introduced or 

they’ve told us that they’re going to bring forward a Bill that’s 

going to require photo ID in the province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

they couch it a little bit. They say they’re going to give 

municipalities the authority to require photo ID when 

consulting local elections. In other words it’s up to the 

municipalities to decide what they want to do in the municipal 

elections. 

 

But then the Throne Speech said the government will also be 

introducing similar Act requiring voters to produce photo ID 

when voting in provincial elections. Well, Mr. Speaker, no one 

in The Battlefords, in any of the communities I’ve been in this 

summer, or across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, no one has said 

to me, boy we really need photo ID in elections; the 

government’s got to do this. Most important. Government’s got 

to do it. Nobody. Not one person, Mr. Speaker, told me that was 

important for them and yet, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the key 

points in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. Today the Minister 

of Justice says we’re going to consult with the public and then, 

Mr. Speaker, in referring to what’s going on in Ontario and 

other provinces, he talks about photo ID being part of the option 

package. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was very clear, very 

clear. And I’ll repeat it again and I’ll quote, “. . . introducing a 

similar act, requiring voters to produce photo ID . . .” The 

Minister of Justice said they’re now going to consult on this. 

They’re going to consult, Mr. Speaker, but they’re going to say 

this is the way it is. This is our way. It’s going to be our way or 

no way but we’ll talk to you about mitigation. And the Minister 

of Justice went so far as to say all the seniors can go and get 

free photo ID from SGI. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my mother’s in a long-term care home in 

Saskatoon, in fact probably even in the Minister of Justice’s 

riding. My mother would go to the mobile voting station at the 

time that the election occurs. My mother’s never driven. 

Mother’s 86 years old. She never had a driver’s licence. She has 

no photo ID. In fact the only photos that she has are of myself 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5733 

and my brother, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure she can’t show those at 

the voting booth. 

 

But you know how difficult it’s going to be for my mother to go 

to the mobile station in her building and see the people sitting 

there who have taken care of her for the last seven years and be 

denied a vote by those people because they say, could you show 

us, Mrs. Taylor, your photo ID? And my mother will say, you 

know who I am; why can’t I vote? No, the Minister of Justice 

says you can’t. The Minister of Justice says you can’t vote 

because you don’t have photo ID. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, my mother will just say, well I guess I 

can’t vote, and she’s been disenfranchised. Eighty-six years old, 

voted in every election in her life that she was able to vote in, 

Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of Justice — I think her own 

MLA — is telling her that she’s got to get a taxi ride down to 

SGI someday and sit there and wondering where she is and why 

she’s doing this to have her picture taken so that on one day in 

2011, she can show the people in her building that she is who 

they’ve known her to be for seven years. 

 

And the Minister of Justice says, we’re going to consult with 

the public about this. This is another, another indication, Mr. 

Speaker, of how this government says, what we think goes and 

what the public says doesn’t matter, and their consultation 

occurs after the fact. 

 

I am hoping that if the Minister of Justice brings this legislation 

forward — actually I’m hoping he doesn’t bring it forward, Mr. 

Speaker — but if he does, if the Minister of Justice brings this 

forward, I hope he’ll bring people into this gallery to say, we 

want this, we demand this; we want our government to 

disenfranchise seniors and students and people from remote and 

rural areas in Saskatchewan. I want to hear the public in 

Saskatchewan stand up and say, this is the best thing the 

Minister of Justice has ever done because, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think the Minister of Justice can find somebody to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. And that doesn’t include the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, consultation is important. There are lots of 

things, Mr. Speaker, that this government has failed to do, but 

consultation is perhaps the most important. We need to ensure 

that when the government puts a vision forward, the vision is 

put out there after consultation with the public or expressing an 

interest in consulting the public on a particular area. For 

example if the government knew last year that it wanted to 

pursue photo ID for voting in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 

Throne Speech last year could have said, we will engage the 

public in a consultation about photo ID. Did they do that? Not 

at all. Were they thinking about it? Absolutely they were, Mr. 

Speaker; the legislation is drafted. They didn’t do it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There are lots of things that this government could be inviting 

consultation on. I talked about transportation earlier. One of the 

things that would really be helpful in northwest Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and probably throughout the whole of 

Saskatchewan, is a public consultation about rail transportation. 

Wouldn’t it be interesting, Mr. Speaker, if we could talk about 

moving goods again on rail lines instead of on our highways? 

 

Highway 4, going north between North Battleford and Meadow 

Lake, is loaded with super-B trucks right now, Mr. Speaker — 

40 a day. Forty a day coming down that highway because we 

don’t have a railway anymore. Those 40 trucks, Mr. Speaker, 

are blowing out that highway and creating unsafe conditions, all 

because we aren’t talking about supporting a highway anymore. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The rural municipality in Meadow Lake, the town of Meadow 

Lake, the rural municipalities that come down through 

Shellbrook and Hafford into The Battlefords have all been 

talking about this for quite a number of years, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

time the government picked up its ears and thought, we could 

be doing something to support transportation. The railways treat 

our highways as branch lines. They don’t pay a penny for that 

branch line maintenance, but the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

certainly do. 

 

And the safety of those who are moving on those roads, Mr. 

Speaker, has deteriorated to the point whereby people are 

looking to go in other directions with their trailers, their boats, 

their motors, their recreational vehicles, Mr. Speaker, because 

their normal recreation routes have become branch lines for the 

railways. And there are massive trucks moving goods from 

Meadow Lake to the CN [Canadian National] line in North 

Battleford, Mr. Speaker, and I think government should be 

consulting the public on that. 

 

And while they’re at it, goofy idea, but why don’t we consult 

about passenger trains again in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

And let’s talk about a line between Regina and Saskatoon. Lots 

of people have talked about that. And anybody that had to travel 

on the road in the last few days would have given anything to 

have got on a train, Mr. Speaker, to travel between Saskatoon 

and Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, government should be thinking about the 

long-term future of a growing province. They talk a lot about 

what’s going on in Alberta. What are they talking about in 

Alberta? Passenger rail service, Mr. Speaker. Let’s start 

thinking about that again, and let’s start thinking about 

re-evaluating movement of goods and services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said earlier, Throne Speeches are important. We 

do remember in 2007 the first Throne Speech that the 

government came out with was called “Securing the Future.” 

Mr. Speaker, the future is far from secure, three years after the 

vision of this government was securing the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008 the Throne Speech was “A Stronger 

Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” Mr. Speaker, we’re still 

searching for that better life for all Saskatchewan people. That 

2008 Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, was the Throne Speech that 

said this: Saskatchewan is no longer next year country. It’s this 

year country. It was also the year in which this government put 

all its eggs into the potash basket, Mr. Speaker, making 

everything next year country — most of which, Mr. Speaker, 

we aren’t even at yet. 

 

Last year, 2009, the Throne Speech title was “Moving 

Forward.” Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech spent most of its 

language, its paragraphs, talking about moving backwards, Mr. 

Speaker, how everything that was good in this province was the 



5734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 1, 2010 

result of Sask Party activity for two years. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we have the fourth and final Throne 

Speech before the election in 2011 called “The New Road”. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t much of a new road at all. This is 

another patchwork road, Mr. Speaker. It’s a road with a thin 

membrane put on it again, Mr. Speaker. This new road of the 

Saskatchewan Party will be beat up just like a lot of those thin 

membrane highways in this province in the past, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s just recycled, tired, old Sask Party rhetoric, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s posing as a new vision for Saskatchewan. 

Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech misses the mark 

for a growing Saskatchewan. 

 

The public of this province is desperate, Mr. Speaker, to know 

that if they make an investment, if they show confidence in 

their community, if they donate money to support municipal 

and community recreational infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, if they 

do the things that they want to do to build their community, that 

the province around them, Mr. Speaker, is going to be there to 

support that continued growth. There’s no evidence of that in 

this Throne Speech. There has not been any evidence of that in 

the three previous throne speeches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I look forward to the budget in March which will give us a 

further indication, Mr. Speaker, of what we can expect before 

the year-end and the public goes to the polls. But I can say right 

now that if this is the election platform of the Saskatchewan 

Party for the 2011 election, Mr. Speaker, the public will stand 

up and reject this without even blinking an eye. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

truly is a privilege and an honour to rise in my place again and 

address and reply to the Speech from the Throne. I guess this 

would be about the 12th Throne Speech that I’ve had the 

opportunity to . . . I haven’t replied to all of them, but most of 

them. And I would say that the last three throne speeches I’ve 

enjoyed much better than the first seven or eight that I had the 

opportunity to reply. 

 

The other interesting part is when you get to reply to the Speech 

from the Throne how you can have really quite a wide-ranging 

conversation line and speech line. You can talk about a lot of 

different things, whereas normally on the government side now 

when you’re addressing a Bill, you’re pretty specific to the Bill. 

You don’t get the opportunity to range quite as far as you 

normally would, for example in the reply to the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

So I want to do some of that at the start. I want to talk a little bit 

about my constituency, the people that I need to thank. I want to 

talk about some of those things. Then I will get into the heat of 

the most important part of my remarks, I guess, the issues 

around health care and some of the comments that have been 

made by the opposition. 

 

First of all I would like to, though, congratulate the new 

member, the new member from Saskatoon Northwest who 

recently won a by-election, Mr. Speaker. Not only won the 

by-election quite handily, but increased the margin of vote that 

the Saskatchewan Party received compared to the 2007 election. 

We saw that the opposition party actually decreased their 

percentage of vote in that by-election. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, when there is a vote on 

government popularity, which a by-election quite often makes, 

when there’s a vote on a government and a by-election, quite 

often it’s easy to change that vote because it doesn’t change the 

government. Instead of changing the vote and moving towards 

an NDP member, not only did the people of Northwest still 

select a government member, but they increased the percentage 

of votes for the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And I guess that’s significant in a couple reasons because we’ve 

been in power for three years and we’re gaining support 

throughout the province. Not only in urban but — hard to 

believe we could be gaining in rural; I think we are — but 

definitely gaining in urban Saskatchewan, a vote of confidence 

for the government. 

 

But even more importantly it was a vote of confidence for the 

member that they selected. I’ve known the member not for a 

very long time, but I do know that when I had the opportunity 

to knock on a few doors, the member was very well known 

from his public service over the years previous. And I do 

believe that not only was there was a bit of an increase on the 

party support, but I think there was a huge vote of confidence 

for that particular member. And I think it’s indicative of that 

member. 

 

I want to also thank my family, who of course . . . like every 

member, could not be in here to do the work that they do 

without the support of family. I want to thank my wife Cindy 

and our two boys, Craig and Mark. It has been a different year 

this past year. Our one son, our oldest son has graduated, and 

our other son isn’t quite graduated but never seems to be at 

home. They’re both gone quite a bit so the house is quite a bit 

quieter than it had been in years previous. So that’s a bit of an 

adjustment. But I do know that even though the two boys aren’t 

in the province very much, I think they are still supporting. I 

haven’t had a chance to ask them, but I think they’re still 

supportive. 

 

I also want to thank the people of Indian Head-Milestone. I 

happen to have had the privilege to represent this constituency 

since 1999, even though the boundaries changed a little bit 

about eight years ago. But I’ve had the privilege to represent the 

people of Indian Head-Milestone over the last number of years, 

and I think we would all say that the area that we happen to 

represent in the province is the best area. I certainly would say 

that Indian Head-Milestone and the people within that 

constituency are some of the finest in the province, for sure. 

 

It’s an agriculturally based constituency that has had its 

struggles this year. I would say for the most part, probably 70 

per cent of the crop got in. Some of it flooded out but what was 

there, what was combined, even though it was stressful getting 

to that point, was overall an average crop. Average-to-better 

with bushels, quality down a little bit. Prices are up a little bit, 

so most of the people that I’ve had the opportunity to talk to 

over the last couple of months has been very positive. They 

realize it wasn’t the best growing year, but they feel that they 



November 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5735 

can move on. 

 

I would say that probably in the area that my farm is located, 

would have to be one of the hardest hit areas as far as moisture. 

In our area, right where my farm is, I think probably I would 

say a 50 per cent seeding intensity was probably max. And then 

after that 50 per cent was seeded, I would say a quarter of that 

was drowned out through summer rains. But again with the 

resilience of farmers, what was there was pretty darn good. And 

through the great work of the Agriculture minister and 

increasing the unseedable acreage portion, most guys are saying 

that it was an average, it’s a break-even crop. And that’s 

coming off of probably two years of some of the best crops 

we’ve had in the constituency. 

 

So agriculture is by far the base, but I can never talk about my 

constituency without talking about the beautiful Qu’Appelle 

Valley that makes up the northern border. The main community 

in that area of course is Fort Qu’Appelle and the lakes up and 

down the Calling Lakes chain, whether it’s Pasqua, Echo, 

Mission, or Katepwa. A beautiful part of the country. 

 

And it’s interesting, when I’m stopped on the streets in Fort 

Qu’Appelle, it would be probably the only part that we 

wouldn’t talk agriculture. We’d talk tourism and fishing. And 

the ski hill is there for the province — one of the provincial ski 

hills, I should say. So it’s a pretty good constituency to 

represent, and I’m very fortunate. 

 

I also want to, as all members in this Chamber would realize, 

the absolute importance, probably the most important person in 

the constituency, wouldn’t be the elected official. It would be 

the person that the elected official hires, called the constituency 

assistant, who fields so many of the phone calls. Some are 

good; some aren’t so good. And they have to deal with the 

issues that come in from the constituency level throughout the 

constituencies. And yes, the phone calls are good or not so 

good. All the constituency assistants are very good. 

 

But the phone calls can vary a little bit. And so I would say that 

we’re all very blessed with strong constituency assistants. I 

would say that my constituency, Nicole, who has been with me 

for the past three years, just does an absolute excellent job of 

fielding those calls and keeping the office going. 

 

I think, you know, it varies from opposition to government. And 

then I think it varies a little bit maybe even from government to 

a government member that would be in cabinet, the amount of 

time that you get to spend in your constituency now, as opposed 

to what we were able to spend in opposition, and even perhaps 

on the government side but not in cabinet, I can tell you that 

I’m not in my constituency as much as I used to unfortunately. I 

try and get out there as much as I can. But as a result, your 

constituency assistant — or mine does — really I’m relying on 

her to carry on some of that business that I can’t get to just 

because of time constraints. 

 

I also want to thank a number of people within not only my 

office but also in the ministry. In my office, I’m blessed to have 

some great people working within my office here in the 

building, whether it’s Christy, Kristen, or Crystal — that’s 

always a bit of a mouthful — those three, or Lindell, Megan, or 

Robin. All do great work for me and certainly keep me as 

briefed up as I need to be and work very hard to make sure that 

I’m aware of the issues that are coming into the office. They do 

an amazing job in my ministerial office, as well as the people 

that have since left that office. 

 

We’ve had an interesting time within the Minister of Health’s 

office in the turnover. And I, you know, I don’t know how the 

proper way to term it is, but we’ve had a number of 

pregnancies. We’ve had three ladies off on maternity leave, and 

now my chief of staff and one of my ministerial assistants, their 

wives are pregnant as well. So it is a very fertile office, I guess 

you could say. A very productive office, I think, is probably the 

proper term to use — a very productive office. 

 

The other people that I would like to thank would be the people 

within the ministry itself led by the deputy minister, Dan 

Florizone, and his assistant deputy ministers. As well as many 

other officials within the Ministry of Health do absolutely 

marvellous work for the province of Saskatchewan. I admire 

them all and thank them all for the work that they do — not to 

mention the people that work within the ministry, but also the 

people that work within the health field itself. The front-line 

providers, Mr. Speaker, are second to none in this province. 

Around the province — whether it’s in acute care, whether it’s 

in long-term care, mental health, home care, Mr. Speaker — the 

individuals that we have providing care on a daily basis to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan are second to none, Mr. Speaker. And 

I want to thank them on behalf of the government of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The Premier as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Quite often it’s not something that you can hang on a wall or 

put in the bank that is the most important; it’s a simple thank 

you for the work that you do. And so on behalf of the 

government, I want to thank those individuals for all the work 

that they do for the Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 5705, 5714 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5705 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5714 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5705 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5705 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5706 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5706 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Prostate Cancer Awareness Month 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5706 

 Health Care Providers’ Week 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5706 

 Snowbirds’ 40th Anniversary Celebrations 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 2010 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 Provincial Debt 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 125th Anniversary of Depot Division 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5707 

 Photo Identification Requirement for Voting 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5708 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5708 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5708 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5709 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5709 

 Funding for Health Regions 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5710 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5710 

 Voter Identification 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5711 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5711 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Resignation of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5712 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5713 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5713 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5717 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5718 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5723 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5726 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5728 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5730 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5734 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


