




















































Hansard: May 03, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 54A  MONDAY, MAY 3, 2010, 8 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5293 

 May 3, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 08:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Government orders. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly do now recess until 1:30 p.m. to 

enable the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice, Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies, and the Standing Committee on Human 

Services to meet. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved, 

pursuant to . . .  

 

Now we’ll do this correctly. Moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That this Assembly do now recess until 1:30 p.m. to 

enable the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice, the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies, and the Standing Committee on 

Human Services to meet. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands recessed until 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 13:30.] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 1:30, the session will resume 

with routine proceedings, introduction of guests. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the 

members of the House eight visitors that have joined us on the 

Assembly floor, and they are from the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council quality of life recreational program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, joining us is Bruce Nokohoot, Don Blair, Steve 

Fiisel, Crystal Falardeau, Gary Lunde, Lynne Demeule who is 

the program coordinator, and John Paul Hickie, staff person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the group has toured the Assembly. I had the 

opportunity to have my photo taken with them, and a 

question-and-answer period over some apple juice. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure you we had some good quality questions, 

and I hope the answers was as good as the questions that were 

proposed. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all the members to 

offer our guests a very warm welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to welcome a very fine looking group and a very 

intelligent group in the east gallery. Ms. Sandy Jost is the 

teacher and Ms. Jost brings her grade 5 class from the Huda 

School annually. I’m not sure if this is the sixth, seventh, or 

eighth such visit, but I know it’s a highlight of my year in the 

Legislative Assembly. With Ms. Jost is Mrs. Dhunna and Mrs. 

Bernhardt. 

 

I’m looking forward to meeting with this group. We’re going to 

have photos at 2:30 on the staircase. And then right after that 

there will be the visit where we get to exchange ideas, and 

hopefully the students can answer some of the questions that I 

have. Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to join me in 

welcoming Ms. Jost and the grade 5 Huda School. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce some 

guests seated in your gallery. These are individuals, Mr. 

Speaker, who have some concerns about recent cuts at SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 

And the individuals I would like to introduce are Andrea 

Norberg, Erika Hodson, Gord Gasper. And I see Brooklyn 

Elhard there as well, who’s no stranger to the Assembly. So I’d 

ask all members to join me in welcoming these individuals to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to join the 

member opposite in welcoming these students to their 

Assembly. And as the opportunity affords later this afternoon, I 

look forward to having a chat with them, or as their schedules 

allow. I’d welcome all members to join me in welcoming these 

students to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

of the members of the Assembly, somebody that was introduced 

at length prior to today was an intern with the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] up to this point and now currently interning 

with myself, Mr. Craig Fink, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

ask all members to welcome him to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

get on record. My colleague from Saskatoon Centre had the 

pleasure of introducing Mr. Fink when he was first introduced 

in the House. Certainly the member from Yorkton, he’s got a 

great, smart, hard-working, sharp young person on board in the 

person of Craig Fink. And anyway, it’s good to see Craig in the 



5294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

gallery. 

 

Obviously I don’t sound as eloquent or as intelligent as I once 

did. That’s probably because Craig’s gone over to the other side 

now, and the member from Yorkton will be the main 

beneficiary of the good work of that individual seated in your 

gallery. So I’d like to very much join with the welcome from 

the member from Yorkton for Craig Fink. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, once again it’s my pleasure to 

introduce Heather Malek, a TV and film editor here in Regina 

who’s very pleased that SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network] has received a brief stay of execution here on Friday, 

and is optimistic that things may turn out better for the 

organization. So with that I’d ask everybody to welcome 

Heather to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased today to rise on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan 

who are concerned over the condition of our highways. This 

particular petition pertains to Highway 310. The petition goes 

on to state that the highway conditions have deteriorated to the 

point where it’s a safety hazard for the residents who have to 

travel on that highway each and every day. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Regina and Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And this petition speaks to the issue that The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands, or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in their natural state. And that the government 

currently has a proposal on the table for repealing the schedule 

of listing these designated lands, and it’s caused a great deal of 

concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of the wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw 

and Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who know that 

seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, 

emotional, and financial abuse. They also believe that 

Saskatchewan seniors have a right to social and economic 

security and a right to live free from poverty. And they believe 

that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to protection from 

abuse, neglect, and exploitation: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ Bill of Rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

The signatures, all the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, 

are from the town of Climax. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

petition that’s signed by a number of Saskatchewan citizens that 

are concerned about the inadequate access to quality, affordable 

child care. This is particularly problematic for parents who want 

to access the labour market and further their own education. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the shortage of affordable and 

accessible child care spaces in Saskatchewan by creating 

new child care spaces immediately. 

 

And this petition is signed by people from Canora, Saltcoats, 

Churchbridge, and Gerald. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Saskatoon. And we know the vacancy rate for 

housing in Saskatoon is very low. And yet the rent increases 

seem to be very, very high. I’d like to read the prayer: 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5295 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more people 

in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan and that the government 

also implement a process of rent review or rent control to 

better protect tenants in a non-competitive housing 

environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair and upgrade Highway 123 that goes to the community 

of Cumberland House. This road right now is in terrible 

condition, is in serious need of repairs. I’ve been getting calls 

and again it’s very concerning to the community members. This 

petition is supported by the leadership and the community 

members of Cumberland House and Cumberland House First 

Nations. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. The petition is circulated and 

signed because of the exorbitant amount of money that Duck 

Lake citizens have to pay for clean, safe drinking water that’s 

causing them hardship. And as the leadership of the community 

suggests, it’s actually driving people from their community. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks from 

Muenster, Humboldt, Duck Lake, Hague, and Prince Albert. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition with respect to rural water issues, 

and this is the town of Furdale. Customers are no longer able to 

treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health, that they have been dealing in good faith with Sask 

Water for over 30 years, and have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. And the 

alternative water supply being referred to them by a government 

ministry is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized 

water at great cost, with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or 

availability of water. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of hamlet of Furdale, 

causing great hardship with no suitable alternatives; to 

exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further water service 

cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause under The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 and 

The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this government 

fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are signed by the good residents 

of Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, the 

members of the building trades unions have a proud history of 

craft union certification in Saskatchewan and the existing 

construction industry labour relations Act, 1992 has provided a 

stable environment for labour relations. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

all know that a stable labour relations environment provides for 

quality work, safe construction sites that benefit all the people 

of our province. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 



5296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 

with a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan concerned 

about proposed government legislation that would allow 

marriage commissioners to discriminate against couples, not 

only on the basis of sexual orientation, but also on the basis of 

race and religion. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina, and I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits, and they allude to the 

two years and billions of dollars of debt growth under the Sask 

Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal mismanagement that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Preeceville, 

Yorkton, Kamsack, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to offer an 

introduction to a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour has asked for leave for an introduction 

of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly I’d like to 

introduce Dr. Bob McCulloch. Dr. McCulloch is the CEO 

[chief executive officer] of SIAST. He does remarkable work 

right across the province, and we’re certainly delighted to have 

him in his legislature this afternoon. I ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming Dr. McCulloch to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests as well. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you to all members. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I’d like to extend a welcome to Dr. 

McCulloch and thank him for all the work that he does in our 

province in the area of advanced education. I ask all members to 

join me in welcoming him also. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this week 

of May the 2nd to the 8th has officially been proclaimed as 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week. 

Activities are being held across this province to focus on the 

importance of preventing injury and illness in the workplace, at 

home, and in the community. 

 

Our government has initiated a number of measures aimed at 

reducing injuries, Mr. Speaker. As an example, we have 

launched the online young worker readiness certificate course, 

which has a strong emphasis on safety. Mr. Speaker, each year 

there are on average 14 fatalities in the agricultural industry, 

which is one of the most hazardous industries in our province. 

These numbers are not acceptable, Mr. Speaker, and that is why 

our government is working hard to build a culture of safety in 

the province. 

 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5297 

And we are starting to see results through dedicated 

enforcement of safety regulation and greater public education. 

Sixty-four per cent of all industries in the province have 

experienced a lower rate in 2009 than in 2008. In 2009 

Saskatchewan recorded 950 fewer work-related time loss injury 

claims than in 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look forward to a day when we realize 

Mission: Zero, and all workers get home safe at the end of the 

day — zero fatalities, zero injuries, and zero sufferings, Mr. 

Speaker. That must be all of our objectives. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Homelessness in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan has topped another list today, but it’s no surprise 

the members opposite aren’t jumping up and down to point out 

this latest achievement. 

 

A report on homelessness was released today by the Salvation 

Army, and Saskatchewan is tied with Manitoba for the top spot 

in the country. Twenty per cent of Saskatchewanians say 

they’ve been homeless or at risk of being homeless. That means 

one out of every five people we pass on the street are in danger 

of not having a place to sleep at night. 

 

This is just the most recent indicator of a troubling trend in this 

province. As recently as October 2009, the average rent for a 

two-bedroom apartment in Regina was $832 a month. The 

number of people in Saskatchewan on social assistance has 

been steadily climbing in the last 16 months. More people, 

including seniors, are using the food banks than ever before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the face of poverty is homelessness, and housing 

and access to affordable and nutritious food are key factors for 

good health and well-being. It’s a sobering reality when many 

individuals and families are only one paycheque away from 

being on the streets. Mr. Speaker, today’s report is an urgent 

reminder that it’s getting harder for people to get by in this 

province. They are paying more and getting less, and this 

government continues to ignore the problem. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Missing Children’s Month 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

advise the House that this May has been proclaimed Missing 

Children’s Month in our province. This proclamation reflects 

our government’s concern and support for all missing children 

and their families, as well as demonstrates this government’s 

commitment to protecting children and youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 2010 also marks the 25th anniversary of Child 

Find Saskatchewan. On May 1st, I had the honour of emceeing 

their fundraiser. The guest speaker for the evening was the 

father of the Whitewood area child victim kidnapped by 

convicted pedophile Peter Whitmore. Mr. Speaker, this is every 

parent’s worst nightmare. 

 

At the time, everyone in Saskatchewan as well as Canada were 

riveted to their televisions as Saskatchewan’s first Amber Alert 

and subsequent RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

standoff played out. The guest speaker spoke with raw emotion 

about his family’s ordeal. Mr. Speaker, you could hear a pin 

drop. While listening, some people held their hands over their 

mouths and some quietly wept. The message this brave man 

sent was that we all need to make ourselves aware as well as 

our precious children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s funding of more police officers 

has increased the capacity of enforcement for hunting 

pedophiles as well as assisting community awareness. I 

encourage all members of this Assembly to wear the green 

ribbon of hope as a symbol of remembrance and hope for the 

safe return of all missing children in our country. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Working People and May Day 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Saturday was May Day, an 

opportunity for working people to come together to celebrate 

their achievements. But unfortunately in this province, it’s also 

a day to list the hurtful outcomes of this Premier’s war on 

working people. 

 

The war started early on in his term. He said essential services 

legislation wasn’t needed in Saskatchewan, but then he rammed 

through Bills 5 and 6 immediately upon taking office. Now he 

refuses to address the shortages in the very occupations that he 

deemed essential, so there will actually be more people working 

during a strike than during a normal workday. It seems the 

working people in this province are only deemed essential when 

they are taking job action and interfering with this Premier’s 

agenda. 

 

The Premier has said there is too much red tape in occupational 

health and safety regulations, sending a clear message that his 

government does not see the true importance of OH & S 

[occupational health and safety] violations. They ignore 

inspectors’ findings and in doing so send a message to the 

public and private sector that the protection of workers just isn’t 

a priority. And when civil servants put the public safety before 

their own interests and come forward as a whistle-blower, this 

Premier’s only response is to launch a witch hunt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the critical issue like protecting workers’ rights 

in occupational health and safety, the people of Saskatchewan 

don’t need a bully. They need leadership. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Emergency Preparedness Week 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring to the 

attention of the members that this week, May 2nd to 8th, has 



5298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

been proclaimed Emergency Preparedness Week in 

Saskatchewan. This is a national event that takes place each 

year during the first full week of May and is coordinated by 

Public Safety Canada in close collaboration with the provinces, 

territories, and partners. 

 

During Emergency Preparedness Week, activities are organized 

across Canada to raise awareness about the importance of 

having an emergency kit and a plan. The theme of this week is, 

72 hours — Are You Prepared? and it is designed to help teach 

Canadians of all ages the importance of being prepared for all 

types of emergencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today grade 4 students from Jack MacKenzie 

visited an emergency operations centre of the Ministry of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. Since preparation is 

key, the students learned how to build a basic emergency kit 

and the importance of having enough supplies in the kit to help 

their families get through the first 72 hours of an emergency. It 

is our hope that Emergency Preparedness Week will send the 

message to the students today, as well as all citizens in this 

province, that being prepared for the first 72 hours can make a 

big difference during an emergency. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we have all seen the result of the 

Sask Party’s financial incompetence, but the toll they have 

taken on our Crown corporations goes beyond all rational 

measures. And if they continue to have their way, total Crown 

debt is set to increase to $7.8 billion by 2014, a jump of 130 per 

cent above the NDP levels. Total debt will be a staggering 

$11.9 billion. 

 

First they stripped all the profits from our Crowns. Now they 

are putting through legislation to actually increase the 

borrowing capacity of Crown corporations so they can take on 

even more debt in the future. And the Minister for CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] seems to think that 

increasing debt will somehow improve the value of our Crown 

corporations. 

 

The NDP fostered one of the strongest economies in the nation 

and left behind a huge surplus, and this government has shown 

us nothing but failure on every count. They are taking us back 

into the Devine days of financial mismanagement, billion-dollar 

deficits, and debt hidden under every accounting trick they can 

find. And once again, Saskatchewan families and businesses 

will pay the price through backdoor tax increases and rising 

utility rates at every turn. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

First Female Commanding Officer of the Snowbirds 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 

to rise today and commend Canadian Forces 431 Squadron, 

better known as the Snowbirds demonstration team, for making 

history. Last Thursday, Lieutenant Colonel Maryse Carmichael 

became the first female commanding officer of the Snowbirds. 

 

The Snowbirds are a marvellous Canadian icon serving as 

Canadian ambassadors. The Snowbirds demonstrate a high 

level of professionalism, teamwork, excellence, discipline, and 

dedication inherent in the men and women of the air force and 

the Canadian Armed Forces. 

 

Colonel Carmichael is well-suited for the role of Snowbird 

commander. She started out as an air cadet at 13 and joined the 

military full time six years later. She became a flying instructor 

and has flown the 434 command support squadron in 

Greenwood, Nova Scotia. She was posted to 3 Wing Bagotville 

in Quebec in 2003 as the deputy wing operations officer and 

moved to 8 Wing Trenton, Ontario in 2007 to fly the CC-130 

Hercules. 

 

In 2000, between her time in Ottawa and Bagotville, Lieutenant 

Colonel Carmichael was selected to fly Snowbird 3 and later 

Snowbird 2 and was the team executive officer. I ask all 

members to join me, congratulating both the Snowbirds and 

Lieutenant Colonel Carmichael. Thank you very much. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Personal Health Information 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on April 12th of this year 

the Minister of Health was asked in the Assembly if the Privacy 

Commissioner had been consulted on his decision to open up 

the personal health informations in the province. Mr. Speaker, 

the minister said, on page 4704, and I quote: “. . . it’s important 

also to know, Mr. Speaker, that the Privacy Commissioner was 

consulted formally four different times on this very regulation 

. . .” In a letter that the commissioner sent to MLAs [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] today, the commissioner says that he 

didn’t see the new regulations until April 13th. That’s a day 

after the minister said here in the Assembly he consulted four 

times, and he only got the new words from the minister a day 

after. 

 

My question to the minister: how do you explain your words in 

the Assembly that you had consulted four times with the 

Privacy Commissioner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this regulation that the 

member opposite talks about, the regulation to allow health 

regions to enter into an agreement with foundations, is not a 

new regulation, Mr. Speaker. In fact the former government had 

drafted a regulation that went in front of the Privacy 

Commissioner in 2004, also another regulation that went in 

2006. And as recent as 2007, just prior to the election, that 

former government drafted a regulation, I would say, with the 

intent to put the regulation forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 

To follow through on what our government has done, Mr. 

Speaker, I did misspeak in one aspect. There has been three 

formal consultations with the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. 

Speaker, and many other informal conversations as is quoted, 

other conversations that have been conducted regarding these 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5299 

regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the 

minister is now trying to say, I quote from the letter that was 

sent to members of the Assembly earlier today. And I quote, the 

commissioner is saying this: “There is a significant change, 

however, in the new regulation.” That’s what the commissioner 

says. For the minister now to try to make it sound like he was 

referring to the former government consulting is not accurate, 

and I would say to the minister that this is not the truth. The fact 

of the matter is we have here documentation, yes, 

documentation from the commissioner of privacy that says 

something very different than the minister has just said. 

 

I want to say to the member again: why did he refer to the four 

consultations as if he and his ministry had done it when he 

knew full well he had not consulted with the commissioner 

even once? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, consultation through the 

ministry have taken place with the Privacy Commissioner on 

three separate formal occasions, Mr. Speaker, as well as other 

conversations back and forth. It is very clear, Mr. Speaker, not 

only in 2004, 2006, 2007, Mr. Speaker, and now with this 

documentation, that the Privacy Commissioner is very clear on 

this issue. 

 

He would rather see opt-in, Mr. Speaker, than opt-out. The 

Privacy Commissioner has been very clear on the regulation, 

the framework of the regulation that is saying it should be 

opt-in as opposed to opt-out, Mr. Speaker. We knew the 

position of the Privacy Commissioner. We’ve had 

conversations, Mr. Speaker. The regulation that we put forward 

is much more protective of the privacy of individuals than the 

regulation that former government had drafted — drafted three 

different times, Mr. Speaker. The former government drafted 

regulation for this very thing. 

 

We understood the Privacy Commissioner’s concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re cited in his report that he released today. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we stand by the decision that we have made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well 

that when he referred on the 12th that he had consulted, he 

would know, and the minister would know that he was sending 

the message to the public and to the press and to the people of 

the province and to the members of the opposition that he had 

consulted four times on this set of changes. 

 

The fact is that when the previous government consulted, they 

were advised and they withdrew the proposal. That happens to 

be the major difference. My question to the minister is this: that 

in the report that was released today, the Privacy Commissioner 

also says that the Saskatchewan government runs the risk, and I 

quote, “of being found to have violated the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms and the privacy interests of Saskatchewan 

patients”. Does the minister have any idea and has he informed 

the public that if this information is released, it will be in 

conflict with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms? Has that 

been made public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we see this 

regulation in other provinces. In Ontario and also Manitoba, this 

very regulation is in place, Mr. Speaker, that allows health 

regions and foundations to enter into a contractual agreement so 

that only the name and address here in Saskatchewan, only the 

name and address can be moved over into a foundation’s hands, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I find it interesting because in 2004, the former government 

talked about a regulation like this. The Privacy Commissioner 

ruled. In 2006 they thought they’d try it again. They thought 

they’d try it again and rewrote the regulation. The same 

judgment was rendered by the Privacy Commissioner that it 

should be an opt-in as opposed to opt-out. They didn’t stand at 

that. They didn’t leave it at that. They tried again in 2007, Mr. 

Speaker. The former government tried again in 2007 and 

consulted with the Privacy Commissioner. The same decision 

was rendered under the Privacy Commissioner then as what his 

statements are today. 

 

He’s been very consistent, Mr. Speaker. We knew that, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s why we’re moving ahead with our 

regulation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing the minister’s 

accurate on is that the previous administration rejected the 

proposal in 2004 and 2007. On that, he’s got it right. 

 

My question to the minister is this. In light of the fact that there 

was in fact no consultation with the Privacy Commissioner — 

we now understand that, and there was no consultation with the 

public — will he now withdraw this ill-advised, ill-advised and 

wrong plan to release health information to anyone? It’s private, 

should be kept that way, and will he now withdraw this 

ill-advised program and plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier that we 

certainly knew the stance of the Privacy Commissioner. He’s 

been very consistent on that. Regardless the former government 

kept bringing new iterations, new iterations to the regulation 

trying to please the Privacy Commissioner. Mr. Speaker, as 

recently as June 2007, a draft regulation was drawn . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. Order. 

Order. I’d ask the opposition to allow the minister to respond. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. I hear a 

former minister of Health from that side. The member from 



5300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

Nutana is saying we brought it forward three times, and it 

wasn’t going to happen. It begs the question, Mr. Speaker. After 

no the first time and they weren’t going to move on it and after 

no the second time and they weren’t going to move on it, they 

still had a third draft drawn in 2007 because they still thought 

they were going to move on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move on what we have said. I have 

made the commitment publicly, and I’ll make the commitment 

again publicly. We will review this policy after the first year, 

Mr. Speaker. And if it needs to be changed, we’ll certainly look 

at it then. But, Mr. Speaker, it has been successful in other 

provinces such as Ontario, Manitoba, and we’ll see how it plays 

out here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

New West Partnership Trade Agreement 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Premier broke 

another campaign promise by signing the New West 

Partnership Trade Agreement which is simply a renamed 

version of the TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement] deal that he promised the people of Saskatchewan 

that he would never sign. Can the Premier confirm that this 

betrayal of his solemn promise is the reason he refused to give 

the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to see this sellout 

deal before he signed it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to rise in this Assembly and 

answer questions about the economy of Saskatchewan and 

about the partnerships and the trade deals. It’s especially 

gratifying to answer questions when you can wake up on 

Saturday morning in my city . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it is especially 

gratifying when you can wake up on a Saturday morning and 

read a headline in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix that says, “A 

western powerhouse,” Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we saw 

headlines like that under the NDP but Saskatchewan was . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m prepared to stand 

here and question period will slowly go by. I recognize the 

Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 

exciting news, and I know that all members of this Assembly 

want to hear about it. “A western powerhouse,” we heard terms 

like that, but Saskatchewan was on the outside looking in, Mr. 

Speaker. Not this time. “Saskatchewan joins B.C. and Alberta 

to form barrier-free trade zone, [and] investment zone.” Mr. 

Speaker, some $555 billion of economic activity, 9 million 

people were happy to be part of it. Saskatchewan residents and 

Saskatchewan businesses are better because we are part of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can’t hide from his 

broken promise, and he can’t get away from this political 

doublespeak or from the fact that the economy has retracted by 

6.3 per cent. He can’t say that this trade agreement is nothing 

like TILMA and then turn around and claim that public 

hearings held three years ago on TILMA amount to public 

consultation on this agreement. How ridiculous is that? Will the 

Premier either admit to another broken promise or commit to 

meaningful public consultations on this new agreement before 

its effective date of July 1st? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a news 

flash for the members opposite. Breaking news here from 

September 12th, 2009, again from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, 

third page, top of the page, 445-word article and it quotes: 

 

Saskatchewan has signed on to a “Western Economic 

Partnership” with Alberta and British Columbia designed 

to break down internal economic barriers between the 

provinces and increase co-operation in areas such as 

international marketing . . . likely [to join a] . . . trade 

mission [going] to Asia. 

 

Further it quotes the Premier as saying in a Friday interview 

back in September, seven months ago, “. . . Premier Brad Wall 

acknowledged the pact, [is] to be finalized in the new year . . .” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is the new year and a good year it is. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have a lot to say and a lot of questions to ask 

about a trade agreement that gives Alberta and BC [British 

Columbia] governments and businesses a veto over our laws 

and regulations, that requires the creation of a new bureaucracy 

to police the agreement, and that subjects Saskatchewan 

taxpayers to court challenges and fines of up to $5 million. Why 

has the Premier denied the public’s right to be heard about this 

sell-out trade deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the member is right 

in one little aspect. Saskatchewan people do have a lot to say 

about this. Saskatchewan First Nations, Saskatchewan Métis, 

Saskatchewan mayors, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], SARM [Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities], Enterprise Saskatchewan, the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business, the chambers of 

commerce — what are they saying, Mr. Speaker? They want 

more trade for our province. They want more international 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5301 

co-operation. They want more innovation, Mr. Speaker, and 

they want more procurement for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from what I can hear, there’s only 20 individuals 

in the entire province that are against this deal, and they’re 

sitting right over there, and that’s where they’re going to sit 

with an attitude like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, article 7 of this sell-out trade deal 

is entitled transparency, and it positively drips with irony for the 

people of Saskatchewan. It says that, in the future, any time a 

Saskatchewan government is proposing a new law or 

regulation, it will be required to provide copies in advance of 

the proposed law or regulation to Alberta and BC and any 

out-of-province companies that might be affected. And it will 

give them an opportunity to be heard before the law or 

regulation is passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree that he is guaranteeing 

out-of-province companies and the governments of Alberta and 

BC the very transparency and right to consultation that he has 

just denied the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, consultations took 

place with an all-party committee regarding a trade deal in the 

province. Members from both sides of the House participated. 

We heard clearly that there were concerns regarding Crown 

corporations. There were concerns regarding the municipalities’ 

ability to attract businesses to their local areas, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, those concerns were 

articulated very well by the Premier of Saskatchewan, and they 

were listened to by the Premier of British Columbia and 

Alberta. This agreement strengthens all three provinces going 

forward. It doesn’t have as much to say on the labour side 

because the Agreement on Internal Trade took place. And we 

give members opposite some credit for doing some work in that 

regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s all about the new Saskatchewan, a new 

Saskatchewan where every business can compete, where 

residents that can come here to Saskatchewan from wherever 

they want, set up their business and know that they will be on 

equal footing with those in Alberta and British Columbia. Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite don’t like it because it’s very 

different than the old Saskatchewan that they oversaw, where 

they were scared to do things, where they didn’t have the 

confidence of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, even though 

the leader has been away . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-three 

programs have been cut at SIAST. Twenty-four staff have been 

laid off, and nearly 300 student seats have been eliminated. One 

of the main reasons is that the Sask Party government has been 

picking winners and losers in the world of post-secondary 

education. To the minister: why is his government picking 

winners and losers on SIAST campuses and making 

short-sighted cuts that will hurt our future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to provide the people of this province with an 

update regarding post-secondary education. As you know, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve invested more than $1.6 billion since coming 

into office in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

best to start by reading from Dr. David Walls who recently 

wrote: 

 

SIAST is the primary provider of skills and technical 

training in Saskatchewan. We are responsible to our 

stakeholders to provide training that meets labour market 

demands. As we have responded, enrolment has grown by 

16.2 per cent over the past five years, including a 

43-per-cent increase in apprenticeship training . . . [over] 

the last two years alone. 

 

For SIAST to continue to provide quality opportunities, 

we must do careful analysis of our program array. 

 

[14:15] 

 

We certainly are supportive of what SIAST is undertaking, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a work in progress. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

certainly continue to support our students, our faculty members, 

and our institutions right across the province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a criticism of SIAST. 

This is a criticism of the Sask Party government that is 

shortchanging Saskatchewan students. The March 30th 

Leader-Post reported, “In an email sent . . . Friday, McCulloch 

. . . [said] funding from the province is reduced and SIAST is 

facing a shortfall of several million dollars in operating and 

capital resources.” 

 

To the minister: will he admit that SIAST is being asked to pay 

the price for their government’s incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a solid 

track record when it comes to investing in post-secondary 

education. 

 

When we look at over a 5 per cent increase from this budget, 



5302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, that’s among the highest of any provincial 

investment in post-secondary education as we look across those 

provinces that have come forward with budgets. When we think 

about Manitoba coming in at 4.5 per cent, at New Brunswick at 

3 per cent, at Quebec at 2.2 per cent, at Newfoundland at 1 per 

cent, at BC flatlining, and at Alberta with a 6 per cent reduction, 

we stand with our 5 per cent-plus investment, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s obviously more to do, but we stand with the students, 

the faculty members, and our institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the applied photography program 

was axed in the recent cuts on SIAST campuses. This is the 

only program of its kind in Saskatchewan, and every year the 

number of applicants has been four times greater than the 

program’s capacity. These students go on to successful jobs in 

photography, web design, and the film industry. According to 

an article in the Moosomin Spectator this government is “in 

effect telling young people if they want to study photography, 

they can leave this province.” 

 

To the minister: why is he forcing young people to leave the 

province in order to follow their career path? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of the last 

eight or nine years, what we’ve seen is that SIAST had had 

more than 200 programs. It now runs about 160. This constant 

and continual program review is what makes SIAST 

programming effective and efficient, especially for students as 

they’re entering the labour market. 

 

Specifically on the point of this specific program, Mr. Speaker, 

I held a conference call on Friday, and I’ve had a meeting with 

President McCulloch this morning. These deliberations 

continue. There are a range of options that we’re willing to . . . 

ensure that we include the students in these deliberations. We’re 

hearing from industry and other stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

not to rule out other initiatives in the future. It is to say that we 

applaud the institution as it continues to make decisions to 

ensure that we’re moving forward for the people of this 

province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the answer sounds a lot like the 

answers to the tuition management strategy questions — lots of 

words, no substance, no answers for Saskatchewan students. 

 

Nearly 300 seats eliminated, Mr. Speaker, affecting students in 

rural, urban, and regional Saskatchewan. One program cut was 

the early childhood education diploma program in Prince 

Albert. While child care facilities in Prince Albert and across 

the province are crying out for qualified workers, the minister 

cuts the program of Prince Albert, forcing them to relocate in 

order to get the training that they need. To the minister: why is 

he forcing Prince Albert students to uproot their lives in order to 

receive training? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the 

member opposite knows well there is another initiative on the 

P.A. [Prince Albert] campus pertaining to child care training, 

Mr. Speaker. We certainly know that. 

 

But as far as tuition management, the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, should be aware of their own record. While they were 

in office, SIAST tuition increased by 263 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s an annual allocation of over 17 per cent. It’s a shameful 

record, Mr. Speaker. We’re making sure that not only 

excellence but also affordability are the watchwords of 

post-secondary education in contemporary Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Security for Courthouses 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Justice: why 

is the government cutting security at the Queen’s Bench 

courthouses in Regina and Saskatoon? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear to 

the member opposite and members of the public that we are not 

eliminating security. We are providing it in a variety of 

different ways. We had initially had perimeter security that 

existed with airport-type security. We will now be providing the 

security sometimes by perimeter security and sometimes by 

other methods. 

 

We are trying to make efficient use of the resources, Mr. 

Speaker, and a number of the things that we will do will make it 

so that we will not have to have the intrusion of the airport-style 

scanners in use at all times. But we will, where appropriate and 

where necessary, ensure that we have appropriate security in 

place at our court centres in all of our major centres, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, November 2008, security at the 

Regina Queen’s Bench court house was temporarily 

understaffed, and people entered without being screened. That 

day an incident occurred that might have been serious. 

Fortunately no one was harmed. At that time, the government 

assured the public that a backup plan was being put in place to 

ensure this wouldn’t happen again. To the minister: is this the 

backup plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that 

we’ve got safe, secure courthouses in Saskatoon, in Regina, and 

in fact throughout the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the reality of it is Saskatchewan has been a 

province for in excess of 100 years. During that period of time, 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5303 

the first 100 years, there was no security whatever in our 

courthouse. It’s a sad statement about today’s society that we 

have had to move towards having security in our courthouses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have security where it is appropriate. We will 

continue to have security where it is appropriate. The perimeter 

security will not be in operation at all points in time. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to ensure the members opposite that we will 

have security when and as is required, Mr. Speaker. We will 

ensure that we have safe courthouses. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill and its amendment be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment and that the Bill and its amendments be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that the amendments be now read the first and 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment may 

proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that Bill No. 122, The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009 with amendment be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 126, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 126, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act with amendment and that its 

amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 



5304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for the Environment has moved 

that the amendments be now read the first and second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. No, I hear . . . All those in favour say 

aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it on division. The 

minister may move to third reading. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment that Bill No. 126, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act with 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it on division. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 

Bill No. 120, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 

2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the Department 

of Finance has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 120, The Financial 

Administration Amendment Act, 2009 and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister may proceed to third reading. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 120, The Financial Administration Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5305 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

141, The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on the Bill, and that 

this Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 141, The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act and that the Bill be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 141 — The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I move this Bill now be read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Investments that Bill No. 141, The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

142, The Business Statutes Administration Transfer 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and this 

Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 142, The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 142 — The Business Statutes Administration 

Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 

portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I move this Bill now be read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments that Bill No. 142, The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 



5306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 139, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

139, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) 

Amendment Act, 2010 and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 139 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 139, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 140, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

140, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) 

Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) without amendment and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 140 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2)/Loi corrective 

(rationalisation administrative) n
o
 2 de 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 140, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 138, The Queen’s Bench Amendment 

Act, 2010 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5307 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

138, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) and that 

the Bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 138 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 138, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 

(No. 2) be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, to seek a waiver of the notice of 

requirement to raise a question of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member to state his notice of 

requirement to seek a waiver. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Request to Waive Notice Period 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Rule 10(1) 

states that, and I quote: 

 

. . . a Member who proposes to raise a question of 

privilege shall first advise the Speaker of his intention to 

do so and . . . the subject matter thereof at least two hours 

prior to the regular daily opening of the Assembly. 

 

However, rule 10(2) states that, and I quote, “Notwithstanding 

the foregoing, the Speaker shall have the right to waive the 

notice.”  

 

This matter has to do with the misleading statements by the 

Minister of Health brought to our attention this morning by the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. Because of the 

extended hours under which this Assembly is now operating, it 

was not possible to provide two hours of notice of our intention 

to raise a question of privilege. 

 

For that reason, I would ask that the Speaker waive the required 

notice and allow the opposition to raise a question of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask the members to come to order. 

The member quoted rule 12(1) which all members are aware of 

about the two hour notice and gave arguments. But rule 12(2) 

says: 

 

Immediately upon receipt of such notice, the Speaker shall 

advise the government and opposition House leaders, and 

any independent Members, of the details of the case and 

the proposed question of privilege. 

 

And then motion 12(3) then goes on to acknowledge the 

Speaker trying to determine a prima facie case. 

 

Given the fact that we’ve had the argument presented by the 

member from Regina Dewdney, I think it will be only 

appropriate to at least hear the arguments for the motion that the 

member is asking of the Assembly and any arguments opposed, 

and then at that time I will indicate to the House how we will 

proceed. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a 

point of privilege. At issue is the statement made by the 

Minister of Health on April 12th, 2010, recorded on page 4704 

of the Hansard when he said, “But it’s important also to know, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Privacy Commissioner was consulted 

formally four . . . times on this very regulation, Mr. Speaker.” 

 

In a letter to all members this morning, the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner clearly states that the statement made by 

the Minister of Health was inaccurate. In fact the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner states, “A review of my records 

indicates that there were only three consultations with my office 

that could be considered as formal and those consultations 

spanned the period 2004 to 2007.” 

 

The Information and Privacy Commissioner goes on to say, and 

I quote: 

 

I had not seen the new regulation until a copy was emailed 

to my office at my request on April 13th, 2010 at 2:47 

p.m. by Saskatchewan Health. 

 

I have not received any draft documentation with respect 

to the type of contract that Saskatchewan Health will be 

introducing pursuant to subsection 7.1(1)(i) or 8 of the 

Regulation. In my view, Saskatchewan Health should have 

completed those pieces and made them available for 

public comment prior to the proclamation of the subject 

Regulation.  

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Information and Privacy 



5308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

Commissioner states: 

 

In summary, for my office, there was only the public 

consultation in 2004, the exchange of correspondence in 

2006 and a further exchange of correspondence in June 

2007. I am not aware of any formal consultation on the 

matter of a fundraising Regulation under HIPA. I also 

wish to stress that, in each of the three consultations, the 

text upon which I was commenting was different; none of 

the three consultations involved text identical to order in 

council 187/2010 . . . 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this is what the Minister of Health said on 

April 12th, 2010, and I quote, “. . . the Privacy Commissioner 

was consulted formally four . . . times on this very regulation 

. . .” That is contrary to what the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner has written this morning. The Minister of Health 

clearly misled this Assembly. 

 

And on page 111 of the 22nd Edition of Erskine May it states, 

and I quote, “The Commons may treat the making of a 

deliberately misleading statement as a contempt.” On page 141 

of the 19th edition of Erskine May it states, and I quote, 

“Conspiracy to deceive either House or any committees of 

either House will also be treated as a breach of privilege.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Health stated in this 

Assembly on April 12, 2010, has been contradicted by an 

independent officer of this Assembly. The evidence that I have 

presented shows a prima facie case of contempt of this House 

and a breach of privilege. Mr. Speaker, if you find this to be a 

prima facie question of privilege, I am prepared to move the 

appropriate motion. And, Mr. Speaker, the motion I would 

move is as follows: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of the statements made 

to this Assembly by the Minister of Health on April 12, 

2010, and report back to this Assembly; and that until such 

time that the committee reports, the Minister of Health 

shall be removed from his position as a minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

through question period we heard a number of the arguments go 

back and forth. I would like to quote from the letter from the 

Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner where he 

says on page 6: “. . . none of the three consultations involved 

text identical to Order in Council 187/2010 although the 2007 

consultation text was very similar but for one significant 

difference,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these consultations, Mr. Speaker, did take 

place. There was changes in the regulations on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the Information Commissioner states on 

page 5, “I understand that Saskatchewan Health has suggested 

that there was also a consultation on fundraising in May 2006, 

but to the best of my knowledge my office was not involved in 

that consultation . . .” Mr. Speaker, so clearly there were 

consultations taking place about fundraising. The Information 

Commissioner doesn’t recollect his meeting in May of 2006. 

 

And on a second point, Mr. Speaker, in Beauchesne’s 6th 

Edition on page 13, no. 31(1) rule, “A dispute arising between 

two Members, as to allegations of facts, does not fulfill the 

conditions of parliamentary privilege.” I submit there is no 

point of privilege here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve listened to the arguments, 

and I appreciate the member from Regina, the Opposition 

House Leader’s comments in regards to the new hours the 

House is operating under. Given that, and given the current 

rules, I feel it would be only appropriate for me to take some 

time to take into consideration the arguments presented by the 

Opposition House Leader and the Government House Leader, 

and certainly would ask if the Opposition House Leader would 

present us with the written arguments so we can look at them 

carefully. And I will come back to the House at an appropriate 

time, as early as I possibly can, to inform the House as to where 

we go with the motion that was presented to us. 

 

Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — Would the Government House Leader state 

his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during question period, the Leader of the Opposition declared in 

his questions to the Minister of Health that the Minister of 

Health’s words were not the truth, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

they know very well that those words are unparliamentary, that 

they’re not entitled to speak them. I ask that the Leader of the 

Official Opposition withdraw and apologize unequivocally. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rose just a 

few moments ago and raised what is one of the most serious 

situations that this House ever has to deal with, and that is the 

issue of one of our members being in contempt of this House. 

Mr. Speaker, I rose on something I would prefer not to do, and 

I’m sure no member of this House would like to do, to have to 

deal with an issue of a member of this House telling us facts 

that are not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s obvious from the letters from the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner, from the statements 

made by the Minister of Health, that the comments made by the 

Leader of the Opposition were in fact true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious issue. If we, as members of 

this Assembly, cannot rely upon the answers that a minister 

provides us as being the facts, Mr. Speaker, we cannot do our 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5309 

jobs appropriately. We cannot hold the government 

accountable. We cannot act on behalf of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people can laugh about this if they like, but this is 

the most serious situation that a House has to deal with. We 

don’t take this as a funny joke. We take this very, very 

seriously. Mr. Speaker, we need to have this House live by the 

rules that the Parliament of Canada and this Legislative 

Assembly are to live by. Mr. Speaker, if a minister of the 

Crown stands and provides facts that are not true to the 

members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we cannot do our jobs. 

And in doing our jobs, Mr. Speaker, we have to be able to call 

the facts what they are. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my time in this Assembly I have seen very few 

circumstances where we’ve had to ask for an issue of privilege, 

Mr. Speaker, to have this House decide upon. In fact in my 

years, Mr. Speaker, now going on 12 years, I have never seen 

the committee deal with an issue of privilege. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this is of the utmost seriousness. And the member’s 

point of order goes to deal with an issue already before you 

that’s a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you take into consideration in 

your deliberations on the point of privilege whether or not the 

facts provided by the Minister of Health were in fact true. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I thank the Government House Leader 

for the point of order and the response by the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Earlier today in question period, I was listening and listening 

very carefully and attentively. And as I recall the debate and the 

way the comment was worded, I didn’t at that time see the 

comment as being directed directly at an individual. I thought it 

was a general comment, and in that regard I find the point of 

order not well taken. 

 

Why is the Deputy Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — By leave to introduce a motion 

regarding hours. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

asked for leave to introduce a motion regarding hours. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move: 

 

That the sessional order dated April 26th, 2010 regarding 

extended hours be rescinded. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Deputy 

Government House Leader, by leave: 

 

That the sessional order dated April 26th, 2010 regarding 

extended hours be rescinded. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. To speak to the motion in 

front of us, the motion moved by the Deputy House Leader to 

rescind the motion of extended hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to speak to this motion, just as I was 

pleased to speak to the motion that set in place the extended 

hours, Mr. Speaker, because I’d like to repeat some of the 

things that I and other members said when the Government 

Deputy House Leader moved this motion to begin with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

First by setting this up, let me simply indicate, Mr. Speaker, that 

I have a bias as to how governments should operate, Mr. 

Speaker. Governments should operate with the trust and the 

confidence of the public who put them there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it is interesting on a day like today that the government is 

going to bring forward a motion that’s asking the public to 

thank them for the trust and confidence that they have shown in 

the public, Mr. Speaker, because exactly the opposite is the 

case. 

 

Here today if anybody was watching question period, or 

watching today, Mr. Speaker, we saw the Minister of Health 

answer questions related to contrary information about 

questions that he’d answered previously, Mr. Speaker, 

questions about consultation. Did this government consult with 

the public, Mr. Speaker? Consult with an independent officer? 

The Minister of Health had said, yes I did. And the Privacy 

Commissioner said, no you didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

After that question, we saw the Minister of Trade for this 

province, the member from Silver Springs, the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation. He was asked 

questions about the western economic partnership agreement, 

Mr. Speaker, and why the government did not consult on that 

issue, Mr. Speaker. Did the government not trust the public or 

have confidence in the public response, Mr. Speaker? And the 

member from Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for 

Trade, indicated this was a good deal and the consultations 

occurred three years ago, Mr. Speaker. Well on a different piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and on a different trade deal, Mr. 

Speaker — at least that’s what he argues — consultations did 

occur. But on this trade deal, Mr. Speaker, no consultations 

occurred whatsoever. 

 

And the irony, as we found out in question period, Mr. Speaker, 

is that this government has signed a deal that says to the 

governments of British Columbia and the governments of 



5310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

Alberta, we will in fact consult with you on any laws that we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan. But through this House, 

Mr. Speaker, and on that deal, this government has said, we will 

not consult with the people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe the motion 

presented by the Opposition House Leader is a motion 

regarding the time of sittings and I would ask the member to 

address the motion. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think my point will 

become very clear here in just a moment. My comment was 

about trust and confidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government, when it moved its motion here 

just a little over a week ago, said to the people of 

Saskatchewan, we need to have extended hours. We need to 

have our staff stay extra hours, we need to have staff in the 

ministries be available for extra hours, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 

trust — this is the government speaking — we don’t trust the 

members of the opposition so we’re going to ask everybody to 

put in extra hours, eliminate public participation in our 

legislative process, Mr. Speaker, all because we need to do this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition made it very 

clear at the time that packages of . . . or that the legislative 

process was being followed; that legislation was being moved 

forward; that indeed, Mr. Speaker, aspects of the budget were 

being studied according to the rules of the Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker. And the opposition said to the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t need the extended hours. The government, 

through managing things appropriately, has the amount of time 

to get through this legislative agenda before May 20. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, if they could not get through it, then of 

course they had the opportunity to extend the number of days 

available to us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government was then saying . . . or what 

we were saying then to the government: that they were 

mismanaging the legislative agenda just as they had 

mismanaged the finances of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier today we saw Chairs of various committees stand in this 

House and report Bills. And we went through third reading of a 

large number of Bills, Mr. Speaker, giving evidence to the fact 

that the opposition continued to —as we had said we would 

previously — co-operate with the government on their 

legislative agenda. 

 

So here we are, Mr. Speaker, still two weeks, actually three 

weeks of a legislative agenda to move forward, Mr. Speaker, 

and most of the work that the government said couldn’t get 

done, has been done, Mr. Speaker, with great co-operation, I 

might add, from members of the opposition. 

 

Now there are still pieces of legislation outstanding on which 

this government said they would consult, but they have not 

consulted, Mr. Speaker, and it’s becoming very obvious. For 

example, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act amendments, Mr. 

Speaker, dealing with land designations. The government has 

indicated they consulted. They haven’t consulted and now they 

want more time to consult, Mr. Speaker, indicating that they’re 

going to meet later this week with those organizations and 

groups who feel the consultation process has failed them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This government miscalculated the amount of time that it would 

need to get their legislative agenda through. They have 

demonstrated clearly that they don’t have the capacity to 

manage finances or legislation, Mr. Speaker. They have 

penalized people who work in this building. They penalized 

people who work in the ministries, Mr. Speaker, by having 

them put in those extra hours to midnight most nights, Mr. 

Speaker. It was unfair to the public. They asked the public for 

trust and confidence while at the same time demonstrating no 

trust or confidence in either the opposition or the public, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just one more thing, one more thing, Mr. Speaker, that the 

public needs to remember going forward is that we cannot trust 

this government. We cannot have confidence in this 

government because the government has not demonstrated 

they’ve earned it. The government has not demonstrated that 

they trust or have confidence in the general public. 

 

They did this once last year. Within four days, they changed 

their minds, Mr. Speaker, and changed the rules back to normal. 

They did it this year, Mr. Speaker. In a week of debate, they’ve 

realized that they didn’t need to do it. Mr. Speaker, I only hope 

that next year we don’t have to go through this process again 

when the government shows that they do not have the ability to 

manage the legislative agenda in this Chamber. And that they 

have the ability to ensure that the public can participate in all 

the processes of the legislative process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is a legislative process that we want the public to be 

engaged in, that the public should be engaged in. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope that the government has learned their lesson 

after going through this process twice and, in both cases, being 

proved they were wrong in their assessment of where things 

were at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will support the motion in front of us today, 

Mr. Speaker, because the motion that set up the extra hours was 

not necessary in the first place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

agree with the member opposite that this is about trust. And fact 

is, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty we on the government side of the 

aisle was that we were trusting the House Leader for the 

opposition at his word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We were trusting when he said none of the environment Bills 

would pass, Mr. Speaker, that that was what his intentions were. 

We were trusting, Mr. Speaker, when he said House business 

would not proceed unless you, the government, rehired the CPS 

[Corrections and Public Safety] worker, Mr. Speaker. We 

trusted that that was his intention and not just hollow words, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since that time, since the change in hours came 

into place, we have passed most of the legislation in the House, 

which is what the duty of the government is, is to bring forward 

legislation that the people of the province want, to have it 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5311 

considered, Mr. Speaker, and to have it come forward for votes, 

Mr. Speaker. That has happened with most of the Bills, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a considerable amount of time put 

forward on the hours for the estimates, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, prior to the addition of additional hours in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t be sure that the budget 

would be passed in the appropriate time, Mr. Speaker. We now 

have a number of estimates that have moved forward and 

assurances from the opposition, an agreement, Mr. Speaker, that 

we will complete the budgetary votes. Doesn’t say that they will 

pass, Mr. Speaker, but rather that they will be voted on, Mr. 

Speaker, by the final day of session of May the 20th, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So while we did have to put in a considerable amount of time, 

Mr. Speaker . . . And I understand that the member from Regina 

Coronation Park felt that it was impossible to work for 16 hours 

a day, Mr. Speaker. The members on this side of the House 

were more than willing to prove him wrong, and in fact did, Mr. 

Speaker. We were ready and did do the work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to thank the members, the workers in the 

Legislative Assembly, and the workers, the employees of the 

Crown corporations and the ministries for their diligence in 

providing us for support, for coming to the committees and 

helping to supply the answers, Mr. Speaker. We certainly 

appreciate that they have put forward on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the goals that the government set 

forward in extending the time have been accomplished and now 

it’s time to move on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 

very important that I enter into the debate and clarify a number 

of facts and statements, Mr. Speaker. As the Opposition House 

Leader, I maintained throughout the entire process that there 

was adequate time to do the work of the government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a timetable which we stuck with, whether 

or not we had extended hours. The time that we had said we 

would bring forward on Bills, we stuck to, Mr. Speaker. The 

time that we would have spent on each Bill in either committee 

or on the floor of the Assembly, the opposition stuck to that 

time frame, Mr. Speaker. And as is very apparent to the general 

public and should be very apparent to everyone, Mr. Speaker, 

we now are virtually out of work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We have two pieces of legislation that will be debated this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, one which is a budget Bill, a maximum 

of five hours on it, Mr. Speaker, and as of now we have 

estimate hours totalling — nine, thirteen, fourteen and a half, 

nineteen — about 26 hours, Mr. Speaker, about seven hours of 

which will be used today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be very clear that if you look at the 

additional hours we spent, Mr. Speaker, and subtracting the two 

days we spent on this particular debate to get into the extended 

hours, Mr. Speaker, and looking at the time that was spent, Mr. 

Speaker, there wasn’t very much additional time actually 

worked. We spent a lot of time, Mr. Speaker, adjourned or 

recessed. Friday morning would be a great example: 8:15 to 

8:20, we recessed till noon one committee, Mr. Speaker; and 

about 10 o’clock we recessed to noon in the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were to have estimates on First Nations and 

Métis Relations on Friday evening, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

was sick. Those estimates weren’t done, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, throughout this whole process the opposition has been 

co-operative throughout this whole process. I’ve told them 

where we’d be and how we would get this done, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve even signed and provided hours in which we would 

spend on our estimates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a short, short two and a half year period, we’ve 

seen a government twice, twice have to extend hours because 

they couldn’t manage their agenda, Mr. Speaker. Before we get 

to next year, Mr. Speaker, I want to offer this. Before we get 

into this problem next year, Mr. Speaker, I want to offer this. 

 

If you want to work with an opposition, you work with them. If 

you try to bully an opposition, you don’t get co-operation, Mr. 

Speaker. So in the future I hope that the government has learned 

that you get co-operation by being co-operative. If you try to 

push an opposition around, you will not get co-operation. If 

you’re coming to bargain on an issue, you come bargain; you 

don’t make things up, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question presented by the Deputy Government House Leader, 

that the sessional order dated April 26th, 2010, regarding 

extended hours be rescinded. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,555 through 1,585. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,555 through 1,585 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 



5312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill 136 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 136 — The 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to make a few 

comments on Bill 136, The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

have a right to feel safe when they ride an elevator, or be that an 

amusement park ride. And keeping people safe is, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the core responsibilities of government, but as in so 

many cases, this government wants to off-load its responsibility 

on to others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill creates a delegated administration 

organization, an authority that, according to the legislation, is 

not an agent of the Crown. And the Bill also refers to the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, as a “. . . member of the Executive 

Council to whom for the time being the administration of the 

Act is assigned.” In other words, this move to a so-called 

delegated administrative authority is just the first move. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, clearly the government has just privatized 

responsibility for safety inspections in the province. And we see 

that on a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, because this 

government, this Sask Party government, does not believe in 

governing. At the very heart of their beliefs that they have at 

their core, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do not believe in 

government. They do not believe that government should 

government — that the less government is better. 

 

But in issues of safety, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in issues of safety I 

believe that they’re wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they’re 

dead wrong and in fact that privatization is not the way to go on 

important issues of safety, important issues where we are 

talking about keeping people safe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, keeping 

people safe and keeping things like elevators operating in a safe 

manner. 

 

Now one of the things that the minister said, or one of the 

reasons that he used for moving on this was, he said, there were 

a backlog of inspections. I suppose had this government not so 

mismanaged the finances of this province, they could have had 

the money to hire inspectors. 

 

Instead what we are finding is they are cutting, cutting in all 

departments across the government, cutting everywhere that 

they can, even down to Dutch Elm disease programs. They’re 

cutting mosquito programs, West Nile programs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. All across the piece, this government is making cuts. 

Every day we hear more cuts. We had today in the Legislative 

Assembly cuts to the SIAST programs. And this is indicative of 

not only mismanaging the finances of this province, but 

mismanaging files like this one which deal with safety in the 

province. 

 

And so I guess the question is the approach, the approach that 

this government takes whenever it gets into a problem. We had 

today also an issue raised around court security services. And 

they call those efficiencies, that they’re making efficiencies. But 

in areas of safety, in areas of where there’s court safety for the 

people of this province to be able to enter into courtrooms 

safely and feel that their safety would not be in jeopardy, that’s 

where they’re going. And there are cuts every day that we hear 

about, that are rolled out and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in such a 

short time, in such a short time with so much money, that we 

have come to today where we are again hearing about more 

cuts. 

 

And it is almost unheard of that you would have, just such a 

short time ago, spent so much money in advertising of how 

you’re reducing the debt to now seeing all these cuts. And 

having people ask, where did all the money go? And that they 

had so much money, and where has the money gone or what 

were they hiding? What were they hiding, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

I think that’s now moved over in there as to what were they 

hiding and not telling the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that they don’t consult. We know they don’t consult 

because on any number of occasions we’ve had people outside 

of the province. They’ve gained some international flavour and 

fame out there for people that recognizing most of these folks, 

that’s what’s occurred. And now we have again here where the 

Minister of Health is saying that in fact he consulted. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he seems to know what you’re 

supposed to say because that’s new. It’s just that apparently 

according to the Privacy Commissioner, he did not consult. So 

we have an interesting . . . They’re sort of moving here, or 

perhaps this is just a different flavour of the whole consultation 

piece. 

 

Where in most cases they don’t consult, this minister felt that he 

should say they did consult because all the other people weren’t 

seeming to get . . . Maybe he didn’t want some international 

recognition around this issue of consultation. He didn’t want to 

be like some of his other colleagues, so he thought he would 

stand up in this House and say he did consult, he did consult on 

four different times with the Privacy Commissioner. Except, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the problem is the Privacy Commissioner 

said that he did not consult on that particular issue, that he did 

not consult on the regulation and the changes that he was 

making . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to return to 

the Bill that is being discussed on the floor, The Technical 

Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act, Bill No. 136. I recognize 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps it was not 

clear when again my remarks as to how they relate to this, I 

think, the idea perhaps of the consultations, the consultations 

. . . because this has become a trademark of the Sask Party 

government is their lack of consultations. Or perhaps it’s even 

the understanding of what the basics of democracy are, that you 

should talk to people. In plain words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 

know, before you do something, you should go and talk to 

people. Perhaps it’s consult, that word is . . . They’re having 

difficulty with that. 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5313 

But we saw a very good example in here today about the 

minister saying, I consulted four times. And it wasn’t us, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that raised that they didn’t consult. Now they 

have the attention of the Privacy Commissioner. So what they 

have, the attention of . . . They have the attention of the United 

Nations, now Privacy Commissioner. They’re getting quite 

famous. And of course the member from Martensville with her 

last episode, she also got some international fame. It was not 

around consultation; it was just simply around a fundraiser that 

she got to be known around the world about. So they are getting 

many people to look at them, not only us and the people of 

Saskatchewan.  

 

And even as to questions were raised under the TILMA, the 

new West partnership agreement masquerading for TILMA, 

that again that they were now going to . . . They signed on, and 

perhaps they weren’t even aware that they have signed on. 

Perhaps they didn’t read it — as many times they haven’t read 

Bills they’d have come in this House, had to have a redo — that 

they have to consult the provinces, the governments of British 

Columbia and the governments of Alberta, before they move in 

certain areas under seven. 

 

So now we have the . . . And perhaps they didn’t read that close 

enough because that’s happened in other times when they’ve 

put forward Bills and they didn’t read it clearly enough or 

carefully enough, had to bring it in here, and then they had to 

take them back to redo them. 

 

And so this is, with that kind of background, with that kind of 

background, we have the Bill before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Bill No. 136, The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act that they bring before here. And the minister touts this as a 

solution to a safety problem. Well their, sort of, their track 

record on safety is . . . I’ll spend some time about that. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, for now, the government, this government 

believes that this new organization can perform inspections 

more efficiently. 

 

And here you have again the word of efficiency from this 

government, the Sask Party government, which are now calling 

all the changes they’re making efficiencies and doing it better, 

but they’re nothing more than cuts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They’re nothing more, nothing less than cuts to services for this 

province. 

 

And how did this all happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And I know 

you’ve heard me say this before and listened intently about the 

$2.3 billion that they were left with that just seemed to drain 

down into a . . . just drain, just drain this province of all that 

money, went on a huge spending spree, and now we find today 

we’re in cuts. 

 

And I would venture to say that now today we find ourselves 

playing around with safety of people because they now want to 

do it at arm’s length. Because they say, they admit or they are 

saying that now they cannot do it the way somebody in the 

private sector can do it, and they would put this agency at an 

arm’s length to do these. 

 

Now why would you, why would you do that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Why wouldn’t you simply address the problem, have 

a look at whether there were more public safety officers needed 

in here, more people needed in the branch, and hire these 

people? Again this is with the Ministry of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing.  

 

Now there’s quite a . . . This minister is one with quite a 

background. He’s made it into The Parliamentarian, forever 

will be written up in The Parliamentarian in an article in there 

which talked about his approach to governing, his approach to it 

were in terms of what . . . his apology to this legislature. 

 

And so now we have in the works, we have a motion of 

privilege for a minister. We’ve got the motion, the member, 

before that, on coming before this House and some of the things 

that he said in this House about his work. And now we have 

another minister in the same, in the same situation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And it is this minister also feeling that he can just 

abdicate his responsibility in this area, abdicate his 

responsibility. 

 

But I would say that it goes deeper than that. I would say that 

the Sask Party government doesn’t believe in governing and 

that in every chance that they would get that they would try and 

get out of governing. And it’s interesting that you can hold such 

ideological beliefs and then run to govern. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again, they will no doubt, as we’ll 

hear, the minister will probably want to reassure us that nothing 

will change, that this is merely administrative change and that 

all of the employees would just be transferred over. Nothing 

will happen. They will have all their benefits. We’ll hear this. 

 

But this coming from a minister whose first reaction was where 

did you get the information, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

threatening the member from Regina Dewdney, that the police 

might come and see them. And for that he has now become 

rather famous — however not probably, in The 

Parliamentarian, as most of us would want to be written up 

about — but in a somewhat different manner, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So again, some fame being gained by the minister over 

there, by the members, by the minister opposite. 

 

Now you can’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can’t have it both 

ways here. You can’t just simply say that this is . . . Either this 

is meaningful change as to how inspections, inspections which 

are very important, are going to be done or it is not meaningful 

change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is it that is going on here? 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it makes no sense for the 

minister to create a backlog . . . create a new organization to 

solve a temporary backlog. I have spoken before on this issue 

and been very clear that on this issue, we have, on these 

occasions, that there . . . What about hiring some extra people? 

What about hiring some extra people so that we can move 

forward and get the backlog done, as opposed to simply 

abdicating their authority on here and putting it to an agency 

that’s going to be at least at arm’s length is what they say. 

 

But here is some of the . . . In a press release from the 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union, it is questioning 

the need for this new organization. And in there they say, 

“We’ve got a bunch of . . .” This is a quote from their press 



5314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

release: 

 

“We’ve got a bunch of inspectors that have been going out 

there and doing excellent work. We need a few more, 

without a doubt, but I don’t know why they’re doing . . . 

[it] this way,” said Hank Lashta, who represents the 

inspectors at the negotiating table. “The problem is easily 

corrected within the current framework.” 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are people who work within 

this field. And again: 

 

“Lashta said there is a conflict of interest to have industry 

involved in the organization that will administer the safety 

program and suggested public safety could suffer.” 

 

And again here they go on to explain what the organization is 

about: 

 

The new organization will operate at arm’s-length from 

the government, but the government said the responsibility 

for legislative and regulatory requirements will remain 

with the province. 

 

Now that’s interesting. And exactly what will that mean? 

 

And then: 

 

The 52 staff in the licensing and inspection branch will be 

transferred to the new authority, expected to be up and 

running in July. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess the questions that come out of this 

is, sort of, what accountability mechanisms will there be to 

guarantee the safety standards are met? We’ve heard nothing, 

nothing from this. Simply again to have, without consultations, 

without having any discussions, they’re asking us to simply say 

that this is . . . that we should accept this.  

 

Will the Provincial Auditor and Ombudsman have powers to 

oversee the operation and address the problems? We know how 

important . . . Now again I sense that maybe it’s not only the 

lack of interest in governing that this Sask Party has. But again 

as we’re seeing by bringing in the Privacy Commissioner the 

way the Health minister brought that individual in — an 

esteemed individual of this legislature, appointed by this 

legislature — that perhaps this is not a problem for them. 

Perhaps it’s not a problem of whether the Provincial Auditor or 

Ombudsman has some . . . is able to oversee the operations here 

and address problems. Perhaps they want to hide this as well. 

Hide this the way they said, we don’t have a deficit, we don’t 

have a deficit. 

 

Can you imagine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they can come 

out and say to people, sit across from them at tables, go back to 

their constituencies, have us go back to the constituencies and 

have people say, there is no deficit. There is no deficit in 

Saskatchewan. There are only, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 

only efficiencies. 

 

We have efficiencies at the courthouse. We have efficiencies 

over at the courthouse, we do. We have efficiencies when it 

comes to the Dutch elm disease. We have efficiencies there. We 

have efficiencies in SIAST, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 

efficiencies there. We have efficiencies in the West Nile. A lot 

of efficiencies we have. This government’s big on efficiencies 

and being efficient. 

 

And people will start saying, well what are they hiding? What 

about that $3 billion of potash that the Minister of Energy and 

Resources was talking about? What happened to all our money? 

Because they’re out there and the people of Saskatchewan are 

out there working and making this economy go and earning a 

living for their families. But they’re turning around and finding 

waiting lists haven’t improved. There’s a doctor shortage. 

They’re not getting their tax breaks. The municipalities aren’t 

getting their money. And we hear on a continual basis, 

Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, raising taxes. 

And they’re hiding that and saying, well we don’t have a 

deficit. We don’t have a deficit. 

 

We hear members from on the other side saying, well here’s 

what we gave them last year; they should be happy with that. 

And if, sorry, if we led you over the cliff by saying you would 

get it next year and now we can’t, you figure it out. Here’s a 

parachute. Here’s a parachute. But maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

maybe they’ll even cut back the parachutes because of 

efficiencies. So when people jump over the cliff, they’ll be 

gone. Because that’s what they’re doing, they’re doing to the 

people in municipal governments. They’re doing that to people 

in education governments. That’s what they’re doing because, 

Mr. Speaker, because they’re hiding, they’re hiding the deficit. 

They’re hiding it, not being upfront about the deficit. 

 

They’re saying they consulted four times. And the Privacy 

Commissioner has to write them and say no. They say they 

consulted on the Bills, on the labour Bills and the ILO 

[International Labour Organization] from the United Nations 

has to write them and say, no, you didn’t. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

how many more letters do they need to get? 

 

You have a minister’s . . . threatening people on this side of the 

House, getting written up in The Parliamentarian. This is quite 

the record that in two and a half years — unbelievable — that 

you could get so much notoriety on issues like that in this 

House. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also on this side, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, have to explain that. Because I guess when you have 

members acting as the way these folks do, invariably the 

conversation turns to where we are also asked. And politicians 

as a whole, Mr. Speaker, are not held in high regard because of 

that. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just one other thing. I know I’ve 

talked about the Ombudsman regarding this — and I’ve talked 

about whether they’ll have the powers — and the auditor. What 

about will freedom of information and privacy protection rules 

that apply to government ministries apply to this authority as 

well? Mr. Deputy Speaker, when there will be issues around the 

way people perform inspections — how many inspections and 

the regulation, what oversight — and how will the public, how 

will we as legislators be able to gain information into what is 

going on here would be my question. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we must look at here, what 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5315 

is the real agenda here? What is the real goal? Here we have a 

bunch of people who are here and they don’t like to govern. 

They don’t like to govern. And they talk about, they talk about 

excess, excess bureaucracy, excess bureaucracy, use the words 

bureaucrat because they know the connotation that they would, 

that those words would conjure up for the public. And so they 

would say, these are efficiencies. These are efficiencies and 

what we do is we play with safety; we play with safety. They’re 

willing to go and play with safety not only in the courthouses in 

this province but also with the elevators and amusement rides. 

 

And I think what they really are about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what they’re really about here is they’re about privatization of 

public services and privatization wherever they can get away 

with it because that’s what they believe in. That’s what they do. 

SaskPower can build their own generation stations, but they 

would see it that they would have to put the needs of their own 

personal, and the needs and the wants of their friends, in front 

of the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So it’s a privatization agenda. 

 

We don’t see any checks here in terms of what would be 

happening. And I personally am not reassured, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, what is before us here, that there has been any clear 

reason for doing this. The only reason I can see is that they are 

talking about a backlog, and that is the apparently the main 

reason for doing this. And I can see that this is in some way just 

sort of a for-profit . . . Somebody’s going to make a lot of 

money. 

 

And there has been examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You would 

think they would learn. The listeriosis situation in Ontario a 

while back where you had, where the government handed over 

inspection to people who could do their own, to companies 

who’d be in charge of their own . . . And in areas of safety, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that is probably not where you should be 

going. 

 

Perhaps they feel that in some way there’s better safety. Or 

perhaps that’s the problem, is that they are not really concerned 

about safety, is that really, when it comes to that, it’s not really 

on their minds. But their prime, the prime . . . If they would 

have said here that our prime concern is safety, our prime 

concern is safety, but nowhere do I see in the minister’s rollout 

or in the minister’s release that it’s safety. 

 

What in fact is in the Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

release is interesting. He’s been concerned about the backlog in 

inspections and the government’s ability to respond to our 

needs over several years. Now I don’t understand if it’s simply, 

simply that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why there wasn’t . . . why the 

government didn’t see the solution as hiring extra officers to do 

the jobs. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again just a review of what we have 

had, or even what we saw today in the legislature in terms of 

the safety concerns in the courts, the cuts to the SIAST. On a 

daily basis we come here and hear more about cuts. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I suppose the unkindest cut of all is the hiding of the 

deficit. The hiding of the deficit is perhaps the most unkindest 

cut of all to the people of Saskatchewan because they elected a 

government, they expected that they could trust this 

government, and what has occurred, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

In two very, just over two short years, we have, they have 

drained, spent $2.3 billion. Just gone, gone down the drain. You 

can almost just see it there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just draining 

down, draining from our province and then the red ink flowing. 

You can almost just see it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you could 

visualize that, that of these people spending money. 

 

And so they had a lot of friends. They had a lot of friends while 

they were doing that. It was a big party. And now that the 

party’s over, now what are we doing? We’re playing with 

safety. We’re playing with safety. And I guess it’s quite clear in 

terms, when you have a Premier say, there’s too much red tape 

in occupational and safety and that prevents business from 

coming. It’s not a far step then to start saying, well all of these 

people who deal with safety should be somehow at arm’s length 

and the government will watch over them. 

 

But there’s nothing here that lends us any comfort or for people 

that . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, people elect us, elect us to come 

here and be guardians over those sorts of things because we, we 

who are here, should not, would probably not, have a vested 

interest. Our vested interest is to the electors, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, who elected us. That’s our vested interest and we 

don’t want to see any of them get hurt. And that’s clear. 

 

And I’m not saying that companies want to see anyone get hurt 

or that anyone does but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should be the 

proprietors of this. We should be in charge of this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And to abdicate that responsibility . . . And it’s an 

abdication. It’s an ideological move on the Sask Party 

government that is simply privatizing by stealth, privatizing by 

stealth on a number of fronts. Trying to get away with and 

covering it using the cover of arm’s length and backlog are 

probably some of the most weakest arguments I think you could 

find, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on an issue like this. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again we have words that the minister 

will still be in charge of this. It’s unclear, though the minister is 

a member of the Executive Council to whom, for the time 

being, the administration of the Act is assigned. Again in other 

words, this move is to a so-called delegated authority. So what 

else is going to happen here? What else when you say 

something like, the minister is “. . . the member of the 

Executive Council to whom for the time being the 

administration of this Act is assigned”? Where will it be going 

after that? 

 

Are we getting rid of . . . I can’t hardly imagine that they will be 

getting rid of inspections in these crucial areas, but what does it 

mean? And why are we again being held in the dark? If the 

minister has another plan, perhaps he should tell us. Perhaps he 

should tell us more than threatening people that the police will 

visit them and getting himself written up in The 

Parliamentarian. Perhaps he should tell people what is 

happening here, and where are we going with this. Where are 

we going with this? 

 

Again the lack of consultation, the lack of transparency is 

becoming a trademark, a hallmark of this government in just 

two short years. And worst of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are 

again not moving away. They’re again hiding what is coming. 



5316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

What is coming that you would say, for the time being the 

administration of the Act is assigned to the minister? So what 

are they hiding and why are they not coming forward with what 

their plan is? This is an important area. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve the right to know what is happening. 

These words in an area of safety just don’t cut it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there are other members that 

would like to enter into the debate, and so I will at that point 

allow them to do so. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to be able to speak to Bill 136, An Act establishing the 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan and respecting the 

Administration of Safety Statutes. As I understand this Bill, 

what we’re being asked to do is to move inspections that 

presently take place in Corrections and Public Safety into a new 

agency. 

 

Those inspections are in the area of amusement rides when our 

families enjoy rides across Saskatchewan in amusement parks 

or at exhibitions. Mr. Speaker, we’re also being asked to move 

the boiler and pressure vessel people out of public safety and 

into this new agency, along with passenger and freight elevators 

as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I understand from the data that I’ve been able to collect that 

literally there are thousands of inspections that take place each 

year in the province of Saskatchewan. I understand that 

presently people who work for government inspect elevators 

and freight elevators. They inspect amusement rides and they 

also inspect boilers and pressure vessels. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that work is no longer going to come under 

the auspices of government, but is going to be transferred to this 

new agency that appears to be controlled by the industry, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is cause for concern. Because in the Bill, the 

minister is going to appoint a board of directors. And it sounds 

as though the minister is going to appoint a board of directors 

that come out of the very industries that are presently being 

inspected and regulated by government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that leads to this whole issue of, how is the 

government going to deal with conflict of interest? Because we 

could have a situation where someone that they’ve appointed to 

the board of this new agency also happens to operate a company 

that is inspected by this new agency. There may be some 

difficulties with an elevator or with an amusement ride or with 

some boilers or vessels. And the question that I have as a 

legislator, how is that conflict of interest going to be handled, or 

are there people going to be appointed that don’t have a vested 

interest in this agency and are not going to be in a conflict of 

interest? 

 

I do know that they say that the board is to establish a code of 

conduct and a code of ethical behaviour for members of the 

board and employees of the authority. But nevertheless it does 

raise a bit of a red flag that when you’re asking industry to 

police itself, to govern itself, particularly when it comes to 

public safety, that we should all be concerned because 

sometimes profit does trump expenses that may be incurred as a 

result of having to meet safety regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the things that also concerns me, and it should 

concern the public, is that while government is in charge of the 

legislation that is being turned over to this new agency, and the 

legislation is The Amusement Ride Safety Act as well as The 

Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act and The Passenger and Freight 

Elevator Act, what the government does in this legislation, and 

this is important that the public understands it, is the 

government has inserted into this legislation article 27(1) called 

immunity. And I want to read this into the record because I 

think the public needs to know this. 

 

[That] no action or proceeding lies or shall be commenced 

against the Government of Saskatchewan, the minister, the 

minister responsible for the administration of a safety 

statute, the authority or any officer, employee or agent of 

the Government of Saskatchewan or the authority for 

anything in good faith done, caused, permitted or 

authorized to be done, attempted to be done or omitted to 

be done by that person or by any of those persons pursuant 

to or in the exercise or supposed exercise of any power 

conferred by a safety statute, this Act or the regulations 

made pursuant to this Act or a safety statute or in the 

carrying out or supposed carrying out of any order or 

direction made pursuant to a safety statute or this Act or 

the regulations made pursuant to this Act or a safety 

statute or any duty imposed by a safety statute, this Act or 

the regulations. 

 

And, 

 

(2) No action or proceeding lies or shall be commenced 

against the Government of Saskatchewan, any member of 

the Executive Council, the authority or any officer, 

employee or agent of the Government of Saskatchewan or 

the authority because of the enactment of this Act. 

 

So what we have, Mr. Speaker, in law is a government that isn’t 

prepared to take legal and financial responsibility for basically 

the deregulation and devolution of the public safety. 

 

So we have three important safety pieces, The Amusement Ride 

Safety Act, The Passenger and Freight Elevator Act, and The 

Boiler and Pressure Vessel Act that are apparently the 

responsibility of the province, the government, but the Act is 

going to be interpreted and dealt with by this new agency, and 

the government has made itself immune — immune — from 

any kind of legal obligation when it comes to the public safety. 

They’re turning it all over to this new agency, but we have no 

assurances that this new agency is going to have the capacity or 

the skill, particularly at the board level, to understand conflict 

of interest, to make sure that the public’s safety is paramount. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is about industry policing and regulating 

itself. And I think in this day and age when the public is more 

concerned about public safety, whether that public safety is on 

the streets or on the roads in our province, they’re also 

concerned about their public safety when it comes to going to 

work, riding an elevator, being in a building where there are 

boilers and pressure operations; as well, Mr. Speaker, riding a 

public elevator in a building that the public has access to. 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5317 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that this appears to be about saving 

money. Now their argument that the government has put 

forward is that we’re not doing enough inspections, and if the 

industry controls it, they’ll be able to hire more people and do 

more inspections and charge for it. Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

very easy way to resolve this. The government hires more 

people and they charge the necessary fees to cover the cost of 

this particular operation so that the public is assured that the 

elevators that they ride, the buildings that they go to where 

there are boilers and vessels, and also the amusement rides that 

their children are on are safe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that’s not what the government wants to do. Because in the 

minister’s, I guess what we could say, budget, when it comes to 

the whole area of money that’s been allocated for public safety, 

when it comes to particularly elevators, boilers and vessels, and 

also amusement rides, the minister last year had about $3.2 

million allocated to this kind of inspections and regulatory 

regime, and this year his budget estimates show that this has 

been cut in half, down to $1.6 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So effectively what the Government of Saskatchewan has done 

is that they have privatized this particular function of 

government. They’ve made themselves immune from any kind 

of action on the part of the public should this new agency not 

fulfill its obligations, Mr. Speaker. And they have cut the cost 

to “the taxpayers” in half. And yet the taxpayers are people who 

are riding those elevators, that have our children enjoying those 

amusement rides, and we also visit those buildings where there 

are boilers and vessels that need to be inspected in order to 

protect the public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is about the government’s philosophy. 

And it’s quite clear from many pieces of legislation that we’ve 

seen before this House that they are moving away from the 

public interest to the private interest. This is about the private 

interest of industry. This is not about public interest. And in fact 

when you have a government that puts in legislation that they’re 

immune from any kind of legal action by a citizen, this is 

indeed problematic, particularly when it’s this legislature that 

brings in those pieces of legislation in order to protect the 

public. 

 

We have a minister that’s in charge of “public safety,” public 

safety when it comes to amusement rides, elevators, when it 

comes to boilers and pressure vessels. But this is a government 

that’s quite prepared to devolve this to industry. And I have to 

say that I find that unacceptable because really what it’s about 

is deregulation of program delivery. It’s about government 

ending its legal obligations, obviously, and legal responsibility 

in actual service delivery because, while they hold the 

legislation tools, apparently they hold the policy tools, but they 

are letting some other agency deliver the actual on-the-ground 

service. And that other agency is going to be controlled by 

industry, according to the minister’s own remarks. Because the 

minister has said in his remarks that this is about industry 

having more timely service, when in fact if you look at it, it 

appears as though it’s about government not having any kind of 

legal obligation and responsibility. They’ve devolved this out to 

the industry. 

 

Now the minister said, and this is important for the public to 

understand, there are about 32,000 boilers and pressure vessels 

that are in operation in the province. There are about 3,100 

elevators that carry passengers and freight, and there are about 

240 amusement park rides that our children go to each year, 

particularly in the summertime. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And he says during the previous year about 5,000 boilers were 

inspected, about 4,000 pressure vessels were inspected, about 

200 elevators, and they also included refrigeration plants. And 

he says that if only one of these devices should fail or if a boiler 

or pressure vessel explodes, property and lives — I would say 

lives — are put in jeopardy. So he says we need to ensure this 

doesn’t happen, and this is why we’re ensuring this equipment 

meets rigorous safety standards. 

 

Well that’s interesting, because if he wants to meet rigorous 

safety standards, I’m not sure you’d put industry in charge of 

regulating themselves, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure you’d do that 

because I’m not sure how you sort out a conflict of interest 

when you have industry controlling the board, when you have a 

Chair that not only gets to vote but also gets to break a tie. And 

who knows who the Chair is going to be. The Chair is going to 

be appointed by the minister. 

 

Now he says that boilers and pressure vessels are inspected at 

frequencies of one-, two- or five-year intervals, depending on 

the assessed degree of potential risk, and inspections ensure that 

installed safety devices continue to provide for safe operation 

and to assure the structural components are sound. Well that’s 

fair. 

 

He also says that elevators are inspected at frequencies of 12 to 

18 months, depending on the risk, and the risk is based on 

maintenance by licensed contractors. Well I wonder if any of 

these licensed contractors are going to be appointed to the 

board. So we’ll have to see who in fact is appointed to the 

board, and whether or not any of the people that they choose to 

appoint to the board will be in what could be seen to be an 

obvious conflict. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this legislation is about 

delegating what should be government’s authority to an 

organization controlled by industry. The authority is going to 

get to charge fees and, as I understand it, fees were already 

charged by government. They’re going to get to retain the 

revenues. What’s not clear, will they be audited by the 

Provincial Auditor? I suspect they will, but that hasn’t been 

made clear by anything that I’ve been able to observe, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I will be interested to know what conflict of interest policies a 

board will have, particularly if there is someone who is very 

involved in the industry. They may have had numerous 

inspections, there may be some difficulties. I want to know that 

the code of ethics or the conflict of interest policy would 

prevent that board member from applying any pressure to the 

CEO or any of the staff, that certainly we would want to make 

sure that that would be in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that the minister will have to explain to us why 

government is immune from any kind of action. Given that 

government does control the legislation and given that 



5318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

government has the policy tools, why is the government 

exonerating itself or making itself immune from any kind of 

action should this authority have all kinds of difficulty, which it 

could have, Mr. Speaker, if the necessary code of ethics and 

conflict of interest provisions are not put in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I thought it was important that 

comments be put on the public record. This is a very serious 

piece of legislation because there are huge consequences if a 

boiler or a pressure vessel were to fail, if an amusement ride 

were to fail, or if an elevator were to fail. At this point we know 

that government is in charge of inspecting and licensing these 

particular devices at the moment. Government is in charge of 

enforcement, and the regulatory enforcement is now going to be 

transferred to a board of directors, an outside agency, that will 

be controlled by industry. And I think in terms of public safety 

that is extremely problematic. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take my seat. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

join into the discussion today on this Bill, Bill 136, The 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act. I sat, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly appreciated the remarks that the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana made because certainly many of the 

remarks she made are consistent with some of my feelings and 

thoughts about this proposed legislation. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s also consistent with many of the concerns that 

people in Saskatchewan have about the approach that the Sask 

Party government is taking to the safety of the public. 

 

If we think, Mr. Speaker, about the activities that we do on a 

daily basis, we often put faith into many of the modern 

conveniences and utilities that we have here in Saskatchewan 

and here in the developed world. And while, Mr. Speaker, in 

certain countries if you flip the light switch or push the button 

on the elevator or turn up the thermostat in a building, 

sometimes you wonder whether or not they will work and 

whether they will work safely and properly, we here in 

Saskatchewan, in Canada, in the developed world, we generally 

put our faith in these amenities and services, programs, and 

trust that they will work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we put our trust in these types of things because we, as a 

general public, as elected officials, believe in a system of 

regulation and control that ensures that these services will in 

fact be provided. So we can think of any area of life, if it is the 

area of boilers and pressure vessels, we in a sense take this for 

granted. But we can’t just take it for granted because it’s clear 

that in order for it to work properly, there needs to be a 

regulatory system in place that ensures there’s the safe and 

proper operation of this feature. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, when taking an elevator and often in an 

elevator, Mr. Speaker, if you’re in an elevator with strangers or 

even people you know, there’s this unwritten norm that we have 

in our culture that you don’t normally engage in conversation. 

So one will be standing there in the elevator, if you have a fairly 

long ride up or down, watching the numbers tick by, the lights 

show up on every floor. And, Mr. Speaker, I think probably 

most members of Saskatchewan and most MLAs . . . There’s 

also that certificate up in the corner by the lights, and it shows, 

Mr. Speaker, that the elevator that one is riding has in fact been 

inspected and has been deemed to be safe and not in violation 

of any other regulations. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps because of my own partisan bent, 

sometimes when I see the name on that certificate of inspection 

in the elevator, I sometimes question the name on that 

certificate because we see, here in the Assembly we have the 

opportunity to see ministers at their finest and sometimes at 

their worst, which is the human condition. But nonetheless, 

even though it’s the minister’s signature on that certificate, Mr. 

Speaker, we know when we see that certificate, when we see 

the 2010 number up there and the fact that it has been inspected, 

we can ride with a degree of confidence because we know that a 

person has inspected that elevator, has ensured that it’s not in 

violation of any of the rules, and that there is a degree of safety 

of course. 

 

Everyone assumes a certain element of risk when we put our 

trust in any modern convenience, whether that’s the brakes in a 

car or the tires on a car or the safety and security of an elevator. 

But certainly elevators are a key example of the need for safety 

and everyone can think of Hollywood movies where there are 

elevator problems and all the drama that comes around that. 

And many people have phobias about riding elevators. And 

perhaps, perhaps it’s heart-smart, Mr. Speaker, to take the stairs 

to avoid the elevator use, but it’s not always possible. 

Sometimes people’s knees aren’t all that great. Sometimes they 

don’t want to have a sweaty suit or a sweaty brow when they 

get to the top floor of an office building for a meeting. 

 

But it’s clear that when it comes to the role of elevators, people 

in Saskatchewan, people in society, we put our trust in these 

machines that take people up and down. And there needs to be a 

guarantee that the proper inspections have taken place and that 

the elevator is in fact safe. So that’s an example, Mr. Speaker. 

We put our trust in a modern convenience, and we assume that 

it was working well, working properly. 

 

A highlight for summer for many people also is going to the 

fair, going to the exhibition, whatever it’s called in an 

individual’s local community. And once again, this is a 

highlight for many people, for many children. Perhaps it’s a 

family tradition that they go every year. They’ve always gone 

with their parents or their grandparents, or perhaps they don’t 

get to go on a big trip to another part of the country or another 

part of the province, or they don’t get to go camping. But they 

get to go to the exhibition, experience the rides, experience the 

fun. And a big part of that, Mr. Speaker, is going on the 

amusement rides because everyone appreciates the thrills, as the 

minister said in his opening remarks, of taking the amusement 

park rides and being a little bit scared and having some 

excitement and some good memories of family and friends. 

 

So it’s an example where Saskatchewan people might go to the 

fair, might go to the exhibition and expect a good time. And we 

never, ever want tragedy to hit a family or an individual. But 

especially tragic, Mr. Speaker, when something that’s designed 

to be a fun and positive and memorable event for children and 

adults alike, when an event like that turns into something where 

there’s a fatality or an accident or that results in an injury where 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5319 

an individual lives with the lifetime effects of an injury related 

to an amusement park ride — surely this is an area, Mr. 

Speaker, where we want to ensure that there is proper regulation 

and oversight with how things are being inspected and how the 

check marks are given to, the stamp of approval, indicating that 

yes, this amusement park ride is safe, is good to go, and will 

provide lifetime memories to boys and girls that are going from 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So no member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I believe would 

disagree with that position, that someone who rides an elevator, 

someone who rides an amusement park ride, someone who 

benefits from a boiler or pressure vessel, Mr. Speaker, that 

individuals who use those services or entertainment pursuits, 

that they do so with the highest level of safety. We in 

Saskatchewan, we have high standards for the rides. We ought 

to have high standards for the rides, and we ought to have 

proper inspection. 

 

I remember one time travelling in Guatemala, and we were on a 

bus and passing a town with a little fair and a carnival going on 

and a few rides. And, Mr. Speaker, while maybe the rides 

looked fun and it would have been a good memory, I simply did 

not have the same level of confidence in going on those rides in 

a country that may not have the same level of quality and 

control with standards as we do have here in Canada. Perhaps 

they do have high levels of quality control on amusement park 

rides in Guatemala. I don’t actually know that. But I decided to 

err on the side of caution and take a pass and stay on the 

chicken bus, Mr. Speaker, which perhaps was just as dangerous 

as going on the rides in the town in Guatemala. 

 

All that to say, Mr. Speaker, that we in Saskatchewan, we have 

an expectation. We have a demand as legislators and in the 

broader public that the regulation of things like elevators, things 

like amusement park rides, like boilers and pressure vessels, 

Mr. Speaker, we want these services to be done in a responsible 

and clear and transparent manner in how they are inspected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was only a few days ago, April 28th, that was 

the day of commemoration for workers killed or injured on the 

job. And, Mr. Speaker, workplace injuries take a variety of 

forms, but every injury, Mr. Speaker, that takes place is a 

tragedy, and every one is one too many. There is no family that 

wants to say goodbye to a loved one in the morning as they go 

off to their place of work, as they go off to earn a living and 

provide for the needs of their family, for their friends, for 

anyone that they’re in charge of. There is no individual who or 

there is no family who wishes harm on that person and does not 

want to see their loved one returned back safe and sound in the 

same condition as when they left the house. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to keep in mind that 

day recognizing the sacrifice that many Saskatchewan workers 

have made over the years. Just proceeding April 28th when we 

had that announcement for . . . or not the announcement, but the 

day of commemoration for injured and fallen workers on the 

job, just before that, there was a delegation here from the Potash 

Council, an umbrella organization for many of the labour 

organizations representing potash workers throughout the mines 

in Saskatchewan. And with them, Mr. Speaker, was the widow 

of a man who died in an accident in a Saskatchewan potash 

mine. And nothing drives home the point in a more clear and 

chilling way than hearing directly from a widow who has lost 

her partner because of a workplace fatality, a workplace 

accident, though I know the use of the word of the accident in 

such a context is not the proper use because it always comes 

down to proper regulations, proper enforcement, slowing down, 

using one’s head properly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a personal and direct connection 

to those that work on amusement park rides, though certainly 

I’ve been on amusement park rides and I know many people 

that have ridden on them. And I don’t have direct activity on a 

regular basis, Mr. Speaker, working with boilers and pressure 

vessels or inspecting elevators, though of course I ride 

elevators, as most people do. I try to take the stairs when I can, 

but it doesn’t always happen; I have to confess and be honest 

with everyone. 

 

But the ethos of safety and the general approach where safety is 

our top concern, this is something that affects all Saskatchewan 

people. While probably for most MLAs in the Assembly here, 

the greatest risk statistically with the type of accidents that we 

might be exposed to or types of workplace injuries with the 

amount of hours that most of us drive on provincial highways, 

not always in the best conditions, whether that’s from city to 

city or city to a rural area, our concern with highway safety is a 

top priority. 

 

But I know there have been occasions, Mr. Speaker, where I’ve 

chosen to spend an extra night in one city or to not drive or to 

carpool with some other people or wait to do the trip until I 

have my winter tires on the car because safety for me is a 

concern because I know I don’t want to leave this planet any 

sooner than I need to and I know there’s loved ones who, 

thankfully, feel the same way about that, who want me around 

for a little while thankfully. 

 

So that same concern that I have, Mr. Speaker, for my own 

personal safety and for that of my family, when I think of 

individuals who are actively engaged in running the amusement 

park rides, individuals that are going on the amusement park 

rides, individuals that are working on boilers and pressure 

vessels, individuals that are taking elevators, that same concern 

that we have for ourselves, the same tragedy or the same 

avoidance that we have to tragedy as we saw on that day when 

the wife of a fallen potash worker came to the Assembly — 

that’s the same approach, Mr. Speaker, that we should take 

when having pieces of legislation that affect the safety of the 

workplace or the recreational place of activity here in the 

province. I think that’s the lens that we need to approach a piece 

of legislation with. 

 

While we are not always directly affected by the piece of 

legislation that we are debating, we need to understand that this 

piece of legislation has the same type of effect on many 

Saskatchewan families that it could have with us, even if the 

effect of the legislation is not always immediate or apparent. 

 

So we have to ask ourselves, the proposed changes to a piece of 

legislation, does this increase the safety for a Saskatchewan 

family, for a Saskatchewan worker, for a Saskatchewan person? 

Or does it decrease the amount of safety that one would have? 



5320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure, when looking at Bill 136 and 

the changes that the minister put forward to deal with the 

regulations — some of the safety requirements around 

elevators, amusement park rides, boilers, and pressure vessels 

— I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, that the approach that the minister 

has taken in this case is the best approach. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because — while the minister’s 

opening comments might want us to believe that or simply take 

it for granted that that’s what this is all about, that it’s about 

additional safety, Mr. Speaker — I think, based on the Sask 

Party’s past actions, based on many of the comments we’ve 

seen around deregulation, around off-loading responsibility 

from the provincial level to other levels or other organizations 

or other entities, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government does not have a track record that builds up a whole 

lot of confidence in us simply taking them at their word that this 

is about improving the safety and the quality. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there are certain services that are 

present in a developed society, that I’ve talked about, that are 

the role of government, certain services, certain responsibilities 

that government is best suited to deal with, that government is 

best suited to oversee and ensure that regulations and 

requirements are in fact met and/or exceeded. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, the suggestion that is put 

forward in Bill 136 raises some flags for me and some question 

marks about the motives around this piece of legislation, the 

motives . . . and also how the doors that this opens, that this 

piece of legislation, the doors that this piece of legislation may 

open for a continued slide down the slope of deregulation, a 

continued slide down the slope of ensuring Saskatchewan 

people are cared for, respected, and are able to go home at the 

end of the day, whether it’s from a work pursuit or a 

recreational pursuit, but able to go home at the end of the day in 

the same condition or a better condition than when they left the 

house early in the morning or whatever time of the day they 

left. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill 136, The Technical 

Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act, it’s necessary to ensure 

that Saskatchewan people are made to feel safe in whatever 

pursuit they are engaged in, whatever pursuit they are doing. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have suggested in this piece of 

legislation by the minister, and this is a quote, that “. . . the 

member of the Executive Council to whom for the time being 

the administration of this Act is assigned.” In other words, Mr. 

Speaker, this move to a so-called delegated administrative 

authority is, in my opinion, just the first move. 

 

And this is a pattern that we see quite often with the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. They sometimes have a reluctance to 

take a piece of legislation as far as they want. They sometimes 

have a reluctance to take an idea or a proposal as far as they 

want. So they’ll take a middle step which in their hope will 

allow Saskatchewan people to warm up to the idea and will also 

allow them more time to engage in whatever type of spin or 

campaign of misinformation in order to ensure that individuals 

can buy into this proposal that they want to see go forward. 

 

Now if you don’t, if members of the Assembly don’t believe 

me, Mr. Speaker, one prime example of this — taking the first 

step of floating an idea and seeing what kind of reaction may 

occur — occurred by the Deputy Premier, the Minister of 

Education, when he put out the idea of greatly reducing the 

number of educational assistants in Saskatchewan schools. 

 

Now it didn’t take long, Mr. Speaker, for parents, for children, 

for teachers, for . . . I should say parents who may have children 

benefiting from an educational assistant directly, but also 

parents of children who are benefiting indirectly by having an 

educational system in the classroom because of the greater 

amount of . . . or because of how the educational atmosphere in 

the classroom can be enhanced and strengthened, allowing all 

students in the classroom to succeed. 

 

And it didn’t take long, Mr. Speaker, where we saw some 

amazing backpedalling where the minister, he floated the idea 

up there with a trial balloon, but when it was clear, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was going to be a large outcry from 

Saskatchewan people, we saw the minister prick that balloon 

and quickly pop it because he thought he was going to get a lot 

of backlash and a lot of flak with that trial balloon. And then we 

saw all of these ridiculous comments, Mr. Speaker, about how 

it’s actually not policy, it was just an idea. And we’re not quite 

sure how it got itself into a memo, and we’re not quite sure how 

it got itself out into the various corners of Saskatchewan. 

 

When we see that approach, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t build up a 

whole lot of confidence for members of the Assembly, for the 

broader public, for individuals directly affected that the Sask 

Party government is particularly willing, is particularly happy to 

simply state what their plans are and carry through with their 

plans. When we saw the huge amount of backpedalling on this 

issue of educational assistants, I know it caused many people to 

have great concern. 

 

So when we look at this initial step that the minister is 

proposing with respect to The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act, this initial step where he talks about creating 

an arm’s-length organization to oversee the safety, when we see 

this off-loading, I can’t help but think, Mr. Speaker, help to 

think and ask myself, what is the minister’s endgame and what 

does he actually want to accomplish at the end of the day? How 

much deregulation does he want to see? How much ceding of 

control from his ministry, ceding of responsibility from his 

ministry does he want to end up having in the area of 

inspections and public safety for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Now if members opposite and members in the public watching 

at home don’t believe my position here that they like to float an 

idea, they like to put an idea out there a little bit and see what 

kind of reaction they might get, we saw similar instances, Mr. 

Speaker, with the Finance minister going to public events 

talking about harmonized sales tax, talking about the need for 

user fees in the health care system. Mr. Speaker, simply 

attempts to float an idea to see what kind of reaction there 

might be and see what Saskatchewan people are going to say. 

 

But it’s telling, Mr. Speaker, because when the Sask Party 

government lets their guard down for a moment and lets their 

true colours shine through, it’s when you see these glimpses of 

honesty with respect to what they actually want to do. I mean 

we all know the example of the past leader, Mr. Hermanson — 

in a previous election when he said, well you know everything 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5321 

is on the table; we’d consider anything — providing a bit of 

honesty. And it allowed Saskatchewan people to see what the 

true motives are of members opposite. 

 

You know, we even saw as of late the Government House 

Leader before the previous election talking about hiving off 

SecurTek and how that might be an option. But in each 

instance, Mr. Speaker, the trial balloon is put out there, the idea 

is put out there, and then public reaction is gauged and public 

reaction is monitored to see what kind of outcry or opposition 

there may be. 

 

So my concern is with Bill 136, The Technical Safety Authority 

of Saskatchewan Act, by having the type of off-loading of 

responsibility for the maintenance or for the control and 

regulation of the services that I have mentioned — elevators, 

amusement park rides, boilers and pressure vessels — Mr. 

Speaker, I think in my opinion most Saskatchewan people want 

to be able to use these services, use these amenities with a high 

degree of confidence knowing that they are as safe as possible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in order for someone to do their job in an 

honest and most diligent way that they possibly can, the 

individuals involved in regulation, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, 

the individuals that are best suited in the evolvement of this 

regulation are those, Mr. Speaker, who do not have something 

to gain or lose with respect to issuing a report that may in fact 

say that the elevator can still be used or the elevator can’t be 

used. 

 

It should not be the individual doing the inspection that is 

involved with, well can this amusement park go forward? Can 

the drop of doom carry on? Can the — whatever the favourite 

roller coaster is — can it continue on or is the plug pulled on 

that roller coaster for a period of time, on that zipper while the 

proper changes to the safety standards are met and followed? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense to Saskatchewan people that 

you would want the individuals that are inspecting a service, 

inspecting a product to not have a direct gain or loss if they are 

the ones that are giving the thumbs up or the thumbs down. It 

makes sense, Mr. Speaker, to have a professional group of 

individuals who are committed to safety because that is by their 

very definition the job that they’ve been asked to do, the job 

that they’ve received training to do, the job that they are 

qualified to do, the job that they have a track record doing. To 

me, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense that these are individual who 

would conduct the inspections on the various pieces of 

equipment and rides that I’ve been speaking of. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if there is a backlog of inspections that need 

to be done, if there are increased inspections that should occur 

in order to ensure that Saskatchewan people can use elevators, 

boilers, pressure vessels, and amusement rides with the highest 

degree of confidence, Mr. Speaker, there are options available 

to the minister to address a backlog. There are options available 

to the minister to make changes within his ministry to allow for 

this type of oversight and regulation. 

 

But the problem, Mr. Speaker, that we see with members 

opposite is that they have an inherent, an inherent inability to 

place confidence in members of the civil service to do their job. 

And in their view, their ideological view of what government 

should do and how government should operate, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re suggesting that having a smaller civil service would 

meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, And while, Mr. 

Speaker, the size and the role of the public service, that’s 

certainly a debate that we can have in this Assembly, and it’s a 

debate that’s occurred many times and probably will occur 

many times in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there are certain things, Mr. Speaker, that government is 

best suited to do, that government has a direct role and 

responsibility in ensuring in my opinion, and there are certain 

areas where government has a track record in delivering the 

quality services that people expect. 

 

And so while members opposite may have what has been 

coined a four-by-four plan to reduce the number of people in 

the civil service doing the job, I mean performing duties in the 

civil service, it’s not clear to me, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a 

clear plan that government members have or the Sask Party has 

in ensuring that we have a strong and vibrant civil service 

meeting the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

If the approach to civil service, Mr. Speaker, is to simply not do 

any hiring, to have individuals retire, thereby create vacancies 

and then, Mr. Speaker, to simply shuffle people around as need 

be according to seniority and maybe some past experience, to 

me, Mr. Speaker, that is not a strategy and approach that will 

guarantee we have the best individuals working in the public 

service, doing the best jobs that they are trained and qualified 

and want to do, if it’s simply a shuffling around of people. 

 

And so when we have the changes proposed in Bill 136 have 

been put forward by the Minister of — I always mix up the 

order of the responsibilities here, but — Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing, CPSP, comment, Mr. Speaker, that in his 

news release of April 20th where he comments and says, “A 

delegated authority will deliver services more effectively and 

efficiently, which responds to industry needs and minimizes 

risks to public safety.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that says more about the member’s dislike 

for the public service than it does about his knowledge of how 

elevators, amusement rides, boilers, and pressure vessels are 

actually maintained, and how they’re actually monitored and 

guaranteed to be in good quality to ensure that there is safety 

for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

And time and time again, Mr. Speaker, we see this government 

opposite so willing to off-load responsibility, so willing to duck 

their responsibility because they, Mr. Speaker, through their 

own mismanagement have gotten themselves into a position 

where they’re not able to deliver on the many promises that 

they’ve made because of the horrible financial situation that 

they have taken our province into — a situation, Mr. Speaker, 

of having had billions of surplus into over $1 billion deficit; a 

situation, Mr. Speaker, of increasing debt. 

 

So it’s time and time again that we see this theme emerge, 

whatever the issue is, where Saskatchewan people are being 

asked to pay the price for the Sask Party’s own inability to 

manage the provincial finances and the provincial economy in a 



5322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

responsible way. No criticism in any way, Mr. Speaker, to the 

many people that are engaged in economic activity in 

Saskatchewan. They’re doing a fabulous job. But when it comes 

to the Premier and his front row of cabinet ministers being able 

to manage things properly, being able to have down-to-earth, 

realistic expectations of revenue, and then to craft a budget 

accordingly, Mr. Speaker, according to what revenues they 

think will be coming in, they’ve horribly failed on this front. I 

think everyone recognizes that. 

 

Interesting editorials in the weekend paper, Mr. Speaker, of 

examples of how Saskatchewan people are being asked to pay 

the price for the Sask Party’s own inability to manage the 

provincial finances. The topic, Mr. Speaker, in one of the 

editorials by a columnist was specifically addressing the issue 

of Crown Investments Corp., CIC, and the actions that the Sask 

Party government has taken and how those actions have 

threatened the long-term viability and sustainability and 

strength of our Crown sector here in the province. 

 

And one of the points made by the comments, Mr. Speaker, was 

that instead of coming up with these ludicrous and almost 

comical explanations as to why they’re doing things, the 

minister should just be frank and say, well guess what? We’re 

horrible managers of the province’s finances. We’ve done a 

brutal job in predicting revenue and then budgeting accordingly, 

and for that reason, we had to do some things that are 

negatively affecting the Crown sector. 

 

And just be upfront. Tell it like it really is and own the problem 

and recognize how the problem that they created by their very 

own making, Mr. Speaker, is having a negative effect and a 

negative outcome on areas of Saskatchewan society. And the 

comments in Saturday’s paper said that when it comes to the 

Crowns, the Sask Party government’s own inability to manage 

the province’s finances in a responsible way has negatively 

affected how the Crowns have been treated. 

 

So it’s an example, Mr. Speaker, where the actions that the Sask 

Party have taken, the result of these actions are that 

Saskatchewan people are being paid to ask the price. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 136, it’s another example where 

Saskatchewan people are being paid to — or being asked, not 

paid — being asked to pay the price for the Sask Party’s own 

ability to do their job properly. 

 

Because if there is a backlog, Mr. Speaker, if more inspections 

need to occur, if safety is the top priority, Mr. Speaker, 

members opposite, if they hadn’t mismanaged the province’s 

finances in such a horrible way would have more funds at their 

disposal to hire more inspectors, perhaps on a temporary basis 

to attack the backlog, hire more inspectors, and address the 

issue that is a concern of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when there’s a health backlog on a particular 

issue, the Health minister suggests exporting people out to BC 

to get the work done to address the immediate need to address a 

backlog or a wait list of some sort. 

 

If there is a backlog, Mr. Speaker, of inspections, for whatever 

the issue might be, whether it’s an elevator, a pressure vessel, a 

boiler, or an amusement park ride, Mr. Speaker, the 

government, if they believed in the role of the public service, if 

they believed in their own responsibility that is placed on them 

in order to ensure that there is a proper control of things like 

amusement park rides, elevators, boilers and pressure vessels, 

Mr. Speaker, they could take the necessary steps to solve the 

problem. 

 

They could take proactive steps, Mr. Speaker, by hiring people, 

perhaps on a temporary basis, I don’t know, but hire individuals 

to address that concern. 

 

What is not appropriate, Mr. Speaker, is farming out that 

responsibility, off-loading that responsibility to a group that 

hasn’t traditionally done it. Because in my opinion, government 

is best suited for doing the types of inspections that are involved 

with ensuring that boilers, elevators, pressure vessels, and 

amusement park rides are in fact properly maintained and in a 

good safety state so that all people in Saskatchewan can ride 

them with a high degree of confidence or be around them with a 

high degree of confidence knowing that they will in fact be 

safe. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the remarks that I have made on Bill 136, as I 

begin to conclude things on this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve addressed a number of areas. They’ve 

addressed how we, as Saskatchewan people, place a great deal 

of trust in the amenities and the services that we appreciate 

having here in the developed world. 

 

We appreciate having boilers and pressure vessels that work 

properly. We appreciate having the opportunity to go to the 

exhibition or the fair in the summer with our families, have 

some good memories, have a fun time, go on the Zipper, maybe 

get a bit of an upset stomach, and then have some cotton candy, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of day that we want when it 

involves going to the fair or the exhibition. 

 

We do not want, Mr. Speaker . . . And the same can be said 

about taking the elevator, something that everyone just takes for 

granted. But I know I’ve been in the elevator, Mr. Speaker, 

when it hasn’t quite worked properly or the door is partially 

opened or there’s been a bit of a jarring. And it’s . . . Watching 

individuals’ faces is, I won’t say amusing, but everyone is 

always quite startled because we put our daily trust in services 

like that and so when something could perhaps go wrong, it 

certainly quickly causes people to panic or show some great 

concern in their face. It’s not unlike a landing gear on a plane or 

something like that. If there’s a funny noise that comes, it 

doesn’t take long for people to become quite worried about that. 

 

So my point is we put a great deal of trust in these services. We 

put a great deal of trust in these services and products that either 

provide enjoyment and amusement or provide a very important 

utility and service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because we put such a high amount of trust and 

place such a high degree of confidence in these services and 

products, it’s necessary that they have the highest level of safety 

and regulation and control, Mr. Speaker. It’s necessary that 

people can in fact ride and use these products and services 

without fear, knowing that they will work properly because, as 

we’ve seen in recent weeks, no one wants what is a regular day 

of going to work or no one wants what is a regular outing for a 

bit of fun, perhaps an annual highlight for a family, to turn into 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5323 

tragedy and despair. That’s not what we want here in 

Saskatchewan. So government’s objective should be that we 

maintain the highest levels of quality, safety, and control with 

the types of services that we’ve been talking about. 

 

My concern is, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions we have seen 

Sask Party members display actions that would at least cause 

me — and I know many members in Saskatchewan — to have 

some serious questions about how wholeheartedly the 

government members take that responsibility. 

 

Because we’ve seen many instances, Mr. Speaker, where 

members opposite have floated a trial balloon, have talked 

about a major change, but they have done so in a partial 

measure, have done so to test the waters, to put up a trial 

balloon. And so my concern is with this arm’s-length 

organization that is being made, Mr. Speaker, or that is 

suggested to be made in Bill 136, that this is one of these partial 

steps where the true motives of the Sask Party members 

opposite are not evident and clear to everyone. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there is a problem — my final point — if 

there is a problem, if there is a safety concern that should be a 

worry to Saskatchewan people because there is a backlog, there 

are means available to the Sask Party government to address 

that problem without the off-loading of responsibility that they 

so greatly seem to enjoy doing time and time again. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, simply because members may not place a 

high degree of confidence in the civil service, or simply because 

members have horribly mismanaged the provincial finances so 

they may feel like their hands are tied with respect to the 

actions they can take to ensure that there is a high degree of 

safety, that’s not an excuse, Mr. Speaker. Because time and 

time again, whether it’s the examples in Advanced Education or 

whether it’s examples in the Crown sector, we sadly see 

Saskatchewan people being asked to pay the price for the Sask 

Party government’s own inability to manage the provincial 

finances in a responsible, sustainable manner, their own 

inability to show good stewardship of our provincial resources 

and ensure that Saskatchewan’s needs are met. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve stated some of my thoughts about this 

piece of legislation, Bill No. 136, and I’ve enjoyed the 

opportunity to listen to other members from this side who have 

shared comments. And I’m going to look forward, Mr. Speaker, 

to talking to more people in the public about this issue as well 

because I think when it comes to safety, it’s top of mind or 

ought to be top of mind for all people. What is certainly top of 

mind is the love that we have for our families and friends and 

co-workers, and how we want everyone to remain safe here in 

the province. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 136 is a step in the 

wrong direction. It’s not a step towards safety, but it’s a step 

towards decreasing the level of safety in Saskatchewan 

workplaces and Saskatchewan’s recreational pursuits. So with 

that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks, though I will sit 

or watch on television perhaps the remarks of my next 

colleague who wishes to speak on Bill No. 136. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

this afternoon to speak to Bill No. 136, An Act establishing the 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan and respecting 

Administration of Safety Statutes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if one is of a conservative temperament — 

as you would think some of the members opposite might be, 

Mr. Speaker — the question that one would ask when ministers 

bring forward legislation, either to cabinet or to the caucus, is: 

why, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know what answer the members 

opposite got if they asked that question in respect to this piece 

of legislation. This question is, why we are doing this? But 

there’s certainly no obvious answer in the legislation and 

there’s no obvious answer in the minister’s second reading 

speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We just heard today in respect to questions about the Minister 

of Justice removing perimeter security and laying off deputy 

sheriffs in the courthouses, that despite the fact that this was an 

initiative of the previous government in 2007 that the minister 

supported when he was Justice critic, he’s had in place for a 

number of years — and as a matter of fact when it was 

temporarily down, there was an issue of safety and security — 

despite all of that, the minister today made the remarkable 

statement that, well we didn’t do it 100 years ago, so why 

would we keep on doing it now? 

 

The ministers didn’t fly 100 years ago. I expect if that’s the 

government policy, they’ll stop flying now, down to Regina. 

The government didn’t have women in the caucus 100 years 

ago, so I suppose that the minister’s support of that is 

conditional. We didn’t have the Internet 100 years ago too and I 

suppose if a government member hadn’t had access to that, 

there would’ve been less controversy in this legislature over the 

last couple of weeks as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that surely isn’t the reason. And we expect that the actual 

reason, in the case of cutting back court security and laying off 

security officers, deputy sheriffs, who I suspect — I need to 

have this confirmed, but I suspect — this government went 

through considerable trouble to have declared as essential, Mr. 

Speaker, and all of a sudden today, no longer essential, not 

essential at all. We didn’t have them doing this 100 years ago; 

why would we have them doing it now, Mr. Speaker? So 

perhaps this legislation is an attempt to return to the days maybe 

of laxer regulations 100 years ago, in respect to elevators, 

boilers, amusement park rides, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps that’s the 

new policy of the government. 

 

That’s not what the minister said. Now you have to be careful 

about what the minister said in his second reading speech 

because it sounds like, partway through his speech, that he’s 

giving an answer to that question of why — why, if it’s not 

broken, you don’t fix it, Mr. Speaker. And this is where the 

minister’s answer appears to be, at first blush: 

 

Why does this government require that this Bill be passed 

into legislation during this session? There are two vital 

reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 



5324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

And he goes on to say what those reasons are, Mr. Speaker. 

And this can be found in the minister’s second reading speech, 

April 28th, 2010, page 5133 of Hansard. He goes on to state 

what those reasons are. But those aren’t reasons why the 

government requires the Bill to be passed. There actually are no 

reasons in the second reading speech as to why the government 

requires the Bill to be passed. 

 

There are only reasons set out to why, if we’re going to pass 

this Bill, the government wants it passed during this session — 

not why it’s going to be passed, not why we are going to change 

the way that we regulate, inspect, and ensure the safety of 

boilers, elevators, and amusement rides. No explanation as to 

that, Mr. Speaker, just an explanation as to why it has to be 

passed this session. The first reason why it has to be passed this 

session is because there is a backlog of inspections and this new 

authority is going to be able to hire inspectors, I suppose, and 

address this backlog, Mr. Speaker. No explanation as to why 

that requires the Bill to be passed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because there’s a backlog, the government could hire new 

inspectors. The government won’t hire new inspectors because 

then you would just have more people employed by government 

who the government does not want employed by government. 

The government wants them employed by this other body. The 

government is actually quite willing to tolerate this backlog, 

Mr. Speaker. They are quite willing to tolerate this backlog 

until this Bill is passed. And they would like the Bill passed 

quickly so the backlog can be dealt with more quickly, but 

they’re willing to tolerate a backlog instead of hiring inspectors 

to do these jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are willing to allow a backlog of inspections — to be 

clear; it’s in the second reading speech of the minister — they 

are willing to allow a backlog of inspections on the province’s 

boilers, elevators, and amusement rides and say to the 

opposition, if these aren’t inspected, if these aren’t safe, it’s 

because you won’t pass a Bill changing who has authority to 

actually conduct the inspections and carry out that work. The 

government currently has it. The government’s not going to 

fulfill its obligations under current legislation. The government 

is going to allow this backlog to exist until this Bill is passed. 

 

So that’s the first reason given for passing the Bill this session, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s not a reason for passing the Bill. There’s no 

explanation in the second reading speech about why we are 

making this change. 

 

The second reason given in the minister’s second reading 

speech is that this function currently falls under the Ministry of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, and the mandate will 

move when the Bill is passed to an authority that collects its 

operating revenues from its stakeholders, and it is necessary to 

align revenues with expenditures appropriately for the business 

year. So for the accounting purposes of this new authority that’s 

not an agent of the Crown, this non-government agency, for 

their accounting purposes, the Bill has to be passed this session 

and specifically before July 1st, 2010. 

 

That doesn’t explain the reason for the creation of the authority, 

Mr. Speaker. That just explains why the authority needs to 

come into existence, why it needs to have this Bill passed this 

session — so it can align revenues and expenditures. 

Essentially the government is saying, we quit doing this to the 

extent that we can. We’re going to allow the backlogs. We want 

out of this, and we want this designated authority to be doing 

this job and that’s why we need the Bill passed as quickly as 

possible. 

 

And you get the impression, along with many other pieces of 

legislation, this government, that if they could have done this by 

regulation, they would have, Mr. Speaker. But they can’t. They 

have to bring this into the House because this affects legislation. 

This affects legislation that has been debated and passed by this 

legislature, and it can’t be done by regulation. It’s got to be held 

up to public scrutiny and, you would think, an explanation 

given as to why, why this is no longer properly done by a 

government ministry, why it is now going to be done by an 

agency that is not an agent of the Crown. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been suggested — I think the previous 

speaker on this Bill suggested it — that this is part of a two-step 

that we’ve seen before. We saw in the ’80s, particular on a 

number of files, Mr. Speaker, a two-step where a separate 

agency is created separate from a government department, and 

then that agency can then be completely privatized, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now can we be sure that that is the plan of the government? No, 

I don’t think we can, Mr. Speaker. It’s not clear in the 

legislation that that is the second step. This may be the only 

step. This may be the only thing the government plans on doing 

in the case of safety inspections of boilers, elevators, 

amusement rides, and there may be no further privatization step 

beyond the creation of this authority, Mr. Speaker. But it is a 

necessary step if there is a privatization agenda here. 

Opposition can’t be confident that this is the last piece, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And without another explanation of why this has to be done — 

other than the government doesn’t want to hire inspectors to do 

this important work, Mr. Speaker — we have to be at least 

skeptical. We can’t make accusations of certainty, Mr. Speaker, 

but we have to be skeptical about what is the motive and ask 

since it doesn’t appear that the minister was asked by his caucus 

colleagues, at least not from his second reading speech, Mr. 

Speaker. We have to ask why. What is so flawed, besides the 

government’s inability to manage its finances, to hire a 

sufficient number of inspectors? What is so flawed about the 

current safety authority? 

 

And you don’t have to be particularly radical, Mr. Speaker, to 

be concerned about the delegation, the derogation of inspections 

and safety legislation from government to non-government 

authorities. And the minister was so fervently fixed on this issue 

— that might be a concern to members of the public and 

members of the Legislative Assembly — that he repeated 

himself in the second reading speech. He repeated that although 

the delegated administrative organization would charge fees and 

retain revenues, it doesn’t appear that the minister thought it 

would actually do anything. Now in fact, it’s going to 

administer safety legislation, Mr. Speaker. Otherwise there’s no 

point creating it. 

 

But besides saying that it’s going to charge fees and retain 

revenues, the minister didn’t say what the authority would do. 



May 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5325 

And repeated, he says it twice, that the “policy, legislation, and 

regulations will be retained by government.” And he says, “Mr. 

Speaker, I wish to repeat that,” and then repeats it. 

 

That’s not quite right, Mr. Speaker. Yes, the legislation talks 

about compliance with the Act. Well the Act doesn’t actually 

set out any safety requirements, Mr. Speaker; I don’t believe. It 

creates this authority to administer them. Then the Act does 

refer to the administration of safety statutes which will be the 

responsibility of this non-government authority. It’s not an 

agent of the Crown authority. And then the legislation says — 

this is in section 25(2) — in reference to safety standard 

agreements, “The minister and the authority shall enter into a 

safety standards agreement for the purposes of this Act.” 

 

So no longer will the government be legislating safety 

standards. No longer will the government be setting the 

standards for boilers, amusement rides, and elevators. From 

here on in, Mr. Speaker, once this legislation is passed and 

acted and proclaimed, the government will negotiate with this 

authority which appears to be in the business, in certainly one 

respect, charging fees and collecting revenues for this work . . . 

will negotiate with this authority which is in the business of 

administering the safety standards and making the inspections, 

will negotiate with this authority what the safety standards are, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what the Act says. 

 

I don’t know what the minister was referring to when he 

suggested in his second reading speech that policy will be 

retained by government. Policy will not be retained by 

government, Mr. Speaker, in respect to safety. Policy will be 

negotiated by the minister with the authority, negotiated prior 

— I suppose — to, as the agreement says, entering into safety 

standard agreements. 

 

Now the legislation sets out provisions that must be in those 

agreements, and the government has some authority, even under 

regulation, to provide for further provisions. But that’s indeed 

the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

If the government’s going to retain all the power to set the 

standards, then the phrase, the section in the legislation that 

says that the minister and the authority shall enter into safety 

standards agreements is without meaning, Mr. Speaker. And the 

courts are loath to find clearly written pieces of legislation like 

that subsection, Mr. Speaker, as to be without meaning. And so 

that bears a meaning. And the meaning is derogation of 

authority over safety standards to be negotiated now, to be 

negotiated with an authority that, at least as far as this 

legislation’s concerned, bears some connection, maintains some 

connection with government but is being for some reason 

divided off from the Ministry Responsible for Public Safety. 

 

And we have to wonder why, Mr. Speaker. We have to wonder 

why, in light of the government failure, when given an 

opportunity on the second reading speech of the minister to give 

an explanation as to why — not why the government wants the 

Bill passed now, but why the government wants the Bill passed 

at all, Mr. Speaker. And that is lacking, that is lacking from the 

government. 

 

And I don’t know how many examples one would need to raise 

a concern about an ideological, knee-jerk reaction to 

government regulation when it comes to the environment or it 

comes to occupational health and safety or public safety, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t know how many examples you would need to 

suggest that the government here should tread very, very 

carefully, much more carefully than they are, Mr. Speaker. And 

they need another explanation. The public needs another 

explanation as to why, why we would be tinkering around in a 

very non-conservative way with safety and inspections of 

publicly used equipment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know this week, maybe as a result of self-regulation of an 

oil well in the Gulf of Mexico, that there is an oil slick the size 

of Jamaica moving towards Louisiana or — the Governor of 

Louisiana hopes — Alabama or Mississippi, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess if it hit Alabama or Mississippi, that’s good news 

because those will have beaches and you can scoop the oil off 

the beaches. If it hits Louisiana, it’s in the bayous and it’s there 

forever, Mr. Speaker. So here we have a situation — a disaster 

— and hope that it will be partially averted by other states being 

struck, by this failure of a valve, Mr. Speaker, like a valve on a 

boiler that was inspected, perhaps, only by the company that 

owned it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have the circumstance of listeria where the federal 

government decided that inspection by the federal government 

on meat packing plants on the nation’s food was too onerous on 

either government — which seems to be the motive behind this 

legislation — or too onerous on the industry. And so we had 

self-regulation. And I think the company involved very 

sincerely, very sincerely thought that they could regulate 

themselves, inspect themselves, and that they were confident 

that when they found a problem that they were on top of that 

problem and could address it. And that turned out not to be the 

case, Mr. Speaker. That’s another example. 

 

This ideology of deregulation, it took hold in the United States 

around electricity and in California where you had — the 

capacity for electricity was not used — you had blackouts. And 

then they might not even be caused by negligence and lack of 

inspection; they may have been deliberate, Mr. Speaker. But 

you had blackouts in a state that had more than enough energy 

capacity, electricity capacity. There is no question that the 

deregulation of the industry was the source of that problem. 

 

And whether it started in the United States or whether it started 

in Britain under Prime Minister Thatcher — the sense that, the 

belief that, on the part of people who like to call themselves 

conservative, that, you know, if it’s not broke, yes, we do want 

to fix it and we want to remove the heavy-handed regulation — 

it has caused nothing but trouble, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you want to go back to Britain, after years of 

deregulation there was, as some people might remember, a 

terrible ferry accident. And it was the type of accident that when 

it happened and people died, people said this is a Third World 

accident. This is a developing world accident. This is an 

accident that you don’t expect to see in the country of Great 

Britain. 

 

I was recently in Spain, Mr. Speaker, which is not a Third 



5326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2010 

World or a developing country, and visiting Alhambra, which is 

the old Moorish palaces in Granada, and the safety measures 

there — and I suppose they don’t want to destroy or harm the 

very fragile staircases and walls there — the safety measure 

there, Mr. Speaker, are sort of photographs or drawings of 

people falling down stairs. So the safety measure there for 

people is a reminder that gravity has not been repealed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well that’s not what we’re used to, Mr. Speaker. That’s not 

what we’re used to. We’re not used to having on stairwells, 

instead of guardrails, a little reminder that people can fall down 

stairs. We’re not used to, instead of a government official’s 

signature on, and the minister’s signature on an inspection 

certificate in the elevator, a little warning that gravity hasn’t 

been repealed. We don’t expect that in our amusement rides, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in the case of boilers, we don’t expect warnings on boilers 

saying, well you know, the other laws of physics haven’t been 

repealed either, Mr. Speaker. What we have grown to expect in 

the province of Saskatchewan is public officials, public servants 

being responsible for public safety, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And without an explanation as to why that’s inappropriate, 

without an explanation as to why that doesn’t work beyond the 

fact that the government is willing to admit that they have hired 

or failed to hire sufficient inspectors, which is actually the 

minister’s argument for this legislation . . . It’s actually his 

argument for why it has to be passed this session. 

 

But implicitly, in the absence of any other explanation, his 

argument for passing this legislation, changing how we have 

administered safety statutes in Saskatchewan for a good period 

of time, his only argument for that is, well the government has 

failed to, can’t afford to, whatever, hire enough inspectors to 

administer these Acts properly, and we have a backlog. That is, 

as the member says, a shameful argument. That is a shameful 

argument, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this is once again the legislation brought forward by a 

majority government, and I think the concerns that we have 

raised will have fallen on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker, but it was our 

duty to raise them. And I suppose, because it was a little 

repetitive on the issues of deregulation and privatization and the 

dangers of tinkering with something that works perfectly well, 

that may have been a little repetitive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we do want to put on the record our concerns about the 

motives behind this legislation and the advisability of it, Mr. 

Speaker. We do want to do that. And we will have — I assume 

some of us at least — a number of questions to ask about this 

legislation in committee. And, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move 

that this legislation now, this Bill 136 now proceed to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a 

question presented by the Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing that Bill No. 136, The Technical 

Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 136, The 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn for committees at 7 o’clock. 

 

The Speaker: — To facilitate the working of committees, the 

Government House Leader has moved that the Assembly do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly is adjourned until tomorrow 

afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5293 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5293 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5293, 5296 

  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5293, 5296 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5293 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5293 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5294 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5294 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5295 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5295 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5295 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5295 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5295 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5296 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5296 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5296 

 Homelessness in Saskatchewan 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5297 

 Missing Children’s Month 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5297 

 Working People and May Day 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5297 

 Emergency Preparedness Week 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5297 

 Crown Corporations 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5298 

 First Female Commanding Officer of the Snowbirds 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5298 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Personal Health Information 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5298 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5298 

 New West Partnership Trade Agreement 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5300 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5300 

 Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5301 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5301 

 Security for Courthouses 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5302 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5302 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5303 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5304 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5305 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5303 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5304 

 



 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5303 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5304 

 Bill No. 120 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5304 

 Bill No. 141 — The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5305 

 Bill No. 142 — The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5305 

 Bill No. 139 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5306 

 Bill No. 140 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 Loi corrective (rationalisation administrative) n
o
 2 de 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5306 

 Bill No. 138 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5307 

PRIVILEGE 

 Request to Waive Notice Period 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5307 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5308 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5308 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5308 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5308 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5309 

MOTIONS 

 Hours of Sitting 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5309 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5309 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5310 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5311 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5311 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5312 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5316 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5318 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5323 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5326 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


