




















































Hansard: March 23, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 35B  TUESDAY, MARCH 23, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4433 

 March 23, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It now being 7 

o’clock, debate will resume on Bill No. 110. The member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to resume debate on this very important Bill that 

is before us. And it’s good to see you in the Chair. I may have 

to review some of the things because I know when you are back 

there you may not hear all the things I was talking about. And I 

know that while you are somewhat northerly of here, you’re not 

in the true North. But it is good to see you in the Chair. 

 

And I will take this opportunity to say hello to the people who 

are joining us in the evening here because this is an important 

time where many people miss out because they’re at work or 

whatever, and they don’t get to hear the debates live. And I do 

know that they can see them on the Internet and on TV at their 

repeats but, you know, I think people especially as they get 

looking forward to tomorrow with the budget, and we are all 

kind of anxious about that, we have some big concerns about 

that, in particular related to this Bill, Bill 110, An Act respecting 

Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. Of course there will 

be consequential amendments, and of course we’re talking 

about the consequences of this Act. 

 

And we’re looking forward to it. We agree to it in principle, but 

we do have some concerns about the unintended consequences. 

We always like to think we can predict in a perfect world what 

will be the outcomes, but we know that that isn’t always the 

case. And unfortunately we’ve seen that kind of thing 

happening here in Saskatchewan. Just these two short years 

where we thought that with the government left with some $2.3 

billion they could be doing so much more, and particularly for 

the folks of the North. 

 

And they have some serious questions because, as I was saying 

earlier, a Bill like this — and it’s pretty substantial; it’s a very 

significant Bill, hundreds of pages; what is it, almost 200 pages, 

210? — can have a huge impact on the municipalities in the 

North as they take over more authority of their work. 

 

And of course we think that is right and appropriate, but the big 

question at this time is, do they have the resources, the capacity 

to do that? And if anything, they probably need the support 

more than ever because of course that is at least half the 

province, and half the province sits in a very pristine state. It’s a 

part of the province that we all hold near and dear, we’re very, 

very proud of simply because it’s such a beautiful part of our 

province with the forests. It attracts people from all over the 

world. It’s a beautiful, beautiful part of our province. And one 

of the things we’re extremely proud of, extremely proud of is 

the 100,000 lakes, most of which, by far most of which are in 

the North. 

 

And we know there are challenges, huge challenges facing the 

municipalities of the North. These are unique challenges that 

southerners don’t face in the same, same way. In the South the 

land has all been surveyed. We’ve gone through a period of 

time where the settlement’s pretty far advanced pretty much 

throughout. That’s been both a blessing and a curse. 

 

The curse is, of course, that when we try to have land protected, 

it’s been pretty tough. And we think about the grasslands, trying 

to get a significant piece of grassland together to protect 

through wildlife habitat protected Act. This is a challenge. 

 

And so we have an opportunity in the North to help the people 

of the North acquire the quality of life that they deserve and that 

they aspire to, that they have hopes for their families, their 

children, and their elders. But they also have a very special 

unique connection with the land. They see that land as a real 

resource. And whether it’s fishing, and it’s one that’s a very 

important part of their culture, but also in terms of their 

economy, and we’ve seen that deteriorate over the course of 

time. Whether it’s forestry, and we see a government that has 

done very little to support forestry and that type of thing in the 

Far North. 

 

So we see the opportunities in resources. And we have some 

real questions about the oil sands. And we see . . . How is this 

government going to assist the northern municipalities as they 

take their rightful place? 

 

So we have some real questions. The questions I was raising 

before, earlier in the day, was the connection they have, the 

municipalities have with the Ministry of Environment. And I 

draw on some experience from my former experience with 

Environment, thinking about the way that the municipalities in 

the North would look to the department, now Ministry of 

Environment, in so many different ways, in so many ways in 

true partnerships. And I know the New North had referenced 

that and they looked for stronger partnerships. 

 

But it is a question when I hear and see the minister’s remarks, 

opening remarks, that he neglects to mention the role of the 

Ministry of Environment and what their responsibility will be in 

this because clearly they will have a large, a large part to play in 

the success of northern municipalities. And in fact in many 

ways, Environment plays a very large role, perhaps the largest 

of any just because of its unique connections with the people in 

the North. Of course, there is Health and Education, of course 

Highways because there’s concerns about roads and also the 

lack of roads, but Environment plays a big, big part. 

 

And just to review some of the things that I was talking about 

earlier, the things that I was talking about was particularly 

around waste management both in terms of how do you deal 

with landfills and all of that, and the responsibility and 

maintenance of that. But the issue is about the areas around 

recycling and how do you deal with the reduction of materials 



4434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

going into landfills. And of course it is a struggle for the folks 

up north. 

 

Water is a huge issue. I mean as I said earlier, talking about the 

100,000 lakes but ironically the question of clean water, clean 

drinking water, is a challenge that we all face. And it’s one 

that’s not just unique to the South but it’s also important to the 

folks in the North. How do you have a continuous, a dependable 

supply of water, and what will be the role of this government in 

that? 

 

And of course as I said earlier and I continue to make this 

comment, that I am worried about tomorrow’s budget and the 

impact on this particular Bill if there are not the resources and 

the tools that go along with it. There are some very, very 

serious concerns and worries that if this Bill is stranded without 

the resources necessary to make it happen, then we’ve let down 

the people of the North yet once more. And we cannot afford to 

do this. I think the northerners are looking for this in a major, 

major way, and yet this government, through its 

mismanagement . . . When they came to power — we all know 

this story very well — but they were left with $2.3 billion, $2.3 

billion. And what have they done with it, particularly in the 

North? 

 

And this, you know, the question is, is this related? Clearly it’s 

related. Clearly it’s related to making sure this Bill comes to life 

because this is all about governance in the North. And if you do 

not have the resources to make it come to life then truly there 

will be some questions. And they’ll be asking questions about 

this. Because they’ll feel let down and betrayed and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they’ll feel doubly betrayed if we take the 

cop-out to say hey, that Bill doesn’t need any resources. We all 

know it needs resources. We all know it needs resources. It 

truly, truly does. 

 

For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in fact the minister himself 

talked about stray dogs. He was the one who brought up stray 

dogs. He brought up stray dogs. Dangerous animals. In fact it’s 

referred to in the legislation. It is referred to. You just cannot 

say that it’s all by itself. They need resources. 

 

And we saw and we heard and we all felt the pain of the family 

in Ile-a-la-Crosse when a child was lost this winter because of 

dangerous animals. This was really a tragedy, and we know that 

everyone in the community felt badly, extremely at a loss for 

what more could have been done. But we know what could 

have been done more was more resources to ensure the 

dangerous animals are looked after, that that issue is looked 

after. 

 

So this is an important aspect of it. You cannot write a piece of 

legislation and say it stands alone by itself. And the northerners 

have felt betrayed by it so many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because we have not provided the resources for that. And this is 

one more time where I feel that we will be, we should be held 

accountable and this government on that side should be held 

accountable if they do not deliver the resources to make this 

Bill come alive for the people in the North. 

 

And we also talked a little bit about my experiences in the 

North in regards to labour and how when we implemented the 

changes . . . And my colleague from Regina, Regina Northeast, 

talked eloquently about his work up there and how important it 

is to consult with the local leadership, and his experiences and 

how that shaped his feelings about the North. And we relied 

heavily on that, heavily on his good work, and understanding 

the unique qualities of what happens in the North. That’s what 

consultations are all about. It’s all about getting it right. It’s all 

about getting it right. And we got it right. And there was a good 

reason we got it right. 

 

As the colleague from Regina Northeast, and we have to thank 

him and then . . . Because it’s all about getting it right, but more 

than that, he would be the first one . . . It’s all about getting it 

fair. Because that’s what people want, to be treated fairly, and 

that’s what’s so important about this piece of legislation, to 

making sure it’s fair for the people of the North, recognizing 

their unique characteristics. 

 

And of course yes, we had some real questions and we continue 

to have questions that the minister . . . Now I understand that 

through his consultations, people asked about the criminal 

record check. He put it in and then he said, let’s put it right 

across the board for everyone that’s elected or seeking election 

at the municipal level. 

 

But we have questions. So why stop there? Why isn’t it 

happening at the provincial level? And of course different levels 

of criminal records you could have as well. What are the ethics 

behind it? We’re not hearing much about that. 

 

Clearly we need to know more about this because while there is 

I think a reasonable need to know, we have to also be careful 

that where we start to encroach on people’s privacy and we start 

to discourage people who should be good candidates and 

unfortunately encourage those who can get around the rules 

because the rules haven’t been well thought out. And of course 

that is or could be one of the unintended consequences. This is a 

major concern that I have because it’s a big one. It’s a big 

change. It’s signalling a change and I’m not sure how this will 

play out in the long run. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said earlier — and I just would 

like the opportunity to repeat this one more time for the folks 

who are just tuning in this evening — that we think that there 

are some concerns and we will be watching this very, very 

carefully. 

 

So as we go through this, I know that there are some questions 

that I have. And I’m going to be wrapping up my remarks pretty 

soon here because I have . . . Well this is an interesting topic, 

but I think that I know others would like to have a chance to 

talk about it as well. And I think that, while I have explained at 

length about the environment aspect of it, about the forest fire 

aspect of it, how important that is, the interconnection with the 

municipalities, the northern municipalities and the Department 

of Environment, and how we seek to protect those who are in 

the North, that’s hugely important. And so forest fires are a 

really important one. The roads, huge; the waste management 

plan. 

 

The other one that I would like to hear a little bit more, and we 

just started to talk a little bit about this before, was about the 

squatters that are in the North. How are they fitting into this 

piece of legislation? Has the minister considered the squatters 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4435 

that are in the North? And there are literally hundreds of 

squatters and that are in places where . . . Well we know that 

they’re there. But how does this all fit in? How does this fit in? 

 

But I did want to say and I did want to take this opportunity in 

the North, that I was struck by my colleague’s comments, my 

colleague from Athabasca who noted that sometimes the voter 

turnout, I think, is it 75, 85, 95 per cent? Up to 95 per cent 

turnout. If only we had that kind of turnout in the South. 

 

[19:15] 

 

I was thinking about my city, the city of Saskatoon, where the 

turnout is something like 27 per cent — 27 per cent — and I 

think they do a pretty good job. But why is it that the North can 

do such a fantastic job of getting their people out? They truly do 

believe in their people. They get out and they support their 

people and hopefully that they’ll have the capacity to take that 

one step further with the capacity to make this piece of 

legislation come to life through the resources and the tools that 

they need. 

 

It will be just a real shame if this is one of those fancy pieces of 

legislation from the South that we trot up north and say, hey this 

is what you wanted. But they need and they’ve asked for and 

they deserve so much more. And the capacity — whether it’s in 

environmental protection, whether that’s landfills, waste 

management, water, or whether it’s around working with a 

species at risk, or forest management, all of that — it’s a huge, 

huge piece. And all of this ties together, yes, and we have to 

make sure that there’s a duty to consult and that it’s done 

appropriately on the issues that need to be done. Meaningfully. 

Absolutely meaningfully. 

 

 And so if this is not taking place, then we have some real 

questions. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish I could say that I 

feel really comfortable with the government in their ability to 

take this forward, to steward this through. But I have to say that 

through pieces of legislation that I’ve become familiar with, I 

have some serious questions. 

 

This is one that I think we’ll have some good discussions in 

committee about and there’ll be some good speeches about 

because clearly we cannot, we cannot make the assumptions 

that this government is going to do the right thing. In fact, can 

they do the right thing? That is the question. Do they even have 

the capacity to do the right thing? 

 

We see the mismanagement here on some pretty basic things, as 

I’ve said right from the very beginning. You know, having $2.3 

billion to start out with, and now we’re here with a $1 billion 

deficit. It just bodes not very well for success, particularly when 

it comes to other areas. 

 

And I know, for example, the Minister of Environment, and she 

quite freely admits to breaking a major campaign promise about 

climate change, a major promise which has huge impacts. And 

today I was talking about this earlier, and when we reflected on 

what was happening in Manitoba. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this is quite a hike away from where you are from, but where 

the roads are starting to thaw and several people have been 

stranded. And the communities in the North are actually kind of 

wondering what’s going to happen because they are without 

supplies for a whole summer season. And there are some real 

questions. 

 

So when promises like climate change are broken, it really hurts 

communities in the North directly. There is a direct line 

between what is said in this House, the energy that’s put into 

keeping promises, and what happens in the North in 

communities like Fond-du-Lac, La Loche, and Stony Rapids. 

Clearly more attention needs to be done. More attention needs 

to be paid to keeping promises. And the first promise that I 

would hope these folk would keep and that this minister would 

keep is to provide resources for Bill 110, An Act respecting 

local government in Northern Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. We are looking 

forward to that. 

 

And while we’ve seen the consultations, there are some 

questions that we’ll have. This is so important that it’s done 

appropriately, and of course we’ll be looking for this tomorrow. 

So I’ll be wrapping up my comments pretty quickly, and we’ll 

be looking for further speakers to speak on this issue. I’ll be 

looking forward to that because I think we’ve had some 

excellent speeches up to this point. But at this point, I would 

like to move adjournment of Bill 110, An Act respecting Local 

Government in Northern Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendments to other Acts. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member has 

moved adjournment on this Bill. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 111 — The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 

2009/Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Indeed it’s 

my pleasure to speak about this very Bill and the North and the 

very many things that it affects because if ever there’s a part of 

our province that really does need support, administrative 

support for its municipal governance, it would be the North. It 

absolutely is a beautiful part of the province that requires both 

administrative support in terms of the municipal Act, and quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, it would require dollars. 

 

In the North they’ve set up actually a mirror operation to our 

. . . Maybe that’s overstating it, but we have SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], the 

Saskatchewan rural municipalities organization. And in the 

North they have the New North, so they’re really working 

collaboratively and collectively together to try and really put 



4436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

wheels underneath some of the needs that they have in northern 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the needs are just immense. 

The needs are unique in a great many ways. 

 

We get all bent out of shape in the South if a road washes out 

and we have to go an extra 3 kilometres or 13 kilometres or 23 

kilometres, whatever the amount. But the reality of northern 

Saskatchewan is simply that there’s typically one road into a 

community and it’s the same road out. And in fact if you look at 

today’s Leader-Post, in northern Manitoba, which in many 

ways is similar to parts of northern Saskatchewan in this 

respect, they’re really concerned with all-weather roads. 

They’re really concerned with global warming. 

 

The winter ice road didn’t last as long. It didn’t come in as 

quick as it should have. They couldn’t get the heavy trucks and 

supplies across the winter road, and so there’s communities that 

are — not to put too fine a point on it, Mr. Speaker — but 

between a rock and a hard place. They’re just really in bad 

shape in terms of getting any of the supplies that will see them 

through the coming year. And of course when the winter road 

doesn’t come in, you know, you might have to airlift some 

supplies in and that just drives cost astronomically high. 

 

So the North, I mean, its very strengths — its vastness, its 

beauty, its forest, its tundra, its rocks, its lakes, its rivers and 

streams — but the vastness of the North is much of the beauty, 

but it also is in some ways their very worst enemy. And it 

makes it very difficult when you have a relatively, to the rest of 

Canada and the rest of southern Saskatchewan, you have a 

relatively sparse population in the North, and yet people expect 

the same goods and services and particularly services like you 

would expect to have: the right to have a road, a road that you 

can travel on; a road that’s open all year round as far that is 

reasonably possible. And I am quick to point out, we don’t even 

enjoy necessarily that in Regina because we’ve had occasions 

when No. 1 Highway is closed in the wintertime because of a 

blizzard and icing conditions and that sort of temporary 

tragedies. 

 

So nobody really can expect any road to be guaranteed to be 

open 24 hours a day, 365 days of the year. But I think in the 

North, as in the South, we expect our roads to be reasonably 

open as good as we can possibly keep them open, and roads 

have to be passable. And the history of the North is not one of 

having terrifically passable roads all the time. 

 

There is tremendous obstacles to overcome in opening up new 

roads. It is a very, very difficult thing to do in the North. And 

then you have to improve on that roadbed in many cases for 

years and sometimes decades before you get the base solid 

enough that you actually have a good roadbed. And interesting 

enough, in other places in the North you build a road and it’s 

sort of there forever. You know, there’s not much grief in that. 

 

But whether you’re in a place where the road is great or where 

it needs constant work, you still have to join that road to get that 

umbilical cord, that thread, up to the extreme North or to keep 

expanding the horizons, if I can describe it that way. And we 

like to think of the North, Mr. Speaker, as a place that we are 

opening up. 

 

We like to think that, you know, we’ve got mines in the North 

and mines in operation, new mines coming on stream. We like 

to think that the mines that exist in northern Saskatchewan 

today aren’t the be-all and end-all. You know, we for the most 

part welcome the mining activity, certainly welcome the jobs 

that go with it for northerners and people from everywhere. But 

I think it’s safe to say that government and opposition are 

optimistic that there’s going to be more mines opening up in 

northern Saskatchewan in the years and decades to come. We 

don’t think we’ve seen the end of mining by any stretch of the 

imagination. 

 

We clearly need better roads in the North and that’s just a 

constant struggle. I know my two colleagues from the two 

northern constituencies have raised highways repeatedly and 

other northern issues repeatedly. And I know that they’re very 

passionate about the North. They’re very passionate about their 

constituents. They’re very, very passionate about the future of 

the North, but they’re also very quick to acknowledge that there 

are special and extreme challenges. 

 

One of the challenges that I know that northern municipalities 

and northerners in any community and even if you’re not in a 

community, the hard fact is that there are wild dog packs in the 

North. It’s a different sort of milieu that dogs come out of there, 

and we read all too often about maulings, about usually a child 

that’s been mauled. Sometimes the . . . well always the 

consequences are terrible. Sometimes they’re almost 

unspeakable because sometimes they result in death, and what a 

tragedy that is. And we’ve all heard different municipal leaders 

from the North speaking about the need to deal with it. 

Occasionally we’ll hear some good news stories. I understand 

there’s a veterinary group that goes up to some of the 

communities in the North and are trying a spaying and . . . I 

shouldn’t say . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Spaying and neutering. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Yes, but I’m not sure it’s spaying and neutering. 

I think they . . . My colleague says spaying and neutering. I 

think they’re attacking one gender of dog more so than the 

other. But the fact is that they’re volunteering and going up and 

trying in their own way, in the way they best know how, to help 

northern communities deal with a problem that we just can’t 

truly understand when we come from the South. 

 

We know that we’ve got a stray dog Act. And heavens, if 

there’s a stray dog roaming around my neighbourhood, chances 

are it’s somebody’s pet. And you’ll try, if it’s friendly, you 

approach the dog, get it and read the tag or see if you can 

recognize it and help it find its home before the dog gets hurt. 

That’s typically where we are. 

 

And if it’s a larger or an angry dog, it’s a straightforward thing. 

We just call for other help and we let the professionals capture 

the dog, assume it’ll go to the pound. And it’ll be dealt with, 

where the owners can either come and pay for the getting out of 

the pound charge and whatever other penalties there are. But 

hopefully it will help them keep their dog at bay, keep the dog 

in their yard, or you know, tie it up, or handle it in a more 

socially acceptable way for the rest of us. 

 

[19:30] 

 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4437 

Because the last thing that we would tolerate in a city or even in 

most towns, increasingly in Saskatchewan, one of the last things 

we would tolerate is dogs that we couldn’t trust to behave, dogs 

that run in packs. Because I know from my farm experience that 

when you get dogs running in packs, they can be incredibly 

vicious and develop a sort of a mind all of their own. 

 

So the municipalities really have to work as diligently as they 

can to deal with some of the extraordinary problems that face 

the North. The municipalities in the North, Mr. Speaker, are 

begging — that may be the wrong word to use — but they’re 

reaching out to each other through the New North, the umbrella 

organization where they look for collaborative ways to work 

together, municipality to municipality, and to support each 

other and to share some of the costs wherever they can, and to 

share the ability to seek help from the next level of government, 

which is the provincial government, or to seek help from the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs or wherever it’s appropriate. And 

it’s nice to see the North developing in ways that really can 

stand the test of time and will look after the people of the North. 

 

So The Northern Municipalities Act is a very, very important 

piece of business, and it’s important that we do the appropriate 

consultation. At every opportunity we should ask the people 

involved what is it that we can do to help you look after 

yourself, help you do your job better, help you run your 

municipal organization better? How is it that we can be of 

assistance? Not how can we put roadblocks up in the way; how 

can we be a millstone to you. We should be always looking for 

ways to add value. 

 

You know, I talked about dogs at large. I’ve talked about the 

need for support. I’ve talked about roads. I’ve talked a little bit 

about mines. But job opportunities in the North are very 

important and municipal government is one of the employers in 

northern Saskatchewan. Municipal government looks after their 

area of streets and roads. Municipal government will look after 

the drainage and, you know, many of the garbage issues, that 

sort of thing, stray dogs or dogs at large in the community. And 

to look after all of that requires some help. So there is some 

employment opportunity, clearly. 

 

But one of the challenges that’s facing the North is a challenge 

of incredibly high unemployment which really leads 

inescapably, when you have chronic and incredibly high level 

of unemployment, it leads inescapably to feelings of despair 

and hopelessness, into feelings that there’s not much point in 

trying to improve your lot in life. And it is unfortunate that we 

get that. In many ways I have to question if that wasn’t part of 

one of the absolute biggest challenge I’ve heard the member for 

Athabasca speak. I know he cares deeply about this, as does the 

member for Cumberland and all of us, of course. But these two 

live it. These two actually have to deal with their communities 

where there is a youth suicide rate that is many times the youth 

suicide rate of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there’s nothing worse 

for any parent than a youth suicide, a son or daughter or a 

young person committing suicide. I can think of nothing, 

nothing that would knock your life away, would just make 

things incredibly desperate. The effect of that on a community 

is unbelievably difficult, never mind on the family. And we 

have northern municipalities, northern leaders that are 

acknowledging in whatever way they can that they have a 

problem and they’re seeking solutions. They’re seeking ways to 

deal with the issue, seeking ways to address the issue, and 

they’d be the first to say that they have not found success. 

They’ve not met with success in any demonstrable and 

measurable way. It is my fervent hope that they’re making some 

inroads, that they are in fact saving some young people’s lives, 

they are providing some hope in an otherwise desperate 

situation. And it’s an area frankly, Mr. Speaker, we all have an 

obligation to do whatever we can to help support not only the 

young people, but the municipal leaders in northern 

Saskatchewan and indeed throughout all of Saskatchewan when 

it comes to such an issue as that. 

 

In terms of health care, I know that when you are in the North, 

health care has a completely different feel to it than it has in the 

South. I know that, Mr. Speaker, if I were to experience an 

accident or somehow wind up with a gash or a cut and was 

losing blood or something like that, here I would simply show 

up, I would simply show up at the hospital or a medical clinic. 

In any event, in Regina I know that I absolutely guarantee that 

in the worst road construction possible, I’m 15 minutes from 

care. That’s sort of at the worst. I’m 15 minutes from care. I 

know that I can expect, if the need arose, I could expect an 

ambulance at my place and I would expect it to be there in 

under 10 minutes. I would be astounded if it took longer than 

that. And quite frankly, I would expect it there in about half that 

time in a normal given day. 

 

I remember my parents went on a fly-in fishing trip and wound 

up, and my mother wound up with a fish hook through her 

thumb. And the hard reality was they were seven hours from the 

nearest health care. Seven hours from the nearest health care. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to relate how they dealt with it, 

other than to say they didn’t wind up going to a health care 

system. My mother was able to take care of the situation in a 

way that I don’t think I would have had the bravery to do, and 

her finger was just fine at the end of the day. And there was a 

little trail of red in the water after she was done doctoring 

herself. 

 

But seven hours, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to what I related: 15 

minutes is what my expectation would be for me to present 

myself or be presented to the nearest health facility that was 

appropriate for whatever my needs were. And you know, I say 

seven hours — that was the situation with my parents in the 

fly-in fishing — but I know that for many people it’s that and 

more. For some, they’re closer. But the North is just huge in 

terms of geography. 

 

The opportunity for injury of course is equally huge, you know. 

You rattle along over roads and highways that really make our 

highways in the South look very, very good for the most part. 

But you rattle over them and you get a flat tire, and the next 

thing you know you’re in some difficulty. Or you’re out 

collecting firewood and things happen. 

 

I mean this is the reality of the North. It’s full of great people, 

wonderful people that get up in the morning and they know that 

who they have to rely on is themselves, not some government in 

Regina or Ottawa or anywhere else. They know that to the 

extent they have any support from a government of a 

meaningful way today, you know, in their daily lives, it would 



4438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

be largely from the municipal government. That’s where the 

action is, and that’s where the support is so desperately needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you look at educational opportunities. And in the 

North, in the North if you want to do post-secondary education 

beyond some community classes, you’ve got go out. You’ve got 

to be, at minimum, Prince Albert, maybe Saskatoon. Some 

come to Regina, and I’m sure that some wind up out of 

province, depending on what the course is that they’re taking. 

 

That’s not to say that, you know, every course has to be 

provided in every community. That’s not the argument I’m 

making at all. I am making the argument that for northerners, 

the obstacles that we overcome in the South, that are merely 

obstacles in the South are just gargantuan for many people in 

the North. It can be as simple as financial; it can be much more 

complex than that. And I know that for many young adults or 

younger people, you go through the education system in the 

North, you graduate grade 12, and then you move away from 

everything you know. It’s just a completely different situation. 

All of the supports, the community, the family, the friends, 

those supports are gone. If you’re lucky, you’ll have a few 

friends at your place of education. 

 

But it’s unique. The North is unique. I don’t know how better to 

paint that picture, Mr. Speaker. It’s such a vast and beautiful 

part of Saskatchewan, and we’re so blessed and so lucky to 

have the whole northern half of our province. We’re very lucky 

to have the southern half of our province too, but the vastness 

and the beauty . . .  

 

I don’t know if you’ve had, how many members have had the 

opportunity to be in the North, but I recall flying in to do a tour 

of a couple of uranium mines. And we were flying, and the 

aurora borealis, the northern lights was actually south of us. We 

were so far north, the northern lights were south of us. And I 

don’t think I’ll ever forget that experience because I just never 

thought I would . . . I didn’t know it was possible until I saw it. 

I didn’t know it was even possible. And the beauty of all of that 

was just phenomenal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that municipalities need to be dealt 

with seriously. The northern municipalities have a huge need 

for consultation. I know that, I know from experience, the 

experience of my seatmate, the member for Regina Northeast, 

that you can go into the North; you can consult in a very 

meaningful way. You can hold public meetings, and you can 

meet with individuals privately if they . . . if that’s the best you 

can, that’s possible. But always in a way that accommodates the 

northerners. 

 

And if you listen respectfully, if you try and understand their 

issues, then you can come back to Regina with 

recommendations, as my seatmate did around the northern 

overtime exemption Act. And I know that my seatmate came 

back, and the government here had a fixed notion on one part of 

the changes that were going to be proposed. And I know that 

my colleague had been in the North and had consulted and had 

asked the questions and had listened respectfully and was 

determined to deliver what the northerners had asked for. He 

came back and insisted on one specific part of that proposal to 

be changed and, Mr. Speaker, it was changed. I can tell you 

that’s meaningful consultation. That improved the situation of 

northerners. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And I know that my colleague was listening to working people, 

and I know he was listening to businesses in the North because 

you’ve got to have both. You can’t run a business without 

people to work in it, and businesses won’t simply be there 

unless everything is good for them to make money, good for 

them to operate there, and they can accomplish and fulfill their 

needs. You have to have a profit. You have to have workers. 

And without both, you’re not going to be in business for terribly 

long. 

 

But I was very proud of my now seatmate. He wasn’t my 

seatmate then, but I was very proud of the consultation job that 

he did, and I was very proud of the way he stood up for the 

northerners around that. So I suspect that he would, if asked by 

the government, by the Sask Party government, I suspect that 

my seatmate might even provide some tips as to how that 

consultation could take place, Mr. Speaker.  

 

The northern municipal Act is very important, and it’s very 

important for a whole host of reasons. We really need to be 

active in consultation. We really need to deal with the 

multitude, the myriad of issues that are affecting the North. We 

need first and foremost via this Act to make sure that the New 

North and all municipalities in the North are supported to the 

very, very best of the government in Regina’s ability, of the 

civil servants, at least those that might be left after tomorrow’s 

budget. We need . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A handful. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I hope it’s more than a handful. My seatmate 

says the handful that are left. I think it’ll be better than that, but 

let’s leave that debate for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. It’ll become 

apparent soon enough. 

 

But we need to be focused on doing the very best we can for all 

municipalities, all municipal levels of government, whether it’s 

the rural arm through SARM and the municipalities that operate 

under that umbrella or whether it’s through SUMA and the 

urban municipalities that operate under the SUMA umbrella, so 

to speak, or the New North. 

 

And in many ways, maybe the New North umbrella needs even 

more attention than the two levels or the two municipal 

organizations that have a long and storied history, long and 

storied history in Saskatchewan. Where the New North is still 

in, I don’t want to say embryonic necessarily, but it’s much 

newer organization, and it still has lots of opportunity, as do the 

other. But it has lots of opportunity to discover itself and 

discover ways of working with its membership — that is, the 

other northern municipalities — to work with its membership so 

that the delivery of services can just be hugely, hugely 

improved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the North needs a good municipal Act. The North 

needs to have the tools. The North needs the administrative 

support, clearly, to help its municipalities, clearly needs 

municipal support, administrative support. And that can come 

in no small measure from the ministry based in Regina and 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4439 

providing its services out from here. But we should always be 

in a supportive role, not in the role of dictating this is the way it 

is. We should always be respectful and listen and ask and try to 

work with those northern municipalities. 

 

And in addition to the administrative support, quite clearly need 

for dollars is there. I know this Bill isn’t about dollars directly, 

so I’m not going to spend a whole lot of time on that other than 

to acknowledge that the northern municipalities absolutely 

need, they need the administrative support and they need the 

dollars.  

 

They need this to deal with, Mr. Speaker, issues like roads and 

the maintenance, the roads, these very roads that in the North 

are a lifeline. These very roads that . . . Mr. Speaker, in the 

North usually there’s one road. And it’s the road that’s in and 

it’s the road that’s out. You take that one road or you fly. I think 

that’s kind of, pretty much it for the most part. There is some 

more limited water travel. And I suppose, depending on the 

time of season, there is some limits in terms of snowmobile. But 

for the most part realistically it would be like most southern 

communities. You know, we use our roads. And in the North 

for the most part, one road — that road that goes in and that 

road that comes out. So the municipalities need to have our 

support at every turn. 

 

We have issues like health and education that require a strong 

municipal organization to make sure that those services are 

delivered in ways that are beneficial to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In the North they have issues around dogs, particularly pack 

dogs, particularly . . . Some people — I think it’s a euphemism 

— but call them, euphemistically, community dogs. Now I’ve 

never lived in the North, so I’m not being too critical when I 

say this. But these are dogs that are for the most part nobody’s 

dog and everybody’s dog and pretty tough to take care of them. 

So the municipalities in the North need to have the support as 

they try and deal with some of their absolutely unique, unique 

to the North problems. 

 

The North has vast amounts of area, vast lakes. I think we’ve 

got over 10,000 lakes, most of them in northern Saskatchewan. 

We’ve got lots of forest, much of that in northern 

Saskatchewan. We’ve got all kinds of beauty. We’ve got 

beautiful waterfalls in the North, some of which I haven’t seen. 

And by gosh I’m going to, one of these years now and in the not 

too distant future. I really, really want to spend some more time, 

more quality time in the North. 

 

I know that there’s the Athabasca Sand Dunes in the very 

northwest corner of our province. I’m much more familiar with 

the Sceptre sand dunes, just south of Sceptre, in the . . . We call 

them the great sand dunes, and that’s what the atlas calls them. 

I’m familiar with that because it’s where my grandmother’s 

ashes are scattered, along with my grandfather’s, having passed 

away at different times. But the great sand dunes south of 

Sceptre have a special part in my family’s heart. And I always 

look forward to an opportunity to go there and be part of nature 

and to remember a great past and to look forward to an even 

greater future. And it’s just an uplifting part of the province that 

stirs great memories and great hopes, and that’s just part of the 

history of this great province. But I have to get up to the North 

to see those Athabasca Sand Dunes too, and see how they 

compare with the great sand dunes in the South. 

 

For any of that to happen, we need to have strong municipal 

leadership. In the North we need to have a strong northern 

municipalities Act. We need to have a municipalities Act that 

works for northern Saskatchewan, that works for the elected 

officials and for the administrators of the communities and 

towns and cities in the North. 

 

We need, very simply put, Mr. Speaker, we need to provide the 

North with the tools to deal with some of their unique situation. 

I know I’ve mentioned the situation of high and chronic 

unemployment. We need to help the municipalities find ways of 

dealing with that. I know that the northern municipalities are 

unable to simply hire everybody, but we need to ensure that we 

help them deal with high unemployment. We have to deal with 

health care and make sure that we provide adequate health care. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t even talked about access to 

potable water, which most of us in the South just think, well in 

the North that’s a given, everywhere there’s potable water. But 

that’s just not entirely the harsh reality. That’s not always the 

way it is. So we need to make sure that we help the 

municipalities in the North deal with very simple — I shouldn’t 

say simple — but the simple concept of safe potable drinking 

water, the simple concept of good sanitation, the simple concept 

of being able to look after your household, your family, in a 

way that we take largely for granted in the South. 

 

So the northern municipalities really do need in some ways, 

need extraordinary support and in some ways extraordinary 

help. And that’s part of what this Act is about, Mr. Speaker, is 

enabling us to reach out, enabling us to listen, enabling us to 

consult, and enabling us to do whatever we can to deal with the 

myriad issues in the North. 

 

The most serious issue that municipal leaders deal with on a far 

too often, far too regular way is that of suicide, and particularly 

youth suicide. And we need to work hand in hand and as 

diligently as we possibly can with administrators, with elected 

officials, with the New North that is the umbrella organization 

for the northern municipalities. Mr. Speaker, there is so much 

that we can do. I know that I’ve mentioned earlier that my two 

colleagues from the North are very passionate about their 

constituencies, and that’s very good. And I understand why they 

are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m about to end my remarks on this northern 

municipalities amendment Act. The legislation we have here is 

actually amending three Acts which is The Interpretation Act 

that replaces references to the former northern municipalities 

Act with The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

It’s important that we do the consultation around this. It’s 

important that we get it right. It’s important that before we even 

contemplate passing legislation that we hear as far and wide as 

we can, we provide the opportunity for northerners to speak up 

about what really is, in essence, their Act. It really is. 

 

We have a role to play here in Regina around the northern 

municipalities amendments Act, but really the northerners are 

the ones that should properly have the most say in it, and they 

should have the opportunity to make suggestions for additions 



4440 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

or deletions from a Bill. They should be the ones that can best 

identify whatever potential problems there are. And our job 

really is to listen as respectfully and carefully as we can, deal 

with that advice that we get from our northern neighbours and 

our friends in the North, and then proceed as best we can. 

 

[20:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, recognizing the need for consultation and the 

desire that we get this Bill right, I move adjournment of The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of Bill No. 111, The Northern 

Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 108 — The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

truly a pleasure and as always an honour to have the privilege 

of being able to rise in this House and take part in a debate on a 

Bill, on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill 108, An Act to 

amend The Cities Act and to make a consequential amendment 

to The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve said this before, but I do know it bears 

repeating, and I think all members would agree with me, that 

when we do get the opportunity to rise in this House and to take 

part in the democratic process through a debating of pros and 

cons on particular pieces of legislation, we do so, I think, with 

the thought and the memory that we are very honoured to have 

that privilege. It’s a privilege that throughout history has been 

awarded to very few people. If you look at the number of years 

that we’ve been government here, had a legislative government 

process here in Saskatchewan and then had the elected process, 

the democratic process of governing this great province of ours, 

and to have the privilege of being a small part of that is truly an 

honour, I think, for each and every one of us. 

 

This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, as I understand 

it, is in regards to certain changes to the Act, primarily to 

address areas that weren’t addressed in the previous Bill, and 

perhaps one could say was sort of loopholes in the previous 

Bill. And this goes in some small direction to fill some of these 

loopholes. 

 

And it’s, for the most part, one would take a look at the initial 

part of the Bill and would say, well it’s kind of reasonable. This 

one small part here that suggests that the province should play 

perhaps a lesser role in the closing of streets or closing of roads 

within the city limits. that those are the decisions that should be 

and could be made by the city and probably made on a more 

informed basis than that would be left up to provincial authority 

to make those decisions. 

 

Basically I think the process in the past has been that it was the 

local municipality, the local governance that would recognize 

the need for a closure of a public road allowance or a public 

street and would have to justify it to the Department of 

Highways, would make the recommendations and requests to 

the Department of Highways for the closure. They’d have to 

justify the need for that closure and how it would in turn 

benefit, be beneficial to the residents of the city. And then 

they’d be able to go ahead and get the approval from the 

Department of Highways to go ahead and close the particular 

street. That would then be the process. 

 

And that was a lengthy process, and really it was a process that 

could be shortened through this Bill. I believe this Bill will go a 

long way in shortening that and allowing greater influence by 

the elected governance of the city to make that decision, to be 

able to recognize the need to close a certain street for perhaps 

expansion of an industry, or perhaps the expansion of an 

operation that’s very important to the city. 

 

One that comes to mind is the operation in Wynyard, for 

example, the plant in Wynyard there which is located right in 

the town limits. And I know that the plant has taken on one or 

two expansions and it’s maximized the area that was available 

to it. And I think in some ways it’s had, to facilitate the final 

expansion, it had to actually encroach upon the right-of-way or 

the road allowance or the street within the community of 

Wynyard. And the necessary process of the town fathers or the 

officials of the town having to go through that process of 

establishing the ability to narrow that street so that they would 

be able to provide a strip of land to facilitate the expansion of 

the plant, a plant which of course was very important to the 

economy of the community of Wynyard, very important to the 

economy of the area around there, and quite frankly very 

important to the industry itself, the poultry industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one could quite easily see why it would be 

much more convenient in cases like that if the local governance 

had the ability to make those decisions on their own without 

having to make application to the province and then justify their 

application to the province before they would be able to receive 

approval. And it would also shorten the process. As I 

understand, the present process is quite lengthy and can be quite 

consuming in time. And this would certainly speed up the 

process. I think probably it would be a bit of a friendlier 

opportunity for business in those communities who require that 

service.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, of course in principle we would probably 

support that type of initiative. We would like to know though if 

this government has done its consultation with the SARM and 

SUMA who are the municipal leaders of this great province of 

ours. And they represent, not hundreds, but thousands of 

people. 

 

And it would be interesting to know what degree the 

consultation took place. How in-depth was that consultation? 

What was some of the concerns raised by the officials from 

SUMA and some of the officials from SARM? And what were 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4441 

the, you know, the arguments? What were the suggestions? 

What were the suggestions being raised? And how were they 

addressed and were they satisfied? Were they, I mean, the 

officials from the city organization, SUMA, after the 

consultation process had taken place, were they satisfied that 

this Bill answers their needs? Does it go far enough? Or perhaps 

does it go too far? Those are the questions that immediately 

come to mind. 

 

And one would like to know, I suppose, what those 

consultations consisted of. And since the government hasn’t 

been clear or at least forthcoming with that type of information, 

I suppose it’s up to the opposition now to have the time 

available to ourselves to be able to speak to those 

representatives from the organizations of SUMA and SARM to 

ensure that they are satisfied, satisfied with the changes that’s 

being proposed in this particular Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also I note in glancing through this Act this 

evening that the legislation also gives municipalities the power 

to seize mobile homes in the case where property taxes have 

gone unpaid. And there is a concern that the mobile home could 

be moved. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the uniqueness 

of this situation and of this Act is that a mobile home has — 

unlike the normal residency of a home that’s on a foundation or 

a footing at least — that the ability to move that home is much 

easier. And I would think that would be a concern with some of 

the communities and community leaders that that could be 

something that could possibly happen. I would think and I 

would hope, Mr. Speaker, that that one’s actually probably very 

rare, but I suppose that would be a concern.  

 

And at the same time, the officials within the communities who 

are responsible do need to have the ability to be able to ensure 

that they have some ability to collect the unpaid taxes if that 

becomes a huge, huge problem. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

we would not find those situations very often in this province, 

although I suppose if you’re seeing what’s happening 

throughout Saskatchewan in the last, well basically since the 

Sask Party has taken over government here, we’re seeing 

situations where the increased cost of living is jumping fairly 

dramatically. 

 

At one time in this province we used to have a guaranteed 

lowest utility bundle that was guaranteed by the government. 

And on those cases when that bundle perhaps was not the 

lowest, there was compensation made by the government to 

ensure that it was the lowest. But it was a guarantee to the 

people of Saskatchewan that they would enjoy the lowest utility 

bundle, and that guarantee has now of course gone out the 

window. And in return for that, what we’re seeing is higher 

power rates, power bills to everybody across this province. 

Whether they be in rural Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, 

their power bills are going up. Their power bills are going up 

quite dramatically. And we understand that we can expect to see 

that continue for the foreseeable future. 

 

There are some people are suggesting that we will see an 

increase of as much as 20 per cent over the next year, year and a 

half. And that, Mr. Speaker, would be quite dramatic, 

particularly to those people who find themselves, you know, 

what I would call the working poor of our society, the people 

who have jobs but they’re working at low-end jobs, low-paying 

jobs. And these are the people who often will find shelter within 

the mobile home community and because that’s something that 

up until now at least has been affordable to them. And these are 

the ones that would be under pressure to ensure that they have 

enough income to be able to meet their daily needs, pay their 

power bill, pay their heat bill, be able to provide food for their 

family. 

 

And that then, Mr. Speaker, would, I suppose, raise an 

opportunity for taxes on mobile homes to go unpaid. And that 

then in turn would cause the city fathers or those governing the 

communities a need to have the ability to ensure that in the 

event, which I hope would be rare, but in the event that property 

taxes goes unpaid to the point where action has to be taken, that 

the local governing body would have the ability to retain the 

asset on that property, and that asset of course being the mobile 

home. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that, you know, there’s something to be 

said for this. But at the same time the government should be 

looking at ways and means to ensure that we have a society and 

we have an economy that makes provisions and opportunity for 

all people within our society and within our economy to be able 

to enjoy a reasonable and quality standard of living, a quality of 

life so that we don’t find ourselves in circumstances where a 

family has to make a decision between paying their taxes or 

paying their power bill, where they have to make a decision 

between paying their property taxes or buying groceries. 

 

Those I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that that would be the goal of 

any government, is to create a society where those decisions do 

not have to be made by the working people of our great 

province of ours. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see that as 

being the initial intentions of this government over here. 

Certainly I don’t see any of that evidence anywhere. 

 

Quite frankly I am fearful for tomorrow and fearful for the 

people of this great province of ours and the increased burden 

that may be thrust upon them as a result of tomorrow’s budget. 

And normally, Mr. Speaker, in a process like this it’s the 

working poor, the poorer people of our society who carry the 

heaviest load. It is for them I have the greatest concern because 

I think tomorrow’s budget is not going to be a budget of a 

province that once enjoyed great prosperity, enjoyed a surplus 

of over $2 billion, and now find ourselves, after just two short 

years, in a situation where we’re looking at a deficit, though the 

government will suggest that they’re balancing their books. But 

they’re balancing their books on the backs of the working poor. 

They’re balancing their books on their ability to draw down on 

the savings account. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that’s as far as 

they go. I hope that they don’t mortgage the assets of our 

province in order to maintain their balanced books. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we start to look at this particular Bill, 

Bill 108, and on the face of it, it would seem like some of the 

changes that are being suggested here are reasonable changes. 

But of course we need the time to consider the proposals being 

put forward and to ensure that they are being done in a fair and 

equitable way. And I would hope that this piece of legislation 

doesn’t in some way . . . isn’t balanced and isn’t fair, that it 

weighs heavier on one part of our society or our group or our 

taxpayers than it does on another. And I would hope that 

wouldn’t be the case, Mr. Speaker. 



4442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

But we need to ensure this government’s done its consultations. 

I see no evidence of that. I see no evidence of it in either the 

second reading speech of the minister. I don’t see any 

references to the consultations that they may or may not have 

carried out. I don’t see any particular references within the 

notes that were given to us to help explain some of the changes 

that they’re proposing in this particular Bill. I don’t see any 

reference to the consultations that may have resulted by 

government officials with these officials with SARM or SUMA 

that would have reflected in the changes in this particular Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So that’s always a concern of mine. It’s always a concern of 

mine when I’m not satisfied, I don’t feel comfortable that 

consultations had taken place. Or if the consultations did take 

place, were they earnest consultations or were they only 

consultations in name? That’s always the question, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s easy to say, well yes, we consulted. But who 

did you consult with? Who did you consult with? What was the 

subject of the consultations? What was the subject of the 

discussions? And what was the reaction of those people who are 

going to be affected? 

 

It’s the officials, it’s officials within the communities, Mr. 

Speaker, who are given the responsibility to ensure that they 

look after the affairs of those communities. And they need to 

have the ability to do that, the tools to do that. And that’s the 

role of the government is to provide the tools to our locally 

elected officials and appointed officials to ensure that they have 

the tools to be able to carry out their jobs, to be able to do their 

duties. 

 

And they do a wonderful job, Mr. Speaker. And I must admit 

that I am perhaps a bit biased when I say that because I had the 

opportunity of spending 10 years on municipal council in the 

RM [rural municipality] of Clayton. And it was an experience 

that I thoroughly enjoyed because it was a learning experience; 

it taught me the value of local government. There’s something, 

there’s something that you learn from first-hand experience in 

governing an area like that, a smaller area like that where 

basically you’re working closely with your friends and your 

neighbours. 

 

And at the end of the day, I think everybody wanted something, 

you know, to improve their particular situation, whether it be a 

road to their farm land or whether it be simply a culvert put in 

to help with spring drainage. But at the end of the day, you 

would as a councillor, you would do the best you could to 

satisfy the needs. You would priorize, you’d learn to priorize 

the issues. And to those who perhaps didn’t meet that list on the 

first year, you’d be able to sit down and talk to them, explain to 

them why it was that you couldn’t perhaps do the work that 

they needed as urgently as they would like to have seen it done. 

 

And it was a learning process, but it was also a good process 

because it taught you a lot of lessons that serve you well 

throughout life; not only in the life of politics but just in your 

own business world or in your own life, period. It teaches you a 

lot of things about people, about how . . . the wants and the 

needs and how sometimes we all, you get those two confused. 

Sometimes we get our wants confused with our needs. And 

when you sort that out, sometimes the picture looks a lot 

different. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the things that comes about 

through the consultation process, is that you would be able to, if 

that consultation was done by this government and was done in 

a meaningful way, then likely they would have been able to 

identify that there are wants and needs by the municipalities — 

the wants that municipalities want, the things that they want 

done. But there are things that they need done. And those are 

two different, two different points, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s very important that the municipalities have the ability, 

have the ability to be able to address their needs. And often that 

is the role for the provincial government to provide those tools 

— not just the funding, not just the programming and just the 

funding — but the legislative tools to be able to allow the 

communities to be able to address their own needs. Because 

quite frankly, they’re the ones that know the answers. They’re 

the ones that have the problem, who are the front-line people, 

and it’s been my theory throughout life that if you need a 

solution, you go to the person with the problem. The front-line 

people who have the problem are the ones who know the 

solution and know the answer to that problem and they’ll know 

how to fix it. 

 

And that’s why I’ve often wondered, Mr. Speaker, having spent 

a number of years both on that side of the House as well as on 

this side of the House, why that we don’t look at starting a 

whole wide-ranging consultation with the municipalities to 

identify ways and means that we can modernize our approach to 

the funding of municipalities. I know that in the past, 

municipalities will come to the provincial government, often 

with their cap in their hand, saying, you know, we need 

increased funding. We need more grants. We need more money. 

We need more revenue sharing. We need more of this; we need 

more of that. 

 

And they do. Don’t get me wrong. They do. I mean they do a 

wonderful job of maintaining the services that we enjoy 

throughout our great province of ours. 

 

But in some cases — and I will use the city of Regina for an 

example — the city of Regina is an older governing body than 

the province of Saskatchewan and yet we have a 

parent-adolescent arrangement with the municipalities and it 

seems to be ongoing. And I wonder why we wouldn’t take the 

initiative in co-operation with the leaders of our communities 

and our cities to look at ways and means that we can modernize 

the regulations, the legislation, to give this greater powers to the 

cities, greater powers for the cities to be able to generate their 

own revenue, to be able to generate their own revenue to meet 

their needs so that they can make their own decisions, so that 

they make the plans what it is they want to do, and be able to 

generate the money for that. 

 

I wonder we don’t move down that road with, I think, a little 

better pace than we have so far because I think it would only be 

fair. You have a very senior governing body in our cities. 

They’re duly elected. They are a governing body that makes the 

decision on behalf of a large, massive group of people. And 

why we shouldn’t we be working with them to identify ways 

and means that we could increase their powers, increase their 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4443 

ability to generate revenue to meet their own needs, that they 

could basically have it all? They could make the decisions as to 

what it is that they want to achieve; then generate the revenue to 

achieve it. 

 

I often wondered, Mr. Speaker, why we don’t — when I say 

we, I mean we collectively here — don’t move in that direction, 

and why the government wouldn’t take the lead to establish that 

type of a consultation process. And I think it could be done 

through SUMA. I would think SUMA would be receptive to 

that and I think that it would be . . . It would just simply 

something I think it’s time should happen. 

 

Because I don’t believe we need to continue for generations to 

come to have this parent-adolescent relationship where every 

year the city goes to make its budget but it can’t really 

determine what its budget’s going to be until it knows the 

funding level it’s going to receive from its parent, the provincial 

government or its federal government, or a combination of both. 

And yet we do so with a governing body that has got as much 

history in this province as the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that we . . . I mean these are duly elected people. 

They are senior government. They have the ability to make the 

decisions on behalf of the people that they represent. Why 

shouldn’t they be given the powers to be able to generate the 

revenue, to be able to support those decisions? And I would, if I 

had the ability into the future, Mr. Speaker, in my role as an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], that would be 

something that I would like to work towards achieving because 

I think it’s something that its time’s at hand. 

 

And I believe that this is, you know, if you look at some of the 

changes that are suggested in Bill 108, those changes could go 

even further, could go even further, could go even further and 

give greater revenue-generating powers to our urban 

municipalities and allow them the ability to be able to set their 

own agenda, I guess you would say, and be masters of their 

own destiny. They’d be able to decide what projects they want 

to go after — what projects they would believe would benefit 

their community — and then put forward a plan of generating 

the revenue to support those projects. 

 

And I, as far as I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, covers everything, 

whether it be redoing our streets, whether it be sewer and water, 

whether it be putting in traffic lights. Those things should be . . . 

Those are the decisions that have been made by the city, 

because quite frankly they’re the people at the front lines. 

They’re the people that are facing those problems . They know 

what those issues are. They know what those problems are. 

They should also have the ability to generate the revenue to be 

able to address those problems. They should have the ability to 

generate the revenue to be able to build their cities in the way 

that they have a plan for that growth. And they should have that 

ability to generate revenue, not just based on a year-to-year 

basis, but have the ability to know that they have a certain level 

of revenue into the future so they can make long-term plans. I 

think it would benefit everybody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that’s my own personal opinion on 

something that I do feel fairly strongly about. I think that the 

municipalities, particularly urban municipalities, should be 

worked with very co-operatively, and a long and in-depth and 

serious consultation process take place to identify ways and 

means that changes could be made to allow the cities to expand 

their powers, to be able to allow the cities to expand their 

powers of generating revenue so that they can service their 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it we also in this province have been 

experiencing now for some time growth, particularly growth in 

our urban centres. We are seeing certainly the principal cities of 

Regina and Saskatoon grow and grow quite rapidly. But we are 

also seeing the other cities growing. Most recently there was a 

news story on, on both television and in the print media on the 

issues facing the city of Yorkton, for example, who are looking 

at the growth of their city, looking at the need to be able to 

develop new subdivisions and develop new areas for 

businesses. 

 

And they simply of course didn’t have the land within the city 

limits so they had to expand their city limits. And in the cases, 

in the past at least, these kind of cases have always been 

irritants with the municipalities because there’s always been 

that, I suppose, rubbing each other wrong in the process. And I 

think Yorkton was one of those examples, where it was tough, 

tough negotiations. And I don’t think hard feelings as a result of 

it, but certainly tough negotiations between the RMs and the 

city. But eventually, I understand, a deal has been made to 

facilitate the ability for the city to expand, and into the 

municipalities, and basically the annexing of municipal 

property into the city so that the city can start to service those 

lots, provide the opportunity for expansion, both in the 

residential aspect but also within the commercial aspect. 

 

But those are some of the things that, Mr. Speaker, that I do 

believe that there’s opportunity here and should be. And this 

Bill could be probably one of those vehicles of opportunity that 

would allow for the negotiations and the consultations between 

the government and both the RM and SUMA . . . I should say 

SARM and SUMA to be able to facilitate a process where, in 

the future, there wouldn’t have to be a tough negotiations, and 

there wouldn’t have to be a rub against each other. There 

wouldn’t have to be hard feelings, hopefully, left as a result of 

it. 

 

But there should be a mechanism put into place that fair and 

reasonable consultations and discussions and negotiations 

would take place to ensure that the municipalities, in the case of 

a city’s expansion, that case the municipalities received fair and 

reasonable compensation. But at the same time the ability for 

the city to be able to expand and the knowledge that the 

community fathers of the city would have that they would be 

able to expand. When the time came, they’d be able to expand. 

They’d be able to meet the ability to plan into the future. 

 

I think you would agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that most of 

these communities would have a long-term planning in place, 

and they need to know that when the time comes that they’ll be 

able to expand, to be able to accommodate an expansion of the 

residential sections, urban expansion of the commercial sections 

of their community. It’s very important in order to make plans 

for the future, but it’s also very important to be able to attract 

business and attract investment to their communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s just once more the real 



4444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

opportunity this government has. It has a real opportunity to 

start that process, that process of consultation to ensure that 

they are able to meet the needs, the growing needs and the 

changing needs of the cities and towns across this great 

province of ours. And here’s a chance to do that in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, since the government has proposed to open this Bill 

up, that we would be able to make those changes so that it 

would meet the needs, not only today but into the future. And 

the opportunity is at hand, Mr. Speaker, because, since we’re 

going to be opening up this Bill and making amendments to the 

Act, that we could do so in a way that would be of long-term 

benefit to the communities. And we wouldn’t be back here in a 

year or two at the will of the communities saying, you know, 

this doesn’t work; we need to have other changes. 

 

[20:30] 

 

With proper consultation . . . And had this government and its 

officials carried out proper consultation with the city 

governments and communities across this great province of 

ours, I think that this would be a great opportunity to be able to 

get it right, get it right this time so that we don’t . . . back here 

in a year or two doing, basically doing the same thing — 

reopening the Act so that we can make certain amendments 

because it hasn’t met the needs for our communities. 

 

And I use Yorkton as an example because I think that’s the one 

that I’m aware of simply from watching it on the news. I don’t 

know any of the details of the situation there, but I watched on 

the news, and I do know that Yorkton is a growing community. 

And I would think that perhaps some of the experiences from 

Yorkton’s situation, had the consultation, had the officials, had 

this government done some consultations with the city of 

Yorkton — and perhaps the member has; I don’t know — but it 

would have been beneficial to have been able to incorporate 

those ideas and those experiences and their suggestions into the 

Act here now since we have the Act open. 

 

And I wouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

from Yorkton has had the opportunity to have those 

discussions. I know that the member from Yorkton is a very 

conscientious member and does a very good job out there of 

staying in touch with his constituents and . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well that’s what I hear from people in Yorkton 

area who tell me that they see him around every once in a while. 

They’re a little disappointed in the fact that although all they do 

is see him, they don’t see any real results. But they do know 

that he is restricted by the party in which he is a member of. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s just one example of the 

opportunity that’s at hand here, and that this government could 

have, could have taken advantage of that opportunity to make 

those changes — since the Act is open anyway — to make 

those changes that would facilitate the ability for communities 

into the future to expand and expand with ease and without any 

hard feelings, without any disagreements, I guess you would 

say; that a process would be put into place, a fair and reasonable 

process so that at the end of the day the municipalities, the rural 

municipalities would get a fair and reasonable compensation for 

the annexing of any property that they may lose. 

 

But at the same time, the city would have the ability to grow 

and to know it could do this, could know it could grow so that 

we’d be able to attract businesses to make that investment 

because many of those investments are on a long-term basis. 

And they need to know before they make that final decision that 

they will have the ability to proceed with their construction 

plans in an orderly fashion and a timely fashion so that they 

don’t find themselves being held up with red tape because the 

city hasn’t been able to move quick enough, and that the 

increased . . . That holdup simply increases the cost of the 

construction cost of their facility, costs of their project. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, that the government had a golden 

opportunity here. Since they’re opening up this Act anyway, 

making the amendments to this Act, they could have carried out 

the proper consultations with the cities to ensure that those 

suggestions, the experiences of the cities’ leadership and the 

suggestions, would have been able to have been incorporated in 

this Act and would’ve been able to get it right the first time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that I see a bit of disappointment 

starting to creep up on the horizon here because I don’t sense 

that that consultation has taken place. And I certainly don’t 

sense that the proposed amendments here certainly would 

address any of those most recent issues that I’ve raised. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a number of the cities and their neighbouring 

RMs have found the process of altering municipal boundaries 

and annexing of land and the determination of compensation to 

be unnecessarily cumbersome. And that’s what I’m saying, Mr. 

Speaker. Here was the opportunity. The government was 

opening up this Act, was opening up this Act through the 

suggested amendments here. It would have been the opportunity 

to have taken a little more time, carried out meaningful 

discussions, meaningful consultations with the leadership of the 

urban municipalities to be able to identify what other changes 

could have been made to this Act, at the same time these 

amendments were taking place, to ensure that it reflects, really 

reflects the needs of the municipalities out there. And so far, 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t see that. 

 

It’s not clear whether or not the government’s process with 

these changes to these provisions are an adequate solution to the 

problem. It’s simply not clear. We have no evidence of that. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have no evidence of that either 

in the second reading speech by the minister and/or in the 

explanatory notes they’ve given us to accompany the Bill.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again it’s up to the opposition to contact 

those people and those organizations, particularly the 

municipalities who are being affected by this, to identify the 

shortcomings of the amendments to this Act and perhaps will be 

able to then make the recommendations to government that they 

may want to perhaps withdraw this Bill and go back and rework 

it and do it again, and this time get it right. This time get it at a 

level where it meets the needs as put forward by the local RMs 

and by the local city governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also I find it interesting that this piece of 

legislation also gives the municipalities the authority to request 

criminal record checks for candidates seeking public office. It’s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, that it would be suggested that the 

municipalities would have those, that authority. And yet that 

same authority is not being provided — at least not that I’ve 

seen anywhere in any of the Acts — not being provided to the 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4445 

province. And my question is, why would it not be something 

that, if the government is moving in that direction, then why 

wouldn’t it be something that would be fair and equitable if it 

was applied to all levels of government within the province, 

whether provincial government, city government, and rural 

government? I think it’s something that is . . . I’m not saying 

it’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. Don’t get me wrong. I’m not saying 

it’s wrong. What I’m saying is that I think the government’s 

kind of missed the boat here a little bit by not applying it 

equally to all levels of government in this province. 

 

And I would think that if you’re going to make that dramatic a 

change, we need to do so again after fair and reasonable 

consultation because I think there has to be some guidelines. 

That’s a very broad statement. What constitutes a criminal 

record? A speeding ticket? Is that enough to be a criminal 

record? I don’t know. It doesn’t state here what level of 

consultation has taken place. It doesn’t state at all what level of 

record check would be considered a criminal record. Those are 

the things, Mr. Speaker, that would certainly need to be 

answered before, I think, this Bill would be considered a 

serious, a serious Bill. 

 

Again I just don’t understand why it wouldn’t be applied 

equally to all levels of government whether . . . not just to the 

municipal government or anybody seeking municipal office but 

why it wouldn’t also be applicable to somebody seeking 

provincial office. And I think it’s again an opportunity that the 

government has missed. It was an opportunity, the opening this 

Act. They want to make amendments to this Act, but yet they 

haven’t obviously carried out extended consultations to this 

recommendation or this amendment because it falls short by 

only being applicable to municipal office. And really one would 

say it’s a double standard, has one standard for those seeking 

municipal office and another standard for those seeking 

provincial office. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that falls once again short on this 

government and indicates their lack of consultation, and their 

lack of having done that consultation in a way that was serious 

and meaningful. And quite frankly I’m beginning to wonder if 

they really did any consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again it begs the question of who approached the 

government to make these amendments and why? Again, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the role of government is to be able to identify 

the changes needed in the municipal Act to facilitate and assist 

the municipalities to carry out their duties, their duties as I say. 

And it’s a very important duty. I had the opportunity, like I said 

earlier, to be on municipal council for 10 years. 

 

And quite frankly I found that very interesting and very useful. 

I found it to be a real need for the power of the municipality to 

be there at hand when required because most cases you were 

dealing right up front with the issue, whether it be a road issue 

or whether it be a safety issue on a municipal grid road or 

whether it be a water and sewer problem with one of our 

communities that was under the umbrella of the RM because 

certain communities are, across this great province of ours. 

 

We have within the RM structure we have hamlets. Hamlets 

usually have their own elected board that govern that particular 

hamlet and does so in a similar legislative manner as we have 

here. And then we have the hamlets that are under the RM 

responsibility or RM jurisdiction. And they’re unorganized 

hamlets and that they are the responsibility of the local 

councillor in the area. And they work very closely with the 

councillor to identify their needs. And the councillor’s 

responsibility is to take that back to the municipal body and to 

lobby on behalf of that particular unorganized hamlet to provide 

those facilities. 

 

Some of those facilities include sewer and water system. I know 

one community in my municipality — it wasn’t in my division 

but was in my municipality — that fell into that category. It 

wasn’t an organized hamlet, but it was a hamlet that had its own 

governing structure. And they levied a tax on themselves to be 

able to facilitate the construction of a water system. 

 

I don’t believe they had a sewer system, but they simply had a 

water system that supplied each family, I guess you could say, 

within that hamlet with the ability to have running water. And it 

was done collectively and it was a good process because it 

ensured the quality of water was that that met the requirements 

of the Department of Health. Because the Department of Health 

would, on a regular basis, investigate the water and ensure that 

the quality of water was there, and it was a good system. I think 

it improved the lot and improved the life of the people who 

lived in that particular community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is certainly a meaningful role for 

government to play in assisting our municipalities to be able to 

achieve the goals that they set for themselves. I think it’s 

important. I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we allow the 

municipalities to set those goals, we give the municipalities the 

privilege and the power to be able to set the goals, to be able to 

design the community that they want to see and to be able to 

achieve that. And I think there’s a role for government to assist 

and support those communities to reach those goals. 

 

And I think it’s not a system where the province should be 

dictating to the municipality what it is that they hope to achieve. 

I think it should be the other way around. I think the 

municipalities should be able to identify what it is that they 

want to achieve; they should be able to identify the kind of 

community they want to develop. And then they should be able 

to come to the provincial government and say, this is the type of 

community we want to develop and this is the role that you can 

play in assisting us. 

 

And it’s not just a financial role, Mr. Speaker. It’s a role where 

often a changing in regulations or changing of certain 

provisions with legislation would go a long way in achieving 

that. And that’s why I say here was an opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, when the government decided to open up The Cities 

Act by making certain amendments. And as outlined here in Bill 

108, it was an opportunity for them to — for them, the 

government — to get it right. 

 

In order to do that though, Mr. Speaker, they would have had to 

go out there and carry out fair and reasonable consultations with 

those communities that are going to be affected, those 

municipalities that are going to be affected. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think that this government did that. I see no evidence of it. 

I see no signs of it. I see no suggestion anywhere that fair and 

reasonable and extensive consultation was carried out with 



4446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

those communities that would be affected through the 

amendments in this particular Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that once again this government has let 

down the people of Saskatchewan by not fulfilling its 

responsibilities and its duties by ensuring that they were able to 

talk to those folks out there who are going to be affected by 

such changes, to ensure that those changes are the correct 

changes, that those changes will do the job, that those changes 

are what it is that the people out there in the front lines, the 

people in our municipalities that are the front-line folks out 

there that know the issues, know the problems. Why? Because 

they live it every day. They know the issues. They know the 

problems. And they also know the solutions to it. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And they would have been able to share with the government, 

had consultations taken place. They would have been able to 

share with the government what was their ideas and their 

suggestions as to what amendments should really take place to 

be able to reflect the needs that these municipalities recognize 

are barriers to growth, are barriers to their ability to expand 

their communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are the things that a consultation 

process would have brought about. And I’m disappointed that 

the government didn’t do that because here was the opportunity. 

The chance was here. The chance was at hand to be able to do 

it, to make the recommendations, to make the amendments, and 

to get it right. And, Mr. Speaker, obviously this government 

hasn’t been able to do that. 

 

And for what reason? I’m left speechless as to identify the 

reasons why they wouldn’t go out and talk to folks that they 

represent. Why they wouldn’t go out and talk to those folks that 

are the leaders of the communities? And why they wouldn’t talk 

to them and be able to provide the meaningful amendments, 

meaningful changes to the Act so that it would benefit the 

communities and the people within? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more to be said on this particular Bill, 

and I know that a lot of my colleagues want to get in on the 

opportunity to discuss this further. Like I said, there’s a lot 

more to be said. 

 

And I’m sure that perhaps even the member from Yorkton 

might have something he’d like to add to this Bill, whether he’d 

do it in this legislative process or whether he’ll do it in a private 

discussion with the minister, but I’m sure that he will be 

contributing in his own way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would, at this point in time, move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 108, The Cities 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

Bill No. 122 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 122 — The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join today and add my comments and certainly the position 

we have in reference to Bill No. 122. And this is An Act to 

amend The Environmental Assessment Act and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Forest Resources 

Management Act. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I was glued to my seat listening to my 

colleague here speak about some amendments to the 

communities. And it was a riveting presentation. And I certainly 

want to point out that I’ve been here for close to 15 years now 

and I’ve been never been riveted to my seat by such an 

astounding amount of information coming from such a small 

Bill. It certainly shows that there is a lot of work, a lot of 

research ability and intelligence on my colleague’s part. And I 

want to certainly publicly recognize him and commend him for 

the tremendous amount of good work on that Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to enter the debate, the debate on 

what’s the Bill’s intent here. And as I pointed out, the minister 

had certainly made a motion to move the Act, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009. And her 

point was that it has been 30 years since The Environmental 

Assessment Act was first passed and a lot has changed. And 

certainly with regard to environment, science, and technology, 

factors such climate change, environmental protection, water 

conservation, and readiness for economic growth are driving the 

need to evolve. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the points that she raised as the 

purpose of this Bill, this particular Bill that I think certainly had 

some merit, in a sense of trying to recognize the environment 

and the science and technology attached to that, and certainly 

talking about environmental protection and climate change. 

 

And I can remember one day my young daughter rushed up to 

me and says, dad, there’s some good news on the newspaper. 

The minister announced a program, and we had certainly 

assumed that this Bill was it, that there’s going to be some 

aggressive change to how we battle climate change. Maybe 

some aggressive action on trying to build our forests and make 

our forests stronger and more safer in terms some of the 

degradation that’s going to happen, or perhaps there’s going to 

be land set aside to protect cabin areas, or maybe there’s going 

to be some special programs for fishermen or fishers or 

trappers, that there’s just a real amount of opportunity that I 

thought the Minister of the Environment was going to make a 

presentation to our newspaper in the area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I was a bit disappointed, to say the least. 

Because February 9th, 2010, in the Northern Pride which is out 

of Meadow Lake, the program that the minister announced was 

the provincial toilet replacement rebate program was extended. 

And so we just kind of fell out of our chairs and we said, wow, 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4447 

this minister certainly has a lot of visionary thinking when she 

extends the toilet replacement rebate program. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we look at some of the actions of this particular 

minister when it comes to a wide variety of issues. On many, 

many fronts there has been zero, zero, and zero in terms of 

effort. And quite frankly, in terms of progress and opportunity 

she gets, as many people say, a big fat F-minus. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is meant by readiness for economic 

growth? And I look across the way and I always tell people 

back home to watch what is being proposed by this particular 

government because readiness for economic growth is not 

putting in the proper tax incentives. It is certainly not making 

the labour that you may need to get the growth opportunities in 

place. It is not talking about incentives, not talking about 

attracting new companies. Readiness for economic growth from 

a right wing government really means get everything off the 

way, including standards, including environmental protection, 

and anything that may impede a company from coming out here 

and doing a bunch of work, even at the expense of the 

environment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at the whole notion attached to Bill 

121. And it really talks about what their particular mindset is 

when it comes to the province of Saskatchewan. We know in 

northern Saskatchewan, and we certainly know from the circles 

that I keep in terms of the political circles, which are very good 

circles, that this government across the way, they have to get rid 

of a number of things. And that includes the Crowns, the 

unions, the social causes, the environmental rules and 

regulations, and big government. And if they get rid of all those 

particular fronts, Mr. Speaker, then all of a sudden they may 

have an opportunity to stay in power. 

 

But the problem is they didn’t tell all these groups of people. 

And now tonight I want to expand on that and to tell them that’s 

exactly what their strategy is behind even Bill No. 121, is to get 

rid of those nasty little things called environmental standards 

and environmental responsibility. Those are deterrents to 

industry coming here. That’s their thinking, Mr. Speaker. And I 

needn’t remind people that if you look at an area that I always 

look at as an example of where you don’t have proper 

environmental standards — which this Bill talks about, which 

this Bill has an effect on — is Fort McMurray. Have a look at 

that from the satellite and you will see a lot of degradation to 

the environment. And that’s what this Bill is starting to propose. 

That’s what this Bill is starting to propose. 

 

Now I look at some of the opportunities that this minister had 

over time to do a lot of things on the environmental front, and 

she hasn’t done anything. So today I want to use the Fort 

McMurray example. I’m going to use the Fort McMurray 

example of why you need to have good, solid controls, Mr. 

Speaker, why you have to have a good guideline, where you’ve 

got to have a measure of environmental conscience if you want 

to be government. 

 

If you want to have a process where you’re going to allow 

every company to come along and do what they want without 

regard for the environment, well what you do? You don’t say 

that in some of your Bills. What you do is you use some of the 

buzzwords attached to the minister’s explanation on this Bill 

such as readiness for economic growth. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we read that readiness to economic growth 

for those guys means taking environmental shortcuts at the 

expense of people and at the expense of course of the 

environment. Now what you ought to know is that Fort 

McMurray, Fort McMurray is causing a lot of damage, and not 

to only the Alberta environment but to Saskatchewan as well. 

And what happened there? What happened there is the 

government said, oh we’re ready for economic activity. And 

yes, we want to see the phrase, readiness for economic growth. 

 

So my argument to the people in Saskatchewan is, no matter 

how benign a Bill may appear, such as Bill 121, there’s real 

motivation behind that government to listen to their political 

masters in Alberta to take a shortcut when it comes to the 

protection of our environment and the protection of our people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this whole notion of readiness for economic growth, I look 

at that and I say to people that I often sit down with, is that who 

is going to argue against growth? Who is going to argue against 

growth? Nobody’s going to argue against growth. But what 

people are talking about is sustained, responsible growth. That’s 

what they’re talking about. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a lot different cry that we hear from the people out in 

Saskatchewan than we hear from what the Saskatchewan Party 

government is trying to prepare and plan for when it comes to a 

Bill of this sort. 

 

So about the only thing that I’ve seen the minister effectively do 

was she extended the rebate program for provincial toilet 

replacement program. And that’s exactly, exactly what ought to 

be. That’s exactly where this Bill ought to go — in a provincial 

toilet — because quite frankly the words on this Bill isn’t meant 

in any way, shape, or form to really achieve the objectives that 

the minister alludes to achieving, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out that we talk about, during the Bill 

presentation, that Saskatchewan proceeds with environmental 

safeguards in place. That’s another buzzword, Mr. Speaker, 

attached to the Bill — environmental safeguards. So we have 

this readiness for economic growth language. We have this 

environmental safeguard language. And people say, what’s that 

all about? What’s that all about? Well quite frankly those are 

buzzwords thrown into these Bills, thrown into these Bills to 

make sure, to make sure that there are no such things as 

environmental safeguards from companies that want to come 

here and do what they want and then head out of Dodge. There 

is none. And this government’s allowing that to continually 

happen. 

 

And every consequential Act that they bring forward, every 

kind of language as a readiness for economic opportunity — 

those aren’t really words of encouragement for industry. Those 

are buzzwords and words meant to say, come on to 

Saskatchewan; we’ll get rid of those simple things like 

environmental protection. We’ll get rid of those words like due 

process. We’ll get rid of those words like responsibility to the 

environment. All those words will be gone, and we’ll put a new 

word in place of all of them, and that word is readiness for 

economic growth, Mr. Speaker. That’s their agenda. That’s 

their plan. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker? Because if they get rid of the unions, they 



4448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

get rid of the Crowns, they get rid of the social causes, they get 

rid of the environmental agenda, what happens is, bit by bit by 

bit by bit they weaken Saskatchewan. And then they can leave 

it wide open and 10 years from now, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t 

going to be nothing such as environmental safeguards and rules 

and regulations in place to protect our land and our 

environment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to again point out that there is a 

notion out there that Fort McMurray, with its booming 

economy, is creating a huge environmental challenge — not 

just to Alberta but to many of the neighbouring communities 

and many of the neighbouring provinces around. And that I’m 

talking about the territories, Alberta . . . I’m sorry, BC [British 

Columbia], and Saskatchewan. And some of the effects of acid 

rain, as an example, even go as far as Manitoba. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the example of the puppet 

masters in Alberta and what they’re trying to do with this 

particular government, it’s that saying, you get rid of the 

environmental standards, you get rid of the quality standard 

control they have there, and use a new word in its place. 

Because we want to fool the people of Saskatchewan; we want 

to use the buzz phrases like readiness for economic growth. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this Bill is intended to 

do. It is intended to take shortcuts. It is intended to circumvent 

what I think was a good process, to make sure companies were 

responsible. It is intended to, quite frankly, ignore the reality 

that many people have been telling this government and telling 

other governments that there are challenges to the environment, 

there’s some global challenges we all face, and you ought to 

pay respect to those issues and those concerns that are raised 

and you ought to listen, Mr. Speaker. You ought to listen. 

 

[21:00] 

 

So when I look at this Bill and I think about some of the 

challenges attached to it, you want to really read what is being 

said with some of the phrases presented by that minister and 

that party — readiness for economic growth. That has nothing 

to do with economic growth. It has everything to do with 

environmental shortcuts that we have seen time and time again, 

our examples that we ought to be worried about and we ought 

to be warned about. And Fort McMurray is one area that I think 

we ought to watch and have watch for as an example of how, if 

industry is left unchecked, if industry is left unchecked, what 

could be the net result, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I travelled to Fort Chip a number of years ago, and I seen 

some of the activities happening in that community. And I 

pointed out at the time that what are some of the challenges 

environmentally to the people in that area. And similar to this 

Bill, there were shortcuts afforded to the large oil companies 

that we think, that we think had not only environmental 

challenges to the Fort Chip and northern Alberta area, but many 

of the residents there as well felt that there was an increase in 

the number of cancers in that community and that they strongly 

believed that, as a result of the lax environmental rules and 

unfair processes of putting some of these oil companies in 

business in Alberta, resulted in the fact that there was some 

serious health problems for the people of Fort Chip as well — 

serious health problems. And that includes all kinds of cancer, a 

dramatic and remarkable increase in cancer. 

 

And this government is saying no, there’s no connection to that, 

that we should have let that occur and happen in Saskatchewan. 

Leave it unchecked and we’ll use the phrase readiness for 

economic growth to deflect what their real agenda is. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see some of the backbenchers chirping 

away there. And what they don’t realize, what they don’t realize 

is this Bill has none of their input in it, first of all, and secondly, 

the agenda’s not driven by them nor their constituents. They’re 

but mere passengers on the puppet masters’ plan for that 

government, from Alberta, when it comes to environmental 

regulations or any Bill that’s being brought forward to talk 

about adjusting or changing or altering The Environmental 

Assessment Act. 

 

Figure it out. Figure it out because obviously you guys don’t 

know what’s happening there. And the other point that’s really 

quite concerning is you don’t have a clue it’s happening, and 

therefore it’s quite frankly a discredit to you and your 

government when you allow this kind of activity to occur 

without clearly analyzing it and watching what goes on. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that on the Fort 

McMurray example, on the Fort McMurray example I want any 

one of those backbenchers there to stand up and say, oh no, they 

have all the right environmental standards in place. And not one 

of them will. And the reason why is they know that it’s not the 

case. This is not the case. That that development was allowed to 

occur unchecked, unfettered, and that’s exactly what happens to 

the environment and to the health of some of the Albertans 

because quite frankly the government didn’t stand up with the 

proper rules and regulations and processes like this government 

isn’t doing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats want to see economic 

growth for Saskatchewan, but we want it sustainable and we 

want it responsible. Those are some of the things that I know 

that people are saying. Well that’s a clear difference between 

that Saskatchewan Party and the New Democratic caucus, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We believe that environmental regulation benefits to the 

Saskatchewan people — certainly having the process clearly 

understood by as many people and having that process rigorous 

to ensure one thing, is that we don’t destroy the land for the oil 

under that land. And this party is doing none of that, Mr. 

Speaker. And any Bill, any Bill that they bring forward that has 

any kind of environmental connotation to it, and even the words 

environment somewhere, I say to them today that it means 

nothing to them, absolutely nothing to them. And quite frankly I 

don’t believe they understand it nor comprehend what is being 

done to Saskatchewan and what is being done to them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that again as I mentioned, 

when I look at the attachment to the phrase, readiness for 

economic growth, I see environmental safeguards. And then it 

hits me because part of the minister’s argument that says we, 

and I quote, “. . . to voluntarily apply for a minister’s screening 

decision.” Now what does that mean? What does a minister’s 

screening decision mean? The screening decision is, it allows 

the minister’s office to arbitrarily decide which projects need 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4449 

better screening or which ones don’t. 

 

So therefore all the caucus people in the backbenches there 

don’t have a clue which companies are going to come along and 

do some of these things in our province. They are agreeing to 

this Bill to allow that particular minister the exclusive right to 

say, okay, company A, company D, company X, you guys can 

come do what you want. Company C, company Y, we’ll maybe 

let you guys go through this process. Well quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the processes attached to approving some of 

these companies’ operations in Saskatchewan ought to have 

public disclosure. It ought to have environmental, an 

environmental process and it ought to have an assessment in 

terms of economic opportunity, employment opportunity, 

training opportunity, and resource revenue-sharing 

opportunities. Those are some of the things that I think is very, 

very important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you look at the notion, and I’m really glad that the 

minister read it out the way she read it out in that particular 

order because it lends credence to my argument that the phrase, 

readiness for economic growth, really means that some of these 

guys can come along and take a shortcut for the environmental 

rules and regulations that they ought to have in place for every 

company. 

 

Now the backbench may not like what I’m saying today, Mr. 

Speaker, but quite frankly they are passengers on that freight 

train to ruin the environment, take all kinds of shortcuts 

attached to this Bill No. 122. And quite frankly they don’t have 

a clue which companies are going to be approved and which 

ones are not going to be approved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think they should look at the Bill, look at 

the intent, and maybe one of these days stand up for the 

constituents and stand up for those people that want to protect 

the environment. Stand up for those people that want to say, we 

ought to have a good process here to discover these 

opportunities and to screen these opportunities instead of 

blindly saying, yes we’ll support Bill 122. Why? Well we’re 

part of the Saskatchewan Party caucus; we have to. 

 

Okay. If you have to, do you understand it? And the answer I 

get, well no. It’s good for the economy. It’s readiness for 

economic growth. Well, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the 

language and the words that that party uses and those caucus 

members use it. My only challenge to them today is, shouldn’t 

you at least understand what you’re doing? Because once you 

understand what you’re doing and you know what’s going on, 

then you can’t say, well I didn’t know. I didn’t know. I didn’t 

know those words, readiness for economic growth, meant 

taking environmental shortcuts. 

 

We’re telling you loud and clear that’s exactly what this Bill is 

doing. That’s exactly what they’re doing to make you guys look 

like you’re part of this project and process and therefore quite 

frankly, in my opinion, contaminating the process of having a 

free, clean, and very public process to see what some of these 

projects are all about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I looked at, on the Bill, some of the offence 

and penalty provisions. Well as much as the minister may want 

to talk about the $1,000 per day or $250,000 per day, like really 

how many people are going to be affected by that? I still want 

to see how many companies that voluntarily want to go to a 

minister’s screening that have less assessment, less scrutiny, but 

boy, if you don’t follow us we’re going to give you a $250,000 

per day fine. Well get real here because the obvious answer is 

that you can throw those penalties up but you have no intent 

whatsoever of penalizing any of these companies. 

 

That’s just a thing to make you feel good and say, yes we can 

do this. Every oil company or every company that wants to 

propose something, they don’t for one second believe that you 

guys are going to make them go through an environmental 

process, and not for a split second think that you guys are going 

to penalize them $250,000 a day. 

 

That’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

important that when people read these Bills, when people read 

these Bills, you’ve got to make absolutely sure that the 

terminology and the wording that they have on some of these 

Bills that they’re proposing really is very clear. And this Bill is 

not clear, Mr. Speaker, not in any way, shape, or form. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also point out that that when you look at 

the other words that the minister used, and I want to quote, 

“The amendments include the ability to establish class 

assessment processes where projects have common 

characteristics.” That’s another part that we kind of sat back and 

laughed and said, well if she supports one company that hasn’t 

got a very good track record and that has broken every 

environmental law and has taken every shortcut possible, well if 

there’s five or six other companies like that and they have fit 

the minister’s screening process, well they do have the same 

characteristics, they do have the same tendencies, so we’ll let 

them take more shortcuts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s just a number of things that people ought 

to be worried about when they talk about The Environmental 

Assessment Act. It is something that people out there ought to 

be very, very careful when they look through some of these 

Bills and they read what’s being said and they start thinking to 

themselves, is this what they mean? Because what the average 

citizen means and what they hope happens in any 

environmental Bill, including Bill No. 122, is radically different 

than what the Sask Party government proposes on many, many 

fronts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the backbench to be very, very 

careful because whenever a minister proposes changes like this 

to your Act, research it, learn from it, read from it, and make 

sure that what she’s saying to the public and saying in this 

Assembly follows through exactly with what you think it is. 

 

And many of you don’t have a clue what is being proposed 

because you don’t take the time to read it and therefore you 

don’t understand it. And quite frankly, you ought to because 

you’re going to be tied hook, line, and sinker on many of these 

fronts because you’re part of that government that makes these 

shortcuts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier comment when I 

thought of Bill No. 122. When I thought of Bill 122, I thought 

this is pretty much on par with the provincial toilet replacement 

rebate program. It’s pretty much even in terms of the same net 



4450 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

benefit, the same net benefit that I think would happen for 

Saskatchewan if Acts like this are proposed and adopted by the 

Sask Party government. The provincial toilet replacement 

rebate program could probably do more environmental good 

than this entire government’s environmental Bills put together, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s how dramatic the intent is in terms of what 

they write and actually what they preach. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to support the minister on her 

provincial toilet replacement rebate program. I’m glad she 

extended it. But there ain’t no way that we’re going to sit by 

and allow Bills like 122 to quietly pass through the Assembly in 

the hopes that nobody catches up to their intent and their 

language when it’s attached to this Bill. So, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to point out readiness for economic growth, environmental 

safeguards, voluntarily apply for a minister’s screening, 

establish class assessment processes where projects have 

common characteristics, and these fines all attached to this Bill 

mean radically different things than what the public 

understands. It means totally different things. 

 

And I go back to my earlier point: this particular party want to 

get rid of the unions. They want to get rid of the Crowns. They 

want to get rid of the social causes. They don’t want any 

environmental standards or monitoring that this Bill is part of. 

They don’t want any of those things in the way. 

 

And the sad reality, Mr. Speaker, is they have some people in 

their corner convinced that’s the way to go. But there’s going to 

be a whole new whack of thinkers that are going to come along 

and read this party for their, quite frankly, for their language to 

make sure it fits the right intent of the Bill 122, but more so, 

Mr. Speaker, of what they intend to do. 

 

Now I want to point out a number of years ago we worked with 

a number of different companies. And most companies are 

pretty responsible, Mr. Speaker. Most of them are pretty 

responsible. The ones that we dealt with, we wanted to make 

sure that they came along to Saskatchewan with a good attitude 

and a willingness to work together. And we found that if you 

actually sought out those companies and sat down and 

negotiated with those companies, that they’d do the responsible 

thing, Mr. Speaker. They would do the responsible thing. 

 

And you don’t have to try and fool people with language that 

you have attached in this Bill. Just do the right thing and follow 

through with the intent of the Bill and what the people think the 

intent is. Not what your language expert tells you to say and 

some of the puppet masters of Alberta saying, put this word in, 

it’ll really confuse them. Put this word in, it’ll make it look like 

we’re doing something; and put that word in and we’ll take all 

of these shortcuts. We’ll make more money for you guys, but in 

the process we’ll just ruin the environment for many, many 

years to come. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I talked about some of the companies 

we’ve dealt with in the past, I talked about the abandoned mines 

in northern Saskatchewan. Cameco and COGEMA are good 

companies. They work really closely with our environmental 

folks. These are professional people that work in the 

environmental field. There are many, many people that have 

served this province for many years — very, very good, 

knowledgeable environmental technicians and people that I 

have complete confidence in. 

 

And when they sat down with the companies, we didn’t talk 

about language and different words to confuse the public. We 

said, let’s do the real thing here. Let’s be responsible on the 

environmental safeguards. Let’s go through a process. Let’s 

make sure we attract your investment. Let’s make sure we leave 

something behind. Let’s leave something tangible here for the 

public and the people to see and to benefit from. And most of 

all, the environment being one of those good, solid causes and 

one of those standards that we ought to look at to try and 

protect. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you start talking about the abandoned 

mines in northern Saskatchewan, there was a number of 

companies . . . And we tried to research back over time. As you 

know, companies change hands, they change names, and they 

sometimes survive. And sometimes they do, and sometimes 

they morph into a different company. Sometimes they just 

disappear. 

 

But after we researched and looked back in some of the years 

and looked at some of the companies operating in northern 

Saskatchewan, all the companies came through. All the 

companies came through and they said, look, we were part of 

that process and that project. And we’ll do the right thing. If the 

government comes along and puts some money down, we will 

do our part to come along and put some money down as well. 

Let’s be partners. Let’s not try and circumvent the 

environmental regulations. Let’s try and work together to 

protect the environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was a number of companies from 

Alberta that came along the uranium mines up in the North, 

Gunnar and Lorado being two of the mines that I remember. 

There was a company out of Alberta that actually assumed 

responsibility for that site. And they said to us, look, if the 

federal government comes along and the province comes along, 

we will come along and do our part. And we’ll start cleaning up 

some of these abandoned mines that operated in the 1950s and 

the 1960s, and we’ll do our part. We’ll do our part. 

 

So what happened, Mr. Speaker — and talk about leadership — 

is this NDP [New Democratic Party] party got up and, like 

many other folks before us, we wanted to take the responsible 

position from our perspective to make sure companies were 

invited in to solve some of the problems that they created, not 

trying to take shortcuts like being proposed by Bill 122. 

 

You ought to tell your puppet masters in Alberta that 

environmental regulation in Saskatchewan will not be 

circumvented, will not be lessened for the sake of your bottom 

line profit, that there’s going to be a balance between the 

environment and the economy. There’s going to be real benefits 

for our people. That’s what you ought to tell them. You ought 

to tell them that, very clear. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we met with these companies to look at 

the environmental cleanup of a number of mines in northern 

Saskatchewan, as I had mentioned, these companies came 

along. And today you see a $30 million deal in northern 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4451 

Saskatchewan being administered by the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, and they’re cleaning up some of the 

abandoned mines of the ’50s and of the ’60s all throughout the 

North to make sure that they’ve done the responsible thing. 

 

Now if that party had been in power then, with Acts like this it 

would have never, ever occurred, Mr. Speaker. It would have 

never occurred. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that if you take 

shortcuts, most companies will take advantage of them. They 

will not try and develop that respectful relationship with the 

government that affords them all these outs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about readiness for economic 

growth as part of your agendas to deign to change the 

environmental Act, we don’t buy that one bit. We don’t buy that 

language in this Bill one bit. And the reason why we don’t buy 

that language is primarily because you guys have not provided 

the leadership on any of these environmental fronts. That’s the 

reason why — zero leadership. So your language doesn’t have 

the effect on this opposition or any environmental group 

primarily because of your attitude and your position and your 

right wing thinkers that say, let’s get as much as we can from 

this resource. To heck with the rules and regulations. Let’s use 

new buzzwords to confuse the people, but in the meantime 

we’ll try and get away with every rule and regulation we can. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to the relationship that we 

established with some of these companies, and I think the 

number — and I could be corrected — we ended up cleaning up 

40 abandoned mines in northern Saskatchewan. Now that 

process is unfolding, and those guys had nothing to do with it 

across the way . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, and a 

member chirps from his seat. Mr. Speaker, this government, this 

NDP government, put that in place. 

 

There’s a federal Liberal government in place in Ottawa, and 

there was some companies that were willing to stand up. Those 

are the three parties that put this in place. Your party, sir, and 

your government had absolutely nothing to do with that. Zero to 

do with that. But the main thing is that environmental support, 

leadership, and putting in good regulations and working with 

the companies, that was compliments of this past 

administration. And you’re welcome. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the point that I would like to 

make is that any time this particular minister or that party 

proposes environmental changes, it is not meant to protect the 

environment in any way, shape, or form. I’ve made this 

statement time and time again, Mr. Speaker, and again I go 

back to what I think that minister and that party has done that is 

significant, significant on the environmental front. The only 

significant thing that I’ve seen them do is they announced that 

the provincial toilet replacement rebate program was extended. 

That’s about it, you know.  

 

And so one of the things that I tell people is that you take one of 

their biggest legislative agendas, their biggest legislative 

agenda, and there’s nothing there. But you take the most simple 

point of extending your provincial toilet program and you guys 

can claim environmental superiority to what we did as a 

government. Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I point out to a lot of folks, hurray, hurray, they’re doing 

something that they think will really gain them votes on the 

environmental front. They are extending their provincial toilet 

replacement program. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask one 

of the Pages to get a copy of that and send that over to the 

member from Shellbrook because he has to read that. That’s 

some pretty good, interesting stuff and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’ve been listening fairly 

intently and in many occasions I’m trying to draw exactly how 

the comments relate to Bill 122. I think we can further draw the 

mark closer to 121 than the Bill before us right now, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act. I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the 

connection I have to The Environmental Assessment Act is this 

government, this minister, and this party — Bill 122 — they are 

talking about some of their experience and their background on 

the environmental front and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they 

haven’t done anything significant on the environmental front. 

It’s been zero in a sense of success. Zero in a sense of even 

trying, Mr. Speaker. So what I wanted to do was to draw 

something that they may have done on the environmental front 

that would be significant, more significant than this Bill. And 

the only thing I could find, Mr. Speaker, was they did extend 

the provincial toilet replacement rebate program. That’s the 

connection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason why it’s such a connection is everybody in my 

family said there’s an announcement by the minister on the 

newspaper. So we all grabbed the paper to see what this is 

about. Well the provincial toilet replacement program was 

announced. So the people in the North said, wow, what 

leadership. So what I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, is to draw 

the parallel. To draw the parallel is, I wonder if their provincial 

toilet replacement rebate program would fit under some of the 

language of readiness for economic growth, or would it be able 

to voluntary apply for minister’s screening, you know, or the 

other thing is would it be eligible for the class assessment 

process where projects have common characteristics like a 

provincial camp toilet? Would this apply? 

 

See I’m trying to draw the parallel, Mr. Speaker, because when 

you talk about leadership, provincial toilet replacement rebate 

program is pretty significant from those guys. That’s their baby. 

Now I’m trying to say from our end it goes much deeper than 

that. And that’s why Bill No. 122 is quite significant, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s the correlation or that’s the connection that I 

would make is that they put wording in, they put wording in 

some of these Bills that mean absolutely nothing, absolutely 

nothing. And they have Bills left and right and I’m trying to 

figure out, okay all this wording, all these Bills, what do they 

exactly do? And I see absolutely nothing. 

 

So I’m really trying to see what they’ve done. And I’ve looked 

through a lot of newspapers and a lot of Bills and researched 

documents and about the only thing I found was the provincial 

toilet replacement rebate program. That’s the only thing of 

significant environmental achievement that I see this 

government creating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out to everybody, going back to my examples 

of working with those companies, is that SRC, the 



4452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

Saskatchewan Research Council, I think have undertaken a 

project where they’re going to do a bunch of work to determine 

what needs to be done in some of these abandoned mines. 

They’re putting out RFPs [request for proposal]. They’re going 

to get the companies do the work.  

 

I understand that many people in the Athabasca Basin are 

involved. There’s just a lot of co-operation, Mr. Speaker. And 

we haven’t got a recent update as to what they’re doing and 

where things are at, but we do know that there’s some good 

work being done. And that good work, Mr. Speaker, is being 

done by people of the Athabasca Basin, of people in the mining 

companies, as a former provincial NDP government, of the 

former federal Liberal government, and of course of some good 

environmentally responsible companies that had to have a little 

bit of pushing and a little bit of shoving, but they finally did 

say, yes, that’s the responsible thing to do. And they came 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s exactly our point. You guys, we know, we know 

when you use language such as this in Bill 122 that you have no 

intention of following some of what people think you’re going 

to do. You have zero intent to do that. Do you know why you 

have zero intent? Is your history and your practice dictates that. 

And the response that people have of some of the 

environmental standards or procedures you put in place, they 

say, well that’s the Saskatchewan Party. Those are just words 

they use to confuse us. They never intend to give any company 

a $250,000 per day fine. When’s the last time they had got that 

kind of fine? I bet you not one company was fined under that 

government, Mr. Speaker. Not one. Because why? They threw 

out the environmental rules and regulations a long time ago, a 

long time ago. 

 

So what’s going to happen to our forests? What’s going to 

happen to our water, to our land, and to our air, Mr. Speaker? 

And all they talk about is readiness for economic growth. What 

a nice deflection from the real agenda, and that is to have 10 or 

12 environmental messes, such as Fort McMurray, throughout 

Saskatchewan, where you take a look at Fort McMurray from 

satellite and it’s a big black hole in northern Alberta where the 

environment was allowed to rapidly deteriorate, where there’s 

no checks and balances, as I mentioned. And if you don’t think 

that people in Alberta know that, they bloody well know, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know as well that we’ll have a lot of problems 

in this province if we don’t start looking after the environment 

and putting proper rules and regulations attached to the rules 

and attend to the regulatory process such as Bill No. 122. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again you go down to the satellite imagery 

of Western Canada, and I challenge any one of the members of 

the Saskatchewan Party to do that. Go ahead and do that and 

have a look. Have a look at what is being, the damage being 

created on the environment. And you wonder why some people 

in Saskatchewan are saying, no, we don’t want to be like 

Alberta. We want to be a very good province. We want to be a 

very solid province that has good schools, good roads, a good 

economy, a diversified economy. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And I bet you 99 per cent of them would say, yes, we do want 

to make sure that the environment is protected as well. Every 

inch of this province has people looking after it and people 

demanding that we don’t lessen environment regulations, that 

we actually strengthen and broaden it and bring the companies 

in to be a part of that process. 

 

And that’s where I use, Mr. Speaker, I use the example of the 

abandoned mines in northern Saskatchewan. You know, that is 

one of the things that people ought to know, is that we attracted 

companies to become part of the solution. We didn’t give them 

a free rein saying, do what you want. Get that resource out of 

the ground, and if something happens in the future, well it’s too 

bad. It’s too bad. Somebody else will clean up that mess. No, 

no, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the way it ought to work. 

 

So when the Saskatchewan Party presents things like this sort 

and guys that try to disguise it as a readiness for economic 

growth, the people of Saskatchewan are saying, we’ve seen that 

act before. We have been fooled before, but it isn’t going to 

happen again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is that this Bill 

and other Bills, other environmental Bills, other environmental 

Bills we will be scrutinizing on a regular, consistent basis. on a 

regular, consistent basis. And I’m putting the Sask Party on 

notice that if you think little buzz words like readiness for 

economic growth in this Bill is going to confuse the masses or 

confuse us, you got another think coming. You got to rethink 

that one, Mr. Speaker, because that isn’t on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they believe that the wording on these 

Bills — some of the backbenchers — are what they’re going to 

follow, well you ought to talk to your puppet masters in 

Alberta, and they will tell you, no, no. That’s not what that 

means. It really means shortcuts for us to come along, get some 

of your oil, and do what we’ve got to do to make a quick profit. 

And this notion of sharing, this notion of environmental 

regulation, well we don’t like those kinds of notions because it 

hurts us oil companies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think overall with this particular Bill, I look 

at it. I do the comparisons. I look at the history. I look at some 

of the things that we did and some of the programs that were 

announced over the years. And you look at the wind project. 

You look at some of the conservation efforts. You look at Mr. 

Prebble’s report. There’s just a wide variety of environmental 

leadership from the former administration. And about all that 

I’ve seen this administration do that is of some significance was 

a provincial toilet replacement rebate program. You guys 

extended that, and if that’s the extent of your environmental 

leadership, then this province ought to be very concerned. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I would remind the 

member to address his comments to the Chair, through the 

Chair to the other side of the House. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Prince Albert 

bellows from his seat. Mr. Speaker, I would encourage him to 

go to the Chair and through the Chair because obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, he should know about environmental challenges 

because what he should have said when he announced his 

support for the mill in Meadow Lake: well this is our readiness 

for growth strategy. So in the future, what happened was the 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4453 

mill in Meadow Lake . . . or the mill in P.A. [Prince Albert] 

shut down. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what people ought to know is that . . . 

Again I go back to my example of how readiness for economic 

growth as proposed by the Saskatchewan Party, the member 

from Prince Albert ought to know that there are two significant 

differences and understandings of what the word means — 

readiness for economic growth: that’s their understanding, and 

then there’s the people of Saskatchewan with the NDP’s 

understanding of what is meant by environmental regulation, 

Mr. Speaker. So again, I look at the Bill No. 122 — nothing 

there, nothing there. Just wording that is intended to confuse 

people.  

 

And I want to go back, Mr. Speaker, to their provincial toilet 

replacement rebate program. I think this provincial toilet 

replacement rebate program that they extended was visionary. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they are saying that they’re going to extend 

this program to “. . . Go Green in their day-to-day lives.” That’s 

what the article says there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to go on, under the provincial toilet replacement 

program: 

 

Under the expansion, low-volume and dual-flush toilets 

installed in municipal and First Nations facilities . . . such 

as schools and hospitals, and non-profit facilities are now 

eligible for the rebate.  

 

Wow. And “This applies to all qualifying toilets installed in 

these facilities . . .” What makes a qualifying toilet, Mr. 

Speaker? That’s what we’re trying to figure out. Now how do 

you go green, how do you go green with a qualifying toilet? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and the quote goes on: 

 

“Our government is committed to finding real solutions to 

key environmental issues facing our province,” Minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority 

Nancy Heppner said . . . “This program is helping 

Saskatchewan residents dramatically reduce the amount of 

water they use every day.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, “The Provincial 

Toilet Replacement Rebate Program provides a $50 rebate on 

the purchase of either a dual-flush or low-volume . . .” toilet. So 

out with the higher volume models that use 13 litres and in with 

the provincial toilet. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my point: if you guys want to 

pretend to be leaders in the environment, don’t use language, 

you know, like readiness for economic growth. People can see 

right through it. They can see through it a mile away. The 

environmental movement in Saskatchewan are a lot brighter 

then you give them credit for. You know, when you use 

economic language like that, you are trying to muddy the 

waters. The fact of the matter is Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. I would remind 

the member once again to direct his comments to the Chair and 

through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out 

to the Chair and through the Chair, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan Party government ought not to disrespect the 

intelligence of the environmental movement.  

 

They ought not to diminish the challenge that we face, not just 

as a province but as a country and as the world, on some of the 

changing environmental issues and the global warming that 

people warn us about. They ought not to disrespect the work of 

many scientists and people throughout the world that have 

warned us of some of the impending challenges. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they ought not to put wording in there that simply 

deflects what their real intent of allowing companies to come 

into Saskatchewan and do what they want, when they want with 

no environmental regard for what they take out or leave behind, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s my point when I’m talking about Bill 122. And when I 

make light of the provincial toilet replacement rebate program, 

the whole message is they have not provided leadership. I think 

they’ve got to buy like 56 million toilets to make up for some of 

the water that some of these companies use in one day. So you 

do the addition, Mr. Speaker, 56,000 toilets for one day, and 

you do the math and times that by the flushing, and I think 

you’ve got to have something like 378 billion toilets under their 

program to make up for some of the challenges that they have 

created on the water quality in Saskatchewan over the next year 

and a half. I’ve done the math, Mr. Speaker. And I challenge 

some of the backbenchers . . . Maybe the member from Carrot 

River might have the math. He’s pretty good at budget 

numbers. He might be able to come along and give us some 

information that’s contrary to what I just pointed out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will just point out to the minister his whole 

notion of a screening process, what is that about, Mr. Speaker? 

What is a screening process? If you give us X amount of 

thousand dollars as a donation, that makes you eligible for the 

screening process? Is that the deal? Hey, you’re on a list. Guess 

what? You give us a couple hundred thousand bucks, and your 

screening process, you’re automatically on. 

 

That is very, very dangerous to do that because companies will 

tend to think that they can do that — buy you off, pay you off 

under the guise of a political donation and bang, all of a sudden 

you’re under the screening process. The minister can say, hey, 

I’m going to run here, so how about you help me win this area 

and I’ll put you as part of my voluntary screening process. You 

ought to leave this in the professional people’s hands. Let them 

decide. Let them look at how some of these projects and 

programs are being implemented and screened. Let them 

become independent of your political process so that we’re able 

to protect Saskatchewan’s water, Saskatchewan’s land, 

Saskatchewan’s forests, and Saskatchewan’s air, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I go back to a long list of some of the issues that I spoke 

about, Mr. Speaker. I spoke about partnership that we had with 

industry. I spoke about the number of wells that were dug under 

this NDP government, of how we’ve seen the economy boom. 

We’ve seen the economy boom. And when these guys took 

over, the economy was booming, building, and money in the 

bank. Now we’re seeing that the economy is levelling off. It’s 

levelling off, and it’s going to start to drop, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

What happens there is these guys, they know that they’re 

messing up the economy. We know they’re messing up the 

economy. So they try and do a compromise. They tell these 

companies, please don’t go back to Alberta because they 

announced that their royalty challenge is over with. So we 

might all head out to Alberta again. How about if we 

compromise on the environmental regulations? How does that 

sound? How does that sound, Mr. Speaker? I think that’s the 

deal attached to Bill 122. We’ll give you a good screening 

process. We’ll diminish the regulations and the rules. And 

please don’t go back to Alberta. Stay here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you’re on your hands and knees to 

have people stay with you, that’s not leadership. That’s not 

leadership. And that’s why about the only thing of significance 

. . . And that’s why you announce the provincial toilet 

replacement rebate program. Because really you had nothing 

else. They had nothing else on the agenda. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at the whole notion. This is another 

good one and I mentioned it earlier: 

 

A regulation will be required to establish what kinds of 

developments may be subject to class assessment. Our 

intention would be to seek advice from industry and other 

stakeholders about what sectors of the economy might 

benefit from a class assessment approach. 

 

So they’re saying, they’re saying, okay we’ll have a class 

assessment process and we can make sure that once we look at 

a project, if it fits all the criteria, then every other project that 

fits under that criteria, we’ll treat them the same to streamline 

regulation. And so we say, okay — great. So who do they ask 

for advice? Not the professionals within SERM [Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management]. They don’t ask them 

that. They don’t ask their provincial counterparts. They don’t 

ask them that. They don’t ask their federal counterparts. They 

don’t ask the environmental movement. Who do they ask? They 

ask the people to do the class assessment of their industry. 

 

So if that isn’t evidence enough to the Sask Party and their 

caucus that you’re being played here, then you ought to wake 

up and read what your Bills are being . . . what’s being said 

about your Bills. You’re not only asking for a screening process 

. . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I’ve been listening to 

the member speak now for about 14 minutes. This is the third 

time I’ve had to remind him about the rule about addressing his 

language to the Speaker and through the Speaker. I would 

appreciate if the member from Athabasca would pay attention 

to the rules of the House. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things 

that people ought to be worried about, ought to be worried 

about, is all Saskatchewan ought to be worried about, is when 

you propose, when you propose shortcuts like this, of this 

magnitude on the environmental front, and not only do you 

propose shortcuts but you’re also allowing class assessment 

processes where all projects within a certain class have a free 

ride, you are creating some significant challenges for the 

environment. You’ve got to get it through a lot of people’s head 

that we are creating a significant shortcut and a significant 

problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that I was really amazed at the last 

couple of years, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that people were 

saying, look, we like Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is a great 

province to live. It’s a great province to raise your family. It’s a 

good province. We’ve seen oil wells that were just booming 

when the NDP were in power. We were seeing profits coming 

in. People were working. The environment are being taken care 

of — all these great things. And when the people of 

Saskatchewan were asked, do you want to be like Alberta? And 

the answer, the resounding answer was, no way, José. That was 

the resounding answer. Why? Because we want to separate 

ourselves from Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

We want to separate ourselves from Alberta as a province or 

say, look, we’re not just about profit, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 

just about profit. We want to see the environment protected. We 

want to see a diversified economy. We want to see social 

programs enhanced. We want to see rural and northern 

Saskatchewan build. We want to see all these good things. 

People of Saskatchewan had a good plan for themselves and a 

good vision and they had a good attitude about themselves, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now what these guys done across the way is their political 

puppet masters in Alberta said, hey you guys, hey you guys, 

you’re a new government; we want some shortcuts. We want a 

bunch of shortcuts that we can, we can . . . we sure use to make 

more money for us. And if we make more money for us, guess 

what? That money’s not staying in Saskatchewan; it is being 

taken out. It is being taken out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now wouldn’t you think that if oil is being taken out of 

Saskatchewan that you should do a number of things. First 

make some money off it because it does belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The second thing you should do is make sure as 

many people are working for as long as you can. That’s pretty 

darn important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the third but equally important thing is, don’t ruin the 

environment — that includes our land and our water and our 

forests and our air — in the process of extracting Saskatchewan 

resources, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they said. That’s what they 

said, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we’ve got to be different, 

we’ve got to be different than Alberta. That’s what the people 

of Saskatchewan said. 

 

And this Bill, when I look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, it is doing 

exactly opposite of what the people of Saskatchewan want. 

They don’t want companies dictating how to set up a screening 

process. They don’t want companies determining which 

projects are eligible to be considered a class project with other 

projects. They don’t want to see buzzwords, buzzwords like 

readiness for economic growth, trying . . . [inaudible] . . . of 

shortcuts, a bunch of shortcuts on the environmental standards, 

Mr. Speaker. That is not what they want. That is not what they 

want. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I go along and I make all these points time and 

time again to this minister. And I’m putting the Saskatchewan 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4455 

Party on notice that we are watching you very closely. And 

every bit of action that you undertake, whether it’s your 

provincial toilet replacement program or whether it is language 

on this Bill, we are going to watch exactly what you’re doing 

and what you’re trying to do to ensure that you’re trying to 

circumvent . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I would remind the 

member from Athabasca that this is the final time I will address 

this issue. You speak to the Chair, direct your language to the 

Chair and through the Chair. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Could I have leave to introduce guests, please? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? Sorry. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — To introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed a pleasure to rise tonight to introduce a friend to this 

House. Many of us know Graham Addley, sitting behind the bar 

back here, a former member for Saskatoon Sutherland who in 

fact actually occupied a chair along with many of us in the 

House, and the Deputy Speaker’s Chair. And I think he’s added 

an awful lot to his time here in the legislature. 

 

Graham now has taken on a new position. He’s working with 

the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan. He’s the 

director of admissions programs. And I know he’ll bring an 

awful lot to those folks. He’s got an awful lot of experience 

dealing with health care and health care policy and he knows 

how to motivate people. 

 

So I would ask all members here to give Graham a warm 

welcome, as he is part of us. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I’m not sure of 

convention, but I’d like to join the member from Saskatoon 

Centre in welcoming Mr. Addley back to the House. I think our 

relationship goes back eight or nine years. We’ve had good 

relationships and friendship develop in the intervening years. 

And I appreciate seeing him back in Canada actually, after his 

extended stay in the great country of Australia. So welcome 

back, Mr. Addley. 

 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to point out again, as I have over the evening, is that I want to 

go back to Fort McMurray, Mr. Speaker. And for brevity’s sake 

I’m going to use the word Fort Mac. Now when I travel out to 

Fort Mac, Mr. Speaker, as we head west . . . And you can 

picture this. It talks a lot about the environmental challenges 

that Saskatchewan faced. As you head west from Buffalo 

Narrows, what you’re leaving behind is you’re leaving behind 

lakes and rivers and streams. Because the land in northern 

Saskatchewan is very, very beautiful, Mr. Speaker. Beautiful 

land. You see the lakes and the rivers and the steams. You see 

the wildlife. You see the forests. You see everything there — 

just a beautiful piece of land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as you head into Fort McMurray you come up to some 

rolling hills. And there’s a lot less water, Mr. Speaker, around 

Fort McMurray. There’s a lot less water. So as you come along 

to Fort McMurray and you begin to see some of the 

environmental challenges of the northern part of Fort 

McMurray, some of the environmental challenges that are 

occurring . . . You don’t see it in the town, nor do you see it as 

you head into the community. But it’s further north, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as you look at some of the challenges that they face . . . 

And rest assured a lot of people know that, a lot of people know 

what’s going on. And we are not against development of our 

resources. Don’t get us wrong. This former NDP government 

built a big economy and a growing economy and a booming 

economy. Those guys messed it up, Mr. Speaker. And as we’re 

building this economy, not once in our language did we say, 

let’s compromise on the environmental regulations. Absolutely 

not. Absolutely not. 

 

So if you want evidence, and you want an example of 

environmental degradation, go north to Fort McMurray and you 

will see what I’m talking about when I tell the people in that 

government that they ought to be a bit more wise about some of 

the challenges when they talk about environmental shortcuts. 

You can’t be that desperate to keep companies here if you’re 

going to compromise on environmental protection and 

environmental standards. You ought not to be that desperate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I point out again, as you head west and as 

you come to Fort McMurray, it’s nestled amongst a bunch of 

large hills. And as you travel there, the community’s bustling 

and moving and everything’s going along quite well. And 

hidden from all that of course, as you head further north, that’s 

where you see a lot of the activity. Which we did. Which we 

did. And courtesy of some of the oil and gas companies we 

toured some of the sights. We went out to see what they were 

doing, and we could see, well the economy was booming. 

Things were going great. People were working, but there was 

still some environmental issues that had to be addressed. 

Anybody travelling there could determine that and could see 

that, in spades. 

 

So as we sit there and we look around as guests, and we learn 

and we ask questions and we look at all these things, one thing 



4456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

that was kind of amazing is the companies actually wanted to 

do more for the environment than what they were required to 

do, Mr. Speaker. They want to do more for the environment 

than what they were required to do. And all they needed was a 

little bit of leadership, Mr. Speaker, a little bit of leadership and 

co-operation and partnership. Very simple. Partnership. Bring 

them into the tent and let’s start talking about these issues. 

 

Now as you go further north — and I made this point earlier, 

and I don’t think many of the members across the way heard 

some of the points that I raised — and as you head further north 

and you hit Fort Chip. And there’s a lot of environmental 

challenges in the Fort McMurray area, but as you head further 

north, and this is my point, if we don’t learn lessons from 

Alberta on proper oil and gas development with some good 

environmental rules and regulations, we are doomed to repeat 

what they are doing wrong, Mr. Speaker. We are doomed to 

repeat what they’re doing wrong, and we shouldn’t do it. 

 

We shouldn’t do it, because further north of Fort Mac is a 

community called Fort Chip. And Fort Chip is mainly made up 

of Aboriginal people. They are very proud people. And they 

live on a beautiful area. And I visited Fort Chip, and as I 

mentioned, I learned a lot about what they do in the community. 

And I can see some of the environmental challenges even in 

Fort Chip even though it’s a number of miles away. 

 

And although they’re trying to embrace development, they are 

trying to embrace development, many of the leaders in that 

particular community said, and I said it earlier and I’m going to 

say again, they’ve seen a remarkable increase in the cancers in 

their community and they can’t figure out why. They can’t 

figure out why. And some people are pointing to the Fort 

McMurray expansion and they’re saying, we believe it is 

caused by that operation not following proper rules and 

environmental regulations. We believe that. And so we say well 

if you believe that, and you’ve been talking about that, why 

aren’t you guys fighting? Why aren’t you guys bringing these 

issues forward? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because they say nobody believes us, and 

nobody’s fighting for us. Nobody’s listening to our concerns as 

we have the cancer rates in our community soar. Nobody seems 

to care. That was the message that I heard. Now where in this 

world would you get a government not caring about a 

community? For the single most pressing issue on their plate is 

to make profit, not care for a population, a people that are 

getting sick and dying from a number of cancers that spiked in 

the years before when this development occurred. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the point I’m 

raising in reference to Bill 122. And again the member from 

Cannington can bellow again from his seat. We’re not taking 

any environmental advice from that party or that member, Mr. 

Speaker, because their message, their message and what they 

have practised in that right wing agenda — don’t care for 

people and don’t care for the environment, Mr. Speaker. They 

never have and they never will. And no matter how much he 

bellows from his chair, no thanks to your advice. We’ll develop 

our own policy and procedure when it comes to the 

environmental regulations. 

 

So go back to the point, Mr. Speaker, in Fort Chip. In Fort 

Chip, young people are having cancers. Some of the 

middle-aged people, the older people are having these cancers. 

So they want to do an inquiry. They want to see if there’s a 

connect between what’s going on in their community and 

what’s happening further south of them in the Fort Mac area. 

 

Is anybody doing that work for them? Do they have the 

resources to do that work for them? Absolutely not. Do they 

have the recognition for that? Absolutely not. Do they have any 

mitigating environmental work being done to further protect 

their health? Absolutely not. And the reason why it’s no, no, no, 

Mr. Speaker, because they had a government in place at the 

time that did not care about their issues and actually lessened 

the environmental rules that were in place to do exactly that — 

protect the environment and the health of all animals and 

mammals, including humanity, Mr. Speaker. They never did it. 

 

And now today we’re seeing the same puppet masters control 

that government across the way through Bills like this that 

actually lessen their environmental regulation and authority to 

make a big difference in the people’s lives in Saskatchewan. 

Now which area is next? Which area is next to suffer from a 

government that is leaderless, is rudderless, and doesn’t want to 

take on the oil companies? Which community is next? If they’re 

coming to Saskatchewan, we say welcome to them. But there’s 

a responsibility, unlike Alberta, when you come to this 

province. 

 

And this province of Saskatchewan wants to have 

environmental protection. They want to make sure they have a 

process that the public understand, and they want to make sure 

they have a government that’ll not only protect their 

environment but protect the health of their children, their elders, 

and their people, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t see any evidence of 

that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. None whatsoever. 

 

So again I go back to my point. After you visit the area and you 

hear some of the challenges and the problem, and you say, my 

goodness, like who is going to help you guys out here? Who is 

going to do this work? And then we come back to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, after you finish the tour. We do the 

Fort Mac trip, and we learned so much. We hear the plight. We 

hear the issues. We hear the challenges. We see all that. And as 

you come back into Saskatchewan — and this is why it’s so 

very important for the people to understand — as you come 

back to Saskatchewan of course you’re heading east. And as the 

sun sets . . . 

 

[22:00] 

 

An Hon. Member: — In the east. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Right. You can actually see . . . That’s one 

thing you got right in the number of years he’s been in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can see the Earth and you can see the curvature of the 

Earth. And you can actually see the lakes just like shimmering 

like a bunch of diamonds in Saskatchewan. These are the 

northern Saskatchewan lakes. They’re shimmering with life. 

They’re shimmering with beauty and, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

awesome sight to come back from Saskatchewan by aircraft 

from a visit from Fort McMurray for a number of reasons. 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4457 

The first reason is we have an abundance of water in northern 

Saskatchewan. There are many lakes, rivers, and streams, and 

life is going good. And the second thing is we say to ourselves, 

well thank goodness we don’t have the environmental 

regulations that those guys have because we have this to 

protect. And, Mr. Speaker, it really gives you an awesome 

feeling when you come home to Saskatchewan for seeing that. 

 

So it leads me to my other point in relation to the weakness of 

Bill 122. When you diminish the regulatory power of a 

government just for the simple profit of trying to keep, a 

desperate government trying to keep the oil companies here, 

what you are doing is you’re compromising the future of our 

children and our grandchildren. So as you come into 

Saskatchewan, see all these beautiful lakes, more so than ever 

do you have a responsibility to protect that land because it has 

much more ecosystem challenges when you put oil and gas in 

that area than what you do in Alberta with less lakes. You have 

a more responsible position that you should take and ought to 

take and, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 122 doesn’t do justice to what 

our environment has and what our ecosystems have in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look at the whole point, the whole point 

being raised. And I think to myself if these guys, this 

government is insisting on diminishing the Minister of the 

Environment’s role, why do they always talk about 

environmental efforts? Why is it they always talk about that? 

Don’t they get the message that you don’t own the land today? 

And the old phrase, you’re simply borrowing that from your 

grandchild. You are simply borrowing that land from your 

grandchild. 

 

And if they don’t have that visionary, futuristic look at the 

environment, then they ought not to be government, Mr. 

Speaker. They ought not to be government, Mr. Speaker, 

because if they think they can diminish the environmental 

standards and the environmental vision that the people of 

Saskatchewan have, they’ve got another think coming, Mr. 

Speaker, they have another think coming because that’s not on. 

That’s not on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other point I would raise, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

problem they have when they don’t look after the environment 

right, they’re taking all these shortcuts to keep the oil 

companies here, is because they’ve mismanaged the money of 

Saskatchewan already. They have mismanaged this province’s 

finances from day one — day one. They didn’t know what they 

were doing then, and they still don’t have a clue now. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the resulting effect. And I’ll give you 

the analogy I would use. I drive an old car, and I change oil in 

that car pretty steady because I want the car to run smooth. And 

then suppose I go and buy my wife a fur jacket. I don’t have 

enough money to change oil in that car, and guess what? The 

car degrades more because of poor oil. Now what’s happening 

with the Saskatchewan Party is much the same. 

 

They’re running out of money, so they’ve got to compromise 

somewhere because they bought themselves a fur coat called 

the NDP surplus, and they spent that money. So as they have no 

money to do these things, then what they’re going to do is 

compromise on a number of things. They are not changing oil 

in that car like I should. 

 

They are simply reducing regulations, and the puppet masters 

from Alberta that control that party over there . . . And despite 

all the backbenchers’ howls and arguments, they don’t have a 

clue what’s going on. They’re mere passengers on that Tory 

bus. But they are simply being driven, the agenda is being 

driven by their political masters in Alberta at Saskatchewan’s 

environmental expense. That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s the problem. 

 

And we New Democrats say, yes, we want the resources to be 

developed. But as our leader says, as our leader says, there’s a 

number of things. You want to have investment from the 

business sector, from government. We want to have . . . make 

sure we get the working people that are working, the strong 

labour movement, you want to make sure they’re strengthened. 

And he also said, environmental protection. And those are three 

fundamental things that these guys across the way don’t get 

right, Mr. Speaker. They don’t understand. There are building 

blocks. 

 

Now I tell people, you contrast what our leader has said in 

terms of building the economy and how it connects with the 

environment, and contrast his work throughout the world and 

contrast his experience throughout the world, even working 

with an oil company like Nexen. And you do all the analysis, 

and you compare it to their leader, a member from Swift 

Current. And there is no comparison, Mr. Speaker, because 

there’s never been any job experience worthwhile mentioning 

from the leader of that party versus the leader of this New 

Democratic caucus, Mr. Speaker — none whatsoever. 

 

For any day of the week, Mr. Speaker, if it’s on the economy, if 

it’s on attracting investment, or of it being responsible on the 

environmental front, I would pick my leader against their leader 

in a split second, Mr. Speaker, because that’s exactly what’s 

going to happen. That’s exactly what’s going to happen when 

you have an inexperienced leader given a huge surplus and a 

booming economy. We said, they’ll blow the money and they’ll 

go downhill. The economy will flow and they’ll start 

compromising. Then they’ll start hiding debt. 

 

And we can see it on this side. And attachment to Bill 122 is 

one of those steps that you’re taking, Mr. Speaker, as you have 

compromised the environmental integrity as well as the 

financial integrity of this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that these guys don’t know what 

they’re doing. Every single Bill that they bring forward, they do 

not know what they’re doing because they’re not in control of 

the agenda. Their inexperience is allowing the puppet masters 

from Alberta to twist them any which way they want. 

 

And I think that our party and our leader is going to say, hold it 

guys. Time out. We’ve got a new act in this province and that 

new act is coming in 2011, and the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to help us achieve that, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to 

help us achieve that because of this government’s recklessness 

with our money and certainly with their ignorance of some of 

the environmental rules and regulations that should be 

protected, not simply taken away, Mr. Speaker, in a desperate 

effort to keep the oil companies working in Saskatchewan. 



4458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

We want them working here, Mr. Speaker. Don’t get us wrong. 

We want them working here. And we invited them here. We set 

up the stage for them to be here, and they came in record 

numbers, Mr. Speaker. And they’re doing well. But the moment 

that that party came into place, the first thing that they threw out 

was environmental integrity — very first thing that they threw 

out. And you don’t think that’s one of the building blocks of a 

province, is to make sure that you protect the environment? 

Isn’t that important to you? 

 

And this Bill by the minister, that she’s brought forward, talks 

about circumventing all the rules and regulations — all of them. 

And who is going to do the design of these rules and 

regulations, Mr. Speaker? It’s going to be industry. It’s going to 

be industry. My goodness, like don’t they have this figured out, 

that you can’t simply transfer that strength that Saskatchewan 

has and say, here you guys figure it out. We’re willing to throw 

that out as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I look at some of the notions of this 

particular party and what is being attached, attached to this 

particular Bill, I say the people of Saskatchewan don’t want this 

Bill. They don’t want this Bill. They don’t want this leader, Mr. 

Speaker, and they don’t want that party, the damage they have 

done, the damage they have done. And if they think for one 

second, for one second trying to get industry to do their work is 

going to help them out of the slide downhill, Mr. Speaker, the 

answer is absolutely not. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, the environmental movement, 

even industry knows that these guys are making a huge mistake. 

And if you don’t think they are going to take advantage of their 

inexperience, they will take advantage of their inexperience. 

And who will pay? The people of Saskatchewan will pay. So 

I’m telling that minister to withdraw some of the provisions and 

the powers that she has given to companies at the cost of the 

Saskatchewan people. She ought to withdraw that. 

 

Because what’s happening here as I’ve said at the outset, this 

particular party, they’re after killing the unions. They’re after 

killing the Crowns. They want to kill the social causes. And the 

thing that’s important with this particular Bill is they want to, 

they want to kill environmental regulations and monitoring of 

our environment. Why, Mr. Speaker, why? Why would they do 

that? If they kill those four particular areas that I speak about 

tonight, and what happens? It gives them free money, free reign 

to do what they want and all these causes will be lost. 

 

But there’s one small problem, Mr. Speaker, one small problem, 

and that there’s this process called elections. That’s the 

problem. And everywhere we go in this province — and there 

are 20 caucus members strong here and 15,000 members within 

our party — we are telling people everywhere we go not only 

have they mismanaged our money; they’ve mismanaged our 

future. And they have destroyed or are destroying our 

environment, and they’re killing off the Crowns. And they’re 

killing off the Crowns. 

 

And they can say, well how about, how about if, how about we 

do an analysis of their leader against our leader? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I see in our leader a businessman that was successful. I 

see a farmer that is successful. I see a person that is from 

Saskatchewan that is successful. I’ve seen a person that has 

travelled throughout the world and done many wonderful things 

with many governments. I see an experienced leader. I see a 

leader that has a resumé that would make their leader blush. 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, above all else, I see success 

and the winning attitude in our leader when it comes to 

environmental protection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when he becomes premier in 2011, we’re going to provide 

that leadership on the environment, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 

important message. But these guys don’t get it. The backbench 

doesn’t get it. Do you know why they don’t get it, Mr. Speaker? 

Because they aren’t even reading their own Act. They aren’t 

even reading their own legislative agenda. Do you know why? 

Because they’re in the dark because the front row is saying to 

them, you are in the dark because you don’t deserve to know. 

That’s why you’re in the backbench. 

 

And I hear the member from Moose Jaw North, Moose Jaw 

North. He bellows from his chair every few minutes, and he 

mutters out eight words. Every few weeks you hear him 

muttering out eight words. I don’t know what these words are, 

but by my count . . . First of all, I’m not sure where exactly he’s 

. . . [inaudible] . . . never hear him. But the eight words he 

mutters out, I figured it out: we’re paying that guy 10,000 a 

word. We’re paying him $10,000 a word to come from Moose 

Jaw to sit way the heck up there in the backbench and mutter 

eight words every eight weeks. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty 

expensive proposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling the backbench, wake up. Wake up. 

Don’t just be given a sheet, don’t be given a sheet and say, this 

is what you’ll say to the media, and this is what you’ll say to 

your reporters. This is what you say to your constituents, and 

this is what you say to the papers. You don’t just say that. 

 

In this particular party, within the NDP caucus, we have the 

ability to debate each other, and there are many good debates, 

Mr. Speaker, many good debates. And this environmental Bill 

would never pass under our government, Mr. Speaker, never 

ever, ever pass. Why? Why? Because it is a piece of junk, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out to the people throughout 

Saskatchewanland one thing: that it’s not the finances of the 

province that these guys are messing up. It is now they’re 

compromising the environmental quality that Saskatchewan 

once enjoyed. And that’s a huge, huge shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this minister, by giving the powers that she has presented 

in this document — to give the powers of screening to herself, 

giving the power to screen herself or giving the power of these 

companies to determine whether they fit amongst a certain 

class, they could avoid the screening process — well that’s not 

what Alberta’s doing. They’re doing this even at a worse pace 

and with less regulations. And that government over there has 

got the Alberta envy. They want to be like Alberta, they say. 

Well the Saskatchewan people are saying, no way; we don’t 

want that. We don’t want that. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, for a fact, that the future of Fort 

Chip in northern Alberta, if left unchecked, is going to be 

affecting Saskatchewan soon. And that area of northern 

Saskatchewan with the lakes, with the rivers, with the streams, 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4459 

with the animals, with the healthy forests, it is now being 

impacted by the Fort McMurray activity — acid rain. You 

travel some of these areas near the border; you can begin to see 

the effects. And what is this government doing, Mr. Speaker? 

What’s their priority? Their priority is the provincial toilet 

replacement rebate program was extended. It was extended. 

And that’s about the style of leadership that we can expect from 

this minister and that party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[22:15] 

 

So I’m telling the backbench, the backbenchers of that party, 

including that eight-word wonder from Moose Jaw North, that 

you ought to stand up in your place as our duly elected MLAs 

and say, no we don’t want to see our environmental regulations 

lessened. No, we’re not going to simply stand by and let the 

resources being taken out of our province. No, we’re not going 

to compromise on the future of our children’s land and our 

forests and our lakes and rivers and streams. No, we’re not 

going to let everybody come run roughshod over 

Saskatchewan’s people. They ought to stand up on their feet 

and fight back, fight back with the many people that are saying, 

we shouldn’t do this. We shouldn’t do this. 

 

Now where is it in the book of politics is it written that you 

come from wherever they come from, and you can’t speak? 

You can’t speak. Where is it in the book of politics saying that 

once you’re elected as a right wing member of any government, 

you’re not allowed to think out of the box? What’s out there 

that’s saying, your job is to give away the resources without any 

regard for Saskatchewan? It must be a right wing book of 

politics, Mr. Speaker, because in this party, under this leader, 

there is exciting policy being developed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s some really good debates, Mr. Speaker, but there’s one 

thing very clear. We’ll not compromise on the quality, nor what 

the people of Saskatchewan want. And they want a fair, 

balanced government that protects their interests every single 

day, Mr. Speaker. And that confidence in that particular party is 

dropping pretty fast. It is dropping pretty fast. And the reason 

why it’s dropping fast, Mr. Speaker, is that they don’t have an 

idea what they’re doing. 

 

They’re inexperienced. Their inexperience is just really hurting 

Saskatchewan. And for the minister to come along and saying, 

okay we’re going to lessen these environmental programs 

attached to Bill 122 — again, inexperience. We need leadership. 

We need leadership to assert who the people of Saskatchewan 

are, not what that party’s about, Mr. Speaker. We need to tap 

into what Saskatchewan people are saying. And what people of 

Saskatchewan are saying is, if oil companies want to come here, 

they are welcome. But we also have the environment to protect, 

we’ve got roads to build, and we’ve got a future to be built. And 

you have to be part of that; otherwise you’re not welcome here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the problem that that particular 

minister and that party has had since it got into this office. They 

don’t know what to do. The first year and a half, they’re saying, 

oh my goodness, all this wealth. What do we do with it? Now 

it’s two and a half years later. Show me the money. They don’t 

have it, Mr. Speaker. They blew it. 

 

So next to go, next to go, next to go are the Crowns. Next to go 

are the environmental regulations and rules that we put in place 

to protect this land. Next to go are the unions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, surprising, they have them all on their sights, all on 

their sights. 

 

And I tell the people of Saskatchewan, it’s the people of 

Saskatchewan on Bills like this, on Bill 122 where you weaken 

your environmental rules and regulations, that this is exactly 

what they’re about. This is exactly what they’re doing. They’re 

going to come back. They’re going to finish off Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re going to finish us off. And what’s going 

to happen is we’re going to be a province that’s going to have 

no Crowns, a province that’s going to have no strong unions, a 

province where there’s environmental challenges galore, and a 

problem where nobody wants to come. 

 

That right wing government wants to do that, Mr. Speaker. And 

these Bills are proof. They’re proof that’s exactly what they 

want to do, Mr. Speaker. The list is wide, and I’m going to be 

talking about that over the next several months. And, Mr. 

Speaker, people ought to know. People ought to know that there 

is an alternative, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why this government 

is going to stand up for people. They’re going to fight that right 

wing machine over there that is trying to confuse people and 

hurt people. And they can do it in many, many ways such as 

this Act, Mr. Speaker, such as this Act. 

 

And I say today, shame on them. Shame on them. And shame 

on them because the people of Saskatchewan watch this 

channel. They listen to what’s going on, and they will not be 

confused. They will not be confused. 

 

And us on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we look at 

this Bill and we say to ourselves, where has the gumption gone 

from the backbench? Where has the gumption gone from the 

backbench? They are simply not a factor in this Assembly, not a 

factor in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been almost 15 

years that I’ve been in this Assembly, and in those 15 years, I 

was not once told by my party or by my leader or by anybody 

on this side what to think and how to think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re a party that’s on the move. We have our debates but we 

also have our principles. So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this 

whole notion, we are going to defend the Crowns. We’re going 

to defend the Crowns because that battle is coming up. That 

battle is coming up. These guys have privatized so many 

components of the Crowns and they had told the people they 

wouldn’t do it. One strike against them. 

 

They said they wouldn’t bring in essential services. They 

brought it in, Mr. Speaker. And they said they would run a 

balanced government. Well that’s gone out the window. And 

now, Mr. Speaker, environmental integrity and protection of the 

environment with this Act, and how the minister has positioned 

oil companies over professionals that work for this government, 

that is also gone. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I warn the people of Saskatchewan. I warn 

the people of Saskatchewan that you’ve got to really watch 

what goes on. You’ve got to really watch what goes on because 

across the way there, those are not centre people. Those are not 

Liberals. The Liberals have been given an assignment that gets 

them all the grief. It’s the Tories over there that are in charge. 



4460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

And the worst part about it — it’s not the Tories over there, it’s 

the Tories over there in Alberta. They’re in charge, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I ask the backbench, where have the Liberals gone? Where 

have the fair-minded people gone? Where have the centre 

people gone? Where have they gone? All I see over there are 

Tories, Mr. Speaker. And I go on to my point, and I’ve made it 

time and time again. I hear a number of people yipping and 

yapping . . . And somebody asked me my opinion the other day 

of the MLA from Meadow Lake. I said just a tiny Tory. The 

fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what he is. 

 

They’re not protecting the environment, they’re not protecting 

our land, they’re not protecting our people. And a lot of the 

Aboriginal people in the North know it and they aren’t ever 

going to forget it, Mr. Speaker. They won’t forget it. The 

damage that could be caused by this party is reckless. It is 

reckless and the people of Saskatchewan are going to make 

them pay. We have not even begun the fight. That fight is 

coming very quick. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan ought to know 

every Bill — every Bill that they bring forward, including Bill 

122 — no matter how benign they make it appear, we know 

there are ulterior motives to their language. We know that there 

are ulterior motives that don’t protect the people of 

Saskatchewan’s interest when they use language that they’ve 

used in this Assembly. 

 

And why do we know? It’s what they do. That’s what they do. 

Why do we know is their puppet masters live in Alberta where 

the same thing is happening. And that’s why I tell people this is 

not just about economic justice or social justice. It’s also about 

environmental justice as well. You ought to take those aspects 

that you talk about and really practise what you preach, practise 

what you preach. Instead of trying to be cute with the wording, 

practise what you preach. Practise what people of Saskatchewan 

have sent you to do here, is to fight for them and their issues in 

your areas. 

 

Stop muzzling your backbench and stop making them irrelevant 

in this Assembly. Because every person that occupies benches 

on this side of the House, or if they’re on that side of the House 

when we’re in government, we are never irrelevant in the 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, never ever irrelevant. We are always 

relevant, Mr. Speaker, always. 

 

So I point out to the backbench there, come on. You know, get 

up, stand up. Instead of uttering eight words every two weeks, 

why don’t you utter these words. Why don’t you say, my 

goodness, I hope our environmental stewardship isn’t the same 

model as our financial stewardship. And I’m afraid, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the same model that’s out there. 

 

Every day I pray, Mr. Speaker, I pray every day, please don’t 

mess up things any further, you guys because somebody has to 

come and clean up your mess eventually. And the more advice 

you’re given to not do it, the less work we have to do cleaning 

up and the more work we have to do building up Saskatchewan 

in 2011 and beyond, Mr. Speaker. The less time that you’re in 

crisis management mode when we assume government in 2011, 

the more you can build that brave, bold, new economy, Mr. 

Speaker, that has Crowns, unions, and the environment as part 

of the pillars of building this economy for a lasting 

Saskatchewan future that our grandkids could be proud of, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again, as I mentioned at the outset to the backbenchers: 

please speak up in your caucus. Because my goodness, people 

want you to speak up in your caucus. And if you can’t speak up, 

then step aside because we will stand up for the people of 

Saskatchewan to speak what needs to be spoken and to say the 

words that need to be told, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would point out to all the people that are listening: 

one Bill, two or three amendments. And they think we’re not 

going to be a tough opposition and fight them every inch of the 

way and have this winning spirit developed on this side with an 

experienced, better leader than theirs and with a better plan, a 

better vision. That to me translates into a bigger, better, stronger 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we will never, ever, 

ever quit, Mr. Speaker. We will continue fighting for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to ask my members to applaud the provincial toilet 

replacement rebate program. Hey, you know, they’re trying. 

They’re trying. But my goodness, maybe it’s time, maybe it’s 

time they got with the program. 

 

So I think it’s really important that I end on these two notes. 

The point that I would end on, Mr. Speaker, is that Bill No. 122, 

An Act to amend The Environmental Assessment Act and to 

make a consequential amendment to The Forest Resources 

Management Act is not worth the paper it’s written on. I’ve said 

it to the minister about every single Bill that she has presented. 

And the reason why I am telling the people that is because they 

have taken words that we think intend to do a certain thing but 

they have no intention. So don’t let them pull the wool over 

your eyes because that’s not what Saskatchewan people are 

about. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what is really worrisome to us, 

is the sneaky style of wordsmithing that this government is so 

fond of doing to try and pull the wool over Saskatchewan 

people’s eyes. 

 

And the second point I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 

a leader that extols the virtues of the union movement, of a 

strong Crown sector, of inviting businesses to be part of the 

booming growing economy, but also speaks about the balance 

with the environment. And that’s something that’s really key, 

Mr. Speaker. And you put the agenda, you put the vision, you 

put the plan and, importantly, you put the resumé of my leader 

against their leader and, Mr. Speaker, you will see, you will see 

that in 2011 the people of Saskatchewan will have a clear 

choice, a very clear choice, and a choice that is radically 

different. And I think that in 2011 that choice will be elect him 

as premier and the New Democratic Party as our government. 

And then you’re going to see action on the environment to 

make sure it continues building up this great province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to close on that note. I think it’s 

important that people are going to be expressing this opinion as 

we go along. I know that people want to know more about this 

Bill, hear more about this Bill, hear many of the other stories 

about this Bill. And the list goes on about some of the problems 

with this Bill. I think it’s very, very important and people ought 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4461 

to be, ought to be paying attention to what these guys are doing. 

 

We cleaned up one mess in 1991, and it took us 16 years to 

clean up that mess. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they used the 

phrase, 16 years as their time frame because they do not want to 

go pre-1991, because that’s where this province took a huge 

backwards step and went into deficit and destroyed the 

environment. And it’s the same people that occupy those chairs 

that occupy these chairs today. And it’s time to get rid of them, 

I say. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It now being 10:30 

p.m., this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4433 

 Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4435 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4440 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4446 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4455 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


