




















































Hansard: April 15, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 15, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4849 

 April 15, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, it gives me great pleasure to introduce 57 

grade 5 and 6 students from l’École Française de Saskatoon. 

This school is in my constituency. And actually I grew up a 

block away from this school, and my parents still live there. 

 

And I’d like to introduce to you also their two teachers: Jennifer 

Chevrier, who I understand is a former youth parliamentarian 

— so I’m always happy to hear when teachers have a strong 

interest in politics — and Janelle Yasinski. 

 

And the chaperones who are here today are Martha 

Smith-Norris, Carina Org-Scutchings, Jennifer Falkowsky 

who’s been a long-time . . . Jennifer and I have known each 

other since our girls were born actually, 12 years ago; Taylor 

Dubiel and Barb McCullough, who I had the pleasure of sitting 

on the school’s parent board together. 

 

I also actually have one very special introduction. My own 

daughter, Hennessey Chartier-Ford is in grade 6 and normally 

doesn’t like having attention pointed out to her. But I have to do 

it. I can see I’m getting the evil eye from her right now. 

Hennessey, can you give us all a little wave? So I’d like us all 

to welcome them to their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

the member opposite. It’s my great pleasure to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the honourable Assembly a 

group of inspiring young people assembled in the gallery today. 

And they’re from grades 5 and 6 from the Saskatoon French 

School. 

 

Monsieur le Président, je vous présent à vous et par votre 

entremise aux autres membres de l’Assemblée législative les 

classes de 5e et 6e année de l’École Française de Saskatoon, et 

je souhait la bienvenue à leurs enseignantes, Mme. Yasinski et 

Mme. Chevrier, et aux parents qui ont pu les joindre. 

 

De plus, je vous présent mon épouse, Dr. Martha Smith-Norris, 

et ma merveilleuse fille, Jacqueline. Merci, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly the 

grade 5 and 6 classes from l’École Française de Saskatoon, and 

I welcome their teachers, Ms. Yasinski and Ms. Chevrier, and 

the parents who were able to join them. 

 

Also, I would like to introduce my wife, Dr. Martha 

Smith-Norris, and my marvellous daughter, Jacqueline. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

I ask all members to indulge me and welcome all of them to 

their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t claim a family 

connection to the group of students in the east gallery, but I 

would like to say hello to a very special constituent. And that’s 

Nadia Ristau, who is in the group. And Nadia is a constituent of 

Saskatoon Massey Place, and not surprisingly lives with her 

parents. And her grandparents also live in Saskatoon Massey 

Place, and they’re a great family, do a lot of really important 

work in our community. So I just wanted to say a special hello 

to Nadia, and I ask all members to join me in welcoming her to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier, the member 

from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce two people. They’re 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll introduce 

the gentleman first. Trevor Roadhouse probably needs no 

introduction to many people in Regina, as he’s been a long-time 

resident of Regina and now is a successful entrepreneur with a 

business of his own here in Regina. 

 

But the young lady accompanying him is Aleana Young. 

Aleana is from Montreal, is a graduate student in Montreal, and 

this is her first visit to Saskatchewan. And I know that she’ll 

have a chance to see the national program of the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] barracks and the training that will go 

on there. And I’m sure she’ll enjoy that visit this afternoon here 

in Regina. So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

Trevor and Aleana Young — for the first time, Aleana, to the 

province. And I hope you enjoy your stay. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about the safety of our highways. This particular 

petition applies to Highway No. 10 from Fort Qu’Appelle to the 

junction of No. 1. The petition states that this highway is a 

major thoroughfare for year-round tourist destinations, as well 

as this highway serves three major inland grain terminals and is 

also a major artery of commerce to the northeastern part of 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer goes as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 



4850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

of Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Regina, and Indian Head, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

petition in support of maintaining educational assistants in the 

province of Saskatchewan. As members will know, in 

November of 2009 the Ministry of Education revealed a 

document that proposes to replace a large number of 

educational assistants with a much smaller number of 

professionals. And people in rural Saskatchewan don’t see this 

as being very practical because they don’t have access to these 

professionals on a regular basis and believe it’s no substitute for 

the loss of in-class support. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain the 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Gull 

Lake, Webb, Maple Creek, Regina, Balcarres, and Fort 

Qu’Appelle. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With a 

waiting list of almost one full year for our seniors, it is 

appalling. I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a call on the Sask Party government 

to have its actions match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition with respect to expanding the graduate 

retention program. The petition is being circulated by students 

and citizens around Saskatchewan because the Saskatchewan 

Party government amended the retention program specifically 

to exclude master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduates 

and graduates from outside the province of Saskatchewan. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Regina and Beaubier. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on the Sask Party’s lack of 

action with respect to climate change: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

undertake immediate actions to mitigate climate change by 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, actions which will 

serve to protect Saskatchewan people from the significant 

costs to our economy, global security, and the quality of 

life which climate change threatens to bring about, and to 

also protect Saskatchewan people from longer and more 

frequent droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers 

which feed our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more 

frequent and more serious flooding, and loss of at least the 

southern part of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest 

which is treasured by so many in our province; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation and substantial and meaningful regulations, to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4851 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made this serious and significant commitment 

was serving as the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, to reduce our province’s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent from the levels of greenhouse gas 

emissions which our province produced in the year 2007 

and to meet said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions by the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from 

now or one short decade away; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring the 

Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set about 

the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties to actually address 

this critically important issue which will directly affect our 

province’s economy and the quality of life for all our 

residents; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan adapt to current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptation; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a well-known fact that the existing construction industry 

labour relations Act, 1992 has provided a stable environment 

for labour relations in the construction industry in the province. 

The results of this are a benefit to the entire province in terms of 

quality of work, safe construction work sites, and these benefit 

all the people of the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009, which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Rouleau, Estevan, 

Moose Jaw, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of 

eliminating poverty in Saskatchewan. The petitioners note that 

freedom from poverty is an enshrined human right by the 

United Nations, and that all citizens are entitled to social and 

economic security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford and the towns of Wilkie and Cut Knife. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s lack of regard for the human 

rights of the people of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference of the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina and 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 



4852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits and the massive debt 

growth within our province under the Sask Party. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of La Ronge, 

Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m on my feet 

again today to present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan 

film and television industry. And this petition is signed by 

concerned residents who don’t understand why this government 

has let the film and television industry languish the last two 

years and now why they’ve kicked it to the curb with the 

closure of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network]. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

I so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to statements by members, I 

want to respond to a point of order raised yesterday by the 

Government House Leader, who raised a point of order 

regarding the remarks made by the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres yesterday during members’ statements. I reviewed the 

record and I find that the point is well taken and the comments 

are out of order. I’ll address it in a minute. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — We’ll go to Regina Elphinstone-Centre, 

please. 

 

Poltava Ensemble Reunion 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

distinct pleasure to attend the reunion of the Poltava Ensemble 

of Song, Music and Dance on April 11th
 
at the Turvey Centre 

here in Regina. The Poltava Ensemble has a long and storied 

history in this province, dating back to the formation of a 

children’s string orchestra in 1922 in the heritage community of 

Regina here. In the 88 years since that humble beginning, the 

Poltava Ensemble has enthralled thousands of spectators with 

their rousing music and impressive Ukrainian dance routines, 

both around the world or as a perennial highlight of Regina’s 

Mosaic festival. 

 

The reunion featured a gala dinner and fashion show, a 

screening of Poltava highlights from years past, and plenty of 

dancing. Though I did not participate in the perogy eating 

contest nor in the kolomeyka, I would like to assure everyone in 

the Assembly and in the Poltava Ensemble that I’ll do my best 

to be better prepared for the next reunion. 

 

This wonderful event would not have been possible without the 

hard work of Lyle Knobbe and the rest of the reunion 

committee. Gathering Poltava alumni from all parts of the globe 

is no small feat, and I would like to thank them very much for 

their hard work. I’d also like to thank the Poltava Ensemble 

community for making such an important contribution to the 

cultural fabric of Saskatchewan and the life of Saskatchewan. 

This province is more rich and diverse because of the Poltava 

Ensemble. Dyakuyu, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Emergency Telecommunicators Week 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to bring 

to the attention of the members that the week of April 11th to 

17th has been proclaimed Emergency Telecommunicators 

Week in Saskatchewan. This is a national event sponsored by 

the Association of Public-Safety Communications Officials, 

APCO, to honour the professionals who help provide 

emergency assistance to people in our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people save lives every day in Saskatchewan 

by responding to emergency telephone calls, dispatching 

emergency personnel, and helping people in emergencies to 

stay calm and confident that help is on the way. Who are these 

people? They are the 911 operators and other emergency 

service dispatchers from police, fire, and emergency medical 

services who handle emergency calls all over the province. 

 

Today it is my great pleasure to inform the House that 

Saskatchewan’s Telecommunicator of the Year is Luana 

Hiebert with MD Communications in Saskatoon. Luana will 

represent Saskatchewan at a national event later this year. In 

addition I’m also pleased to tell the members gathered that the 

Excellence in Teamwork Award was presented to two 

dispatchers from the Prince Albert Police Service who worked 

on my platoon in the past, Randi Miller and Bonnie Logue. 

Both awards were presented at the eighth annual Emergency 

Telecommunicators Banquet in Moose Jaw on April 14th, last 

night. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in congratulating 

Saskatchewan’s emergency communications professionals. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4853 

National Poetry Month 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure of 

attending at Government House hosted by the Lieutenant 

Governor and the Saskatchewan Writers Guild when there’s a 

celebration of April as National Poetry Month. And we were 

treated to some very interesting use of words by our Poet 

Laureate, Robert Currie, Mari-Lou Rowley from Saskatoon, 

and also Dr. Kathleen Wall, a poet here in Regina. And I think 

all of the people there appreciated the fine skill of the poets as 

they told stories, created images. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was one image in a poem that Robert 

Currie read last night — and I can’t read the whole thing; I 

don’t have enough time — but I want to provide this image. 

“Roger Maris in 1961,” it’s called. It’s a baseball poem and it’s 

about the time when Roger Maris was going to beat Babe 

Ruth’s record. And he had been on a drought, hadn’t hardly got 

a hit for quite a while. 

 

The next day, angry with them and with himself, 

tight, vibrating, a rubber band about to break, 

he digs in at the plate, hears a honking noise, 

looks up and sees hundreds, hundreds 

of Canada geese, the sky alive above the stadium. 

He steps out of the box to stare. The umpire 

straightens, calls time out, and stands 

with Roger, looking up, the two of them 

lost in lines of geese, endless flowing vees, 

long dark necks pointing south, their broad wings 

lifting, light as air as if above 

a silent slough somewhere far in North Dakota. 

When the last goose has vanished in the still Detroit sky, 

Roger steps to the plate, swings at the next pitch, 

lifts it high into the cool autumn air, 

the fifty-seventh homer of his record year. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Cycling Trip to Raise Funds for Children’s Hospital 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

are some people in this world who devote their lives to helping 

others. Wayne Dyck is one of these people and I’m proud to 

share his story with the members here today. Wayne was a 

teacher and administrator in the Saskatoon public school system 

for 32 years and retired five years ago. He was a coach and 

volunteer for many years and was awarded the 2002 Citizen of 

the Year Award for his contributions. 

 

Wayne is a cancer survivor and has done numerous talks about 

his journey with cancer. While undergoing treatment, Wayne 

felt that something could be done to help sick children become 

more comfortable during their treatment. The children’s 

hospital became Wayne’s cause. And so began the 

Coast-to-Coast for Kids. 

 

In May, Wayne will be embarking on a cross-Canada cycling 

trip to raise funds for the Children’s Hospital Foundation of 

Saskatchewan with funds being primarily used for pediatric 

oncology. He leaves Victoria on May 3rd, 2010, and plans to 

arrive in St. John’s on July 4th. Wayne’s vision is this: 

 

I ride for those who can’t, whose lives have been 

interrupted by challenges beyond their control, who have 

given us moments to treasure and have enriched our lives. 

I ride because I can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 

Wayne Dyck for his contribution to the Saskatchewan children 

and families and wish him a safe journey. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund 

Celebrates 25 Years 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday the Deputy Leader, 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, and I had the great 

pleasure of attending the 25th anniversary celebration of the 

Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund at Government 

House. 

 

The Hon. Dr. Gordon Barnhart hosted the reception for this 

proud occasion and commented on the good work that has been 

achieved over the years to promote women’s issues and the 

issues of social justice. The guest speaker at the event was a 

dynamic woman, Patricia Paradis, who was a former Chair of 

LEAF [Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund] and 

currently chairs LEAF’s 25th anniversary celebrations 

committee. 

 

This celebration coincides with the 25th anniversary of the 

coming into force of section 15, which is the equality provision 

under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. To quote 

Ms. Paradis, “Because of LEAF, the legal equality landscape 

looks very different than it did 25 years ago.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so much has been achieved, but there’s still so 

much that must be done to make equality rights real. It is a 

shame, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister Responsible for the 

Status of Women did not attend the event, nor did any of his 

colleagues — not even the women in the Sask Party caucus. 

This is not surprising since the government cut $41,000 from 

the Status of Women office in this budget, an office that’s 

already holding on by a thread. 

 

The Sask Party government’s lack of respect for women’s 

equality, women’s health issues, women’s safety, and for the 

25,000 health care workers in this province, most of whom are 

female, is obvious. What isn’t obvious, Mr. Speaker, is why. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

New Printing Plant to Open in Estevan 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

booming economy in Estevan will now benefit the rest of the 

Prairies. Last week it was announced by Glacier Media Inc. that 

they will be building a brand new 22,000-square-foot printing 

plant. Yes, Mr. Speaker, while newspapers all over the world 

are closing up shop, The Globe and Mail is setting up its Prairie 



4854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

printing and distribution centre right in my hometown of 

Estevan. 

 

This announcement is very significant for my constituency as 

not only will it benefit The Globe and Mail readership, but also 

all our small town Saskatchewan newspapers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Peter Ng, the operations director of Glacier 

Media’s Prairie newspaper group stated, and I quote: 

 

At a time when most media companies are contracting, 

Glacier is providing capital to expand. Excluding the big 

cities, Estevan Web will be the latest and best printing 

plant in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. We will print 45 

community newspapers and more than 65 titles ranging 

from Lloydminster, Alberta across to Thompson, 

Manitoba and down to the United States. They’ll all be 

printed in Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this exciting new project will add 30 full-time jobs 

in the wonderful city of Estevan. This project is just another 

example of how people across the country are seeing 

Saskatchewan as a land of opportunity. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Words and Actions 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier who talks the 

talk, but doesn’t walk the walk. He says Saskatchewan first, 

then sends his own investment dollars out of the country. He 

claims to care about the environment, then boasts of ragging the 

puck on climate change. He doesn’t believe in picking winners 

and losers, but chases forestry and film industry out of 

Saskatchewan, then creates Investment Saskatchewan. 

 

He says our province’s democracy is better off when that 

contest is vibrant, but meddles with the choice of the Chief 

Electoral Officer and hides from questions about his role in the 

PC [Progressive Conservative] trust fund scandal. He promises 

to put patients first, then doubles surgical wait-lists, lets doctors 

vacancies increase, cuts chiropractic care, and intentionally puts 

patients’ privacy and health at risk. 

 

He points the finger at FNUC [First Nations University of 

Canada] for mismanagement, ignoring the three pointing back 

at himself for the worst financial management in the province’s 

history. 

 

That’s right, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s budget provides some 

of the clearest examples of his habit of saying one thing and 

doing another. He says his budget is balanced, but he’s running 

a $622 million deficit and adding billions to the public debt. He 

says it’s forward-looking, but it’s full of short-sighted cuts to 

money-saving programs. He even has the nerve to say it’s good 

for rural Saskatchewan, but millions in cuts to agriculture and 

highways hit rural communities the hardest. 

 

Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier who talks the talk, 

but does not walk the walk. People are going to get ready to 

send him on a very long and lonely walk, November 2011. 

Thank you. 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Unparliamentary Language 

 

The Speaker: — I will now speak to the point of order I was 

going to address earlier. Yesterday the Government House 

Leader raised a point of order regarding the remarks made by 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres during member 

statements. 

 

I’ve reviewed the record, and I find that the point is well taken 

and the comments are out of order. And I ask the member for 

Regina Walsh Acres to withdraw her remarks and apologize to 

the Assembly. The member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw my remarks and I 

apologize to the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Kidney Transplants 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are three 

nephrologists and three vascular surgeons ready to work in 

Saskatoon — the same complement of health professionals as 

when the kidney transplant program was up and running, and 

running well according to the medical program director, Dr. 

Shoker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to pay attention, as he is 

responsible for his department and their actions or their 

inactions. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why not continue to do 

the transplants now while working on a long-term strategy so 

patients like Dion Poochay can get the immediate transplant 

they need to live? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the situation in Saskatoon regarding kidney transplants 

is not the situation we want to have. It is deeply concerning 

when we see that people are waiting. And as I said yesterday, I 

met with Sandi in my office after, I believe, questions on 

Tuesday. You know, our heart and sympathy goes out to that 

family. We want to have this program operating, up and 

running as soon as we possibly can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are some issues though with the way the program was 

structured in the past. The vascular surgeons are in agreement 

with that, that the way the program was structured in the past is 

not the way it should be structured in the future. That’s why 

we’re working with the health region and the specialists in that 

area to make sure that when we bring in new specialists, which 

we’re working on, that the program will be long-lasting, that it 

will be secure, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4855 

I set a very aggressive date, I think, to the health region to say 

we want to have this up and running within the next three to 

four months. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says he’s working at 

getting the program up and running. He set an aggressive date 

last year in July that it would open right away. Well nothing has 

happened. 

 

This morning, Dr. Shoker, the medical director of the program 

and a transplant nephrologist, said he gave the name of one 

surgeon from out of the province and the name of a local 

surgeon who would be capable of doing transplants. He gave 

them to the Health department, and he even offered to phone 

them personally. And he was told to mind his own business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how is this building a team? And it speaks to the 

disrespect that this minister and this government has for 

anybody working, in health in particular, but anybody working, 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: have these surgeons been 

contacted? And if not, why not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working 

with the specialists in Saskatoon. We want to make sure that 

this program is up and running. In the meantime, we have been 

talking to Edmonton that has been taking some of our transplant 

patients. We’re working on increasing that capacity in the 

short-term. We’re also working with Edmonton to look at 

taking high-risk patients, Mr. Speaker, so that our citizens are 

taken care of. 

 

That is a short-term solution. That isn’t the long-term solution. 

What we want to see is a program up and running in our 

province that is secure, that is long-lasting, Mr. Speaker. And as 

I said earlier, that we’re looking . . . I’ve set an aggressive target 

of three to four months to have the program up and running, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a couple of specialists on line that we think may be 

coming, that that timeline may be shorter. But we’ll have to see 

until those professionals are here and we ensure a long program, 

long-lasting program, Mr. Speaker. But again we have been 

working hard to make sure that this program can be up and 

running. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad commentary that the 

minister only started working hard when Sandi Poochay came 

and made him do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to Dr. Shoker the program has not 

resumed operation because “The transplant program is paying 

the price for failed negotiations.” This would be between the 

Sask Party government and vascular surgeons around fee 

structures and workloads. 

 

The minister’s abysmal failure to negotiate is seen throughout 

the health system. He tore up an agreement with chiropractors. 

He’s delaying negotiations with the doctors. He has obstructed 

negotiations with over 25,000 health care professionals. Mr. 

Speaker, why is the minister putting people’s lives at risk due to 

his inability to negotiate, and will he finally take responsibility 

for the health issues of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, much of what was in 

that question I will not even comment on because it was 

completely untrue. But what I will comment on is there are 

negotiations in the process, Mr. Speaker, negotiations between 

the Ministry of Health and the surgical team as well as some 

side negotiations as well, Mr. Speaker, with other health care 

professionals. Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that those 

negotiations proceed as quickly as possible. 

 

But we have been working. The critic would say that we just 

started when the family came to the Assembly. That is not true, 

Mr. Speaker. We have been negotiating with Edmonton to take 

our patients and to increase the capacity over the last number of 

months, Mr. Speaker, as well as looking at how can we make 

this program secure into the future. And that is why the vascular 

surgeons themselves will say that the way the program was 

structured before is not sustainable. We need to look at a 

different model and that’s what we have been doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to remember 

that people’s lives are at risk. The life of Dion Poochay, a 

36-year-old father of four is at risk. And believe me, more 

people are phoning and coming forward daily to tell their story 

about how this is affecting them and their lives. The minister 

needs to listen to them and act for them. 

 

The program is not resuming operation only because of the 

minister’s failure to negotiate workloads and fee structures. It’s 

an even bigger money issue. The Sask Party government has 

failed to properly fund the health system and people are 

suffering. The Sask Party’s financial mismanagement is putting 

people’s lives at risk as health districts, they cut programs to 

make up for a lack of funding and deficits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the minister have anything more to offer the 

Poochay and other families coming forward? Something better 

than empty words and perhaps a form letter asking for a 

financial donation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

answer, that when I hear the stories of people waiting for, in 

this particular situation, a kidney transplant, it is deeply 

concerning to our government. And we certainly want to make 

sure that those services are provided in the province and we’re 

working towards that. 



4856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

But I will tell this Assembly and you, Mr. Speaker, that wait 

times and people waiting for surgery isn’t just a situation that’s 

happened in the past week or past few weeks. But the wait 

times under that government were the worst in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the worst in Canada. Our government has put 

a surgical care initiative in place that will start addressing some 

of those long waits that we have seen under the former 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working on the surgical care initiative. We 

have found . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the minister 

to complete his . . . Order. I’d ask the minister to complete his 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have a surgical care 

initiative that is met with great anticipation. And actually a lot 

of positive feedback on the surgical care initiative as we move 

forward, Mr. Speaker because we know wait times are an issue 

and the kidney transplant is one example. There are many 

examples that our government will be addressing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. Does the Government of Saskatchewan 

intend to dissolve the Human Rights Tribunal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’re having negotiations 

with the Chief Commissioner at the Human Rights 

Commission, and we’re looking at options that will make the 

process fair and equitable. And we will work forward, we will 

go forward with those discussions and with those negotiations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — My understanding, Mr. Speaker, is the 

government has expressed its intent to dissolve the tribunal. The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal gives people who can’t 

afford a lawyer and go to court an affordable way to defend 

their basic human rights. These are people who may have been 

denied housing, employment, access to public services because 

of their race, gender, sexual orientation, age, disability, marital 

status, or the fact that they’re on public assistance. And it gives 

people who think they are treated unfairly by the Human Rights 

Commission a recourse for a fair hearing. 

 

To the minister: does the government intend to force 

Saskatchewan people to spend thousands of dollars to defend 

their human rights and to hire a lawyer to do so in court. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate and value the 

comments made by the member opposite. We have received a 

recommendation from the Chief Commissioner that the Human 

Rights Tribunal matters could better be dealt with in the Court 

of Queen’s Bench. It’s a recommendation that has come from 

the Human Rights Commission, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can advise the Assembly that we value and appreciate the very 

good work done by the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission in protecting the rights of Saskatchewan citizens. 

This is a recommendation that’s come forward, and it is a 

recommendation that in fact may have some merit. 

 

There are criticisms, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Tribunal may be seen as too close to the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. We are looking for 

ways to try and improve the optics and improve the situation 

where citizens will go before the tribunal, and it’s a matter that 

we will consider, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I expect this is the Chief 

Electoral Officer all over again, and members opposite don’t 

like some of the decisions that have come out of the tribunal, 

and that’s what the minister’s concerned about. 

 

This provincial government seems to be determined to off-load 

its responsibilities onto others. Property owners are carrying the 

ball for the government’s broken promises on revenue sharing 

and cuts to various programs. Kidney transplant patients are 

told to shop around for surgery because the government needs 

more time to come up with a plan. But forcing people to go to 

the court to defend their basic human rights is a new low. 

 

To the minister: why are people facing discrimination being 

forced to pay the price for this government’s incompetence and 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights 

Tribunal has done very good work. I’d like to point out to the 

members opposite when there was a government change, there 

was no changes to membership or makeup of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission or the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Tribunal. The members that sit on those boards and panels 

continue to sit, and they continue to enjoy the confidence of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. Those people do very good work, 

very competent work, very professional work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want the members of this Assembly and I want 

the public of this province to know that when we deal with 

matters affecting fundamental rights of the citizens of our 

province, we will take, we will take advice carefully from the 

Chief Commissioner of the Human Rights Commission. And 

we will look at ways that we can best deal with the rights of 

those citizens to make sure that they are well protected, well 

cared for. And we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4857 

Legal Issues and Changes to Legislation 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, The Trustee Act falls under the 

responsibility of the Department of Justice. Changes have been 

made to The Trustee Act around conflict of interest and were 

brought forward by the minister. Can the Minister of Justice 

explain what these changes are, who asked for them, and why 

they were proposed to start with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the changes that were 

made to The Trustee Act and various pieces of legislation that 

have come forward came forward as a matter of routine 

housekeeping, usually, Mr. Speaker, at the request of officials 

from within the ministry. I want to advise the members opposite 

and the Assembly that there was no political interference with 

that process. It was routine changes, Mr. Speaker, that were 

made as a result of streamlining our legislation and making our 

legislation consistent with the legislation that takes place in 

other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are a government that has been proactive in 

looking at pieces of legislation, and we will continue to be 

proactive in updating and moving the legislation of this 

province forward. Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that our 

province has up-to-date, current, competent legislation, and we 

will continue that process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the changes involved in The 

Trustee Act included changes to the conflict of interest 

provisions within The Trustee Act, Mr. Speaker. Did these 

changes and the passing of these changes in any way interfere 

with a case that’s before the courts? That’s a question that we 

should all be concerned about. Were they made at a time when 

it would even perceived to interfere with issues before the 

court? 

 

We ask that the minister agree to review the changes and report 

to the House if any of the changes would have any impact on 

the case before the courts. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is no way that I or 

any other member of this Assembly ought comment on a matter 

that is before the court. Mr. Speaker, to comment or debate or in 

any way engage in discussion regarding a matter that is 

currently before the court is totally inappropriate. It will not be 

done by members on this side of the House. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to encourage members on that side of the House to 

respect the judicial process and not interfere with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no intention on the part of this legislature 

to interfere with or in any way fetter the rights of our courts to 

deal with matters that are before them. We do not do that type 

of thing, Mr. Speaker. It is not done. It is not being 

contemplated, Mr. Speaker, in any way, period. 

 

[10:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question was about the 

legislation and asking the minister to review the legislation and 

report back to the Assembly if any of the changes may have 

affected the outcome of a court case. But, Mr. Speaker, before 

proposing the changes to The Trustee Act, did the minister 

receive a legal opinion that said this will not interfere with the 

PC trust court case before the courts? And if he did, will he 

make that opinion public today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the 

members opposite and the citizens of this province that the 

changes to The Trustee Act were as a result of a Law Reform 

Commission report. Mr. Speaker, that document is in fact a 

public document, and I would be pleased to make it available to 

the members opposite and the citizens of this province. 

 

That’s the source of the changes, Mr. Speaker. These were 

routine updating changes. We will continue to make changes of 

that nature as our province moves forward. This will in fact . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It’s becoming a little difficult 

for the Speaker to even hear the minister, who is right below 

him, responding to the questions. The minister may complete 

his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Law Reform 

Commission produces reports. They compare information with 

what takes place in other jurisdictions. The officials that work 

in the Ministry of Justice in the legislative drafting compare 

documents with other jurisdictions, both in Canada and 

elsewhere. In this case, this was like many other pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And the fact, the simple fact of the 

matter is, we will continue to move legislation forward where it 

is appropriate to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Consultation with First Nations and Métis People 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on budget day this government cut 

funding to the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations]/Ministry of Environment partnership, destroying the 

work of a bilateral task force that provided expert advice on 

how best to manage Saskatchewan’s environmental resources. 

To the minister: why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, there was a partnership 

agreement with funding attached to it. It paid for staff within 

FSIN. As part of this budget process, we looked at the core 

responsibilities of my ministry. Staffing FSIN is not one of the 

core responsibilities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the additional assistance to First Nations in 

this province is unprecedented. I would put our record against 



4858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

the opposition’s record any time. Mr. Speaker, there remains in 

Environment $2.8 million for First Nations initiatives, including 

a worker program through the fire protection branch. There’s $3 

million new money through FNMR [First Nations and Métis 

Relations] for economic development opportunities, and that’s 

in addition to the $3 million in the consultation fund housed 

within FNMR, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what the FSIN had to 

say about the minister who feels there’s a great reputation. 

According to FSIN Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish: 

 

The telephone call on March 24, 2010 advising that your 

ministry will no longer provide funding illustrates 

insensitivity and a lack of appreciation of First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. We see it as a clear indication 

that the Ministry of Environment has no regard for the 

inherent and treaty rights of First Nations people in 

Saskatchewan and that First Nations people in 

Saskatchewan are to be further excluded from 

participating in the protection of the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how will she replace this 16-year 

agreement and how will she ensure the First Nations people are 

consulted on the management of renewable resources? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as the opposition will 

know, when it comes to the duty to consult, the Ministry of 

Environment is the most affected ministry as we are the first 

step in development because of environmental assessment 

processes and that sort of thing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our ministry has consulted with First Nations 

on every file that requires us to consult with First Nations. We 

will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. It is not only our duty, but 

it is a responsibility of this government to make sure that First 

Nations are engaged, not only in the protection of the 

environment in our province, Mr. Speaker, but in the economic 

opportunities that our province can supply. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, they are almost three years into 

their term and they’re only taking first steps now, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, even if this minister doesn’t understand her duty 

to properly manage the renewable resources in our province or 

her duty to consult with First Nations and Métis people, even 

she should be able to understand her duty to honour legally 

binding agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this agreement clearly spells out that this 

agreement can only be terminated with 60 days written notice to 

the other party. If the Sask Party won’t honour the terms of this 

legally binding agreement, how can Saskatchewan people trust 

the Sask Party to honour any agreement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of 

First Nations and Métis Relations, and any other ministry that is 

involved in the situations that require engagement with First 

Nations and Métis in this province, Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to do that. We have consulted First Nations and Métis 

on every aspect of my ministry when it affects their treaty rights 

— hunting, fishing, and trapping, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. There’s a handful of members, 

opposition members, who are interfering with the minister’s 

opportunity to respond. I’d ask them to join the other opposition 

members who are paying attention. The Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Environment critic for 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] implied in her question that 

we have not fulfilled our duty to consult. That is absolutely not 

true and we will, the Ministry of Environment will continue to 

engage First Nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as an example, on the fisheries management 

plan that is being worked on within my ministry, a total of 

$250,000 has been spent in order to make sure that First 

Nations and Métis are engaged in this process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a letter to 

Minister of Environment by Lyle Whitefish who’s the 

Vice-chief of the FSIN. And he says this, Mr. Speaker:  

 

I must express serious concern that you did not provide 

due consideration and respect to my office by contacting 

me personally to discuss the situation prior to such a 

decision being made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so how can this minister stand there and say that 

she’s consulting the First Nations and Métis people of 

Saskatchewan when clearly it is quite the opposite according to 

the vice-chief of the FSIN. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have 

stated, the Ministry of Environment will continue to engage 

First Nations and Métis in development projects on issues that 

affect their treaty rights. It is our duty, and we will continue to 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is a $3 million consultation fund through FNMR which 

will work to engage First Nations and Métis to make sure that 

they are involved in and have the available information on these 

projects as they go forward, Mr. Speaker. As I said, in this 

budget, through FNMR there is an additional $3 million for 

economic development opportunities for First Nations and 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4859 

Métis, Mr. Speaker, which is unprecedented. 

 

We live in one of the best provinces in the world. There are 

opportunities for everyone, Mr. Speaker. And we want to make 

sure that First Nations and Métis people are involved in the 

opportunities that Saskatchewan has to present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government likes to 

profess about the members of the NDP having had 16 years of 

government, and that might be an opposition to what they feel. 

But here’s what Lyle Whitefish from the FSIN says about that 

previous relationship: “My previous experience in working with 

three provincial ministers and ministries has been very different 

than what has occurred in this situation.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s about the previous relationship with the 

NDP under the 16-year agreement that was in place. Mr. 

Speaker, this is just the tip of the iceberg. Since this 

government was elected, we’ve seen nothing but insensitivity, 

disrespect, and broken promises for the First Nations and Métis 

people of Saskatchewan. As Vice-chief Whitefish says, “The 

message you are sending to First Nations leadership is that the 

ministry would prefer an adversarial approach on dealing with 

matters between First Nations and the provincial Crown.”  

 

Why did the Sask Party government break their campaign 

promise to strengthen the relationship with First Nations 

people? 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I have stated, we will 

continue to engage First Nations in the consultation process. 

We will continue to engage First Nations and Métis on 

economic development issues that exist within our province, 

Mr. Speaker. And as far as consultation goes, I believe that 

members of the opposition were praising the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs just last night on his consultation process on 

The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to talk about 

consultation, perhaps they could tell us how much consultation 

happened with the 1,100 people who were signed up for NDP 

memberships in Meadow Lake. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 97, The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask, I would ask members 

. . . Order. I would ask members to come to order so that the 

Speaker can hear exactly where we are in committee. I would 

ask the Leader of the Opposition to come to order and allow 

proceedings to move forward without interference. When shall 

the Bill be considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize 

the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 118, The Milk 

Control Repeal Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 



4860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 108, The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 108 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 and 

that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

[11:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that the amendments be now read a first and 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 108, The Cities Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4861 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 109, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 109, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2009 and that the Bill and its amendments be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. The Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 109, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 110, The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read in Committee of 

the Whole? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has requested leave to waive the consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 110, The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009 and that the Bill and its amendments 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that the amendments be now read the first 

and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



4862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. I 

recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 111, The Northern Municipalities 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

and that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

to table the answers to questions 1,438 through 1,458. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,438 through 1,458 are tabled. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 904 — The Orange Benevolent Society 

Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m certainly pleased to be able to sponsor this private Bill No. 

904, Mr. Speaker, a Bill amending the Orange Benevolent 

Society’s Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thought what I would do is perhaps explain a bit 

of the process that’s required for amendment to this Act. The 

Orange Benevolent Society is a community-based organization 

that has been in operation for many years, and it has been 

incorporated by an Act of this legislature. And so in order for its 

Act to be amended, the amendments need to be done by this 

House, Mr. Speaker. And I’m certainly pleased to be able to 

sponsor the Bill on their behalf. 

 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4863 

Mr. Speaker, the Orange Benevolent Society is, as I said, a 

community-based organization that was founded back in the 

early part of the last century in the early 1920s. There was a 

need to look after children whose families were destitute and 

could not look after them themselves. So the Orange lodges set 

up the Orange Benevolent Society and opened some homes for 

those children. 

 

These children were not without parents, the majority of them. 

It’s just that the parents . . . In those days there was very large 

families, and especially during the 1930s, there was many 

destitute families. And as a last resort, they approached the 

Orange Benevolent Society to look after some of those children. 

And over their history, Mr. Speaker, they looked after, I 

believe, it’s over 1,000 children in their homes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They were centred in Indian Head where they had built some 

houses to look after the children. In I believe it was 1944 a Mr. 

Downing donated some land, a section of land outside of Indian 

Head, and a home was constructed there for boys and in a farm 

setting, Mr. Speaker. And there was a lot of good work done by 

this society. They also had other homes in the town of Indian 

Head. 

 

And it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that this society operated 

through its own source of funds through primarily donations 

and those sorts of things. They never received any government 

money to conduct their activities, Mr. Speaker. And I think we 

should, you know, that’s something that is noteworthy and 

should be recognized. 

 

As time moved on, the mode of operation and the emphasize of 

their operation changed. There was less and less need for them 

to look after those children because there was other 

organizations and families able to look after them, so the focus 

of their activity shifted somewhat, where in 1999 they built a 

seniors home and are providing services to seniors. And then in 

the year 2000, the home at the farm was closed because, as I 

said, there was no need, no longer a need for those type of 

services. And in 2006, Mr. Speaker, the society set up two new 

programs. They’re called the Orange Benevolent Society 

scholarship award and the Orange Benevolent Society medical 

assistance grant. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with their somewhat change of emphasis, 

there’s a need to amend their Act, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 

purposes of Bill 904. And primarily, Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments that are contained in Bill 904 centre on two areas. 

One is to amend the way the society can acquire and hold 

property. Under the old Act, there was some pretty limiting 

restrictions because it was set up under a statute in 1927, and so 

it needs to be modernized so that it enables the society to 

function in a more efficient manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the second amendment that’s contained in the Bill is to 

direct the distribution of assets. If at some time the society 

decides to dissolve itself, the amendment directs that the assets 

of the society upon dissolution would go towards organizations 

that deal with youth and families. Mr. Speaker, I think a very 

credible amendment. I believe there’s no intention to dissolve, 

but in the eventuality that they may need to dissolve or decide 

to dissolve, there would be provision as to the direction of their 

assets, Mr. Speaker. 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that Bill 904, The 

Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan amendment Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill 904, The Orange 

Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan amendment Act be now 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 

member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know it’s unusual for 

another member to speak on a private member’s motion, but I 

wanted to thank the hon. member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood for doing such a thorough job on behalf 

of the Orange Benevolent Society. He explained this Bill and 

the changes very eloquently and very, I believe, accurately. And 

I’ve seldom seen such a good job of a Bill explanation. Of 

course I will be supportive of this particular private member’s 

Bill. And I want to congratulate the member and congratulate 

the Orange Benevolent Society for selecting the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood to bring it forward. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

904, the Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan Act be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to Rule 100, this Bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 

move to a motion to go to government business. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved a 

motion with leave . . . asked for leave to go to government 

business. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Government Orders 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the Assembly move to government orders and debate 

the following Bills in the following order: item no. 9, Bill 

No. 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009; 

item no. 11, Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment 

Act, 2009 (No. 2); item no. 22, Bill No. 127, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009; item no. 

26, Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act; item no. 24, Bill No. 



4864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009; item 

no. 6, Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 

2009; item no. 7, Bill No. 106, The Labour Market 

Commission Repeal Act; item no. 5, Bill No. 107, The 

Weed Control Act; item no. 10, Bill No. 114, The Small 

Claims Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the government House 

Leader: 

 

That by leave the Assembly move to government orders 

and debate the following Bills in the following order: item 

no. 9, Bill No. 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment 

Act, 2009; item no. 11, Bill No. 115, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2); item no. 22, Bill No. 127, 

The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009; 

item no. 26, Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act; item no. 24, 

Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 

2009; item no. 6, Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy 

Amendment Act, 2009; item no. 7, Bill No. 106, The 

Labour Market Commission Repeal Act; item no. 5, Bill 

No. 107, The Weed Control Act; and item no. 10, Bill No. 

114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[11:15] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 112 — The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into debate 

on this very important piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to Bill 112 do a number of 

things, but most significantly they extend the age of retirement 

from age 65 to age 70 for justices of the peace. I think this is a 

progressive move in the circumstances which we face in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, that many of our justices of the peace 

are individuals who have spent many years in the professional 

community and have earned the honour of those in their 

communities, Mr. Speaker, and often do this after they’ve 

completed a career and are acting in the best interest of the 

people they serve in their communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to extend from age 65 to 70 allows that experience and 

knowledge that these very important people in our communities 

have obtained as justices of the peace and previous to that in 

their professions, Mr. Speaker, to serve their communities 

longer, to share that wisdom and knowledge and advice with 

those in the community who they represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I happen to know personally a couple of justices 

who, because of the restriction of age 65, had to retire who 

would have preferred to remain a little longer in the role, Mr. 

Speaker, because justices of the peace feel very strongly that 

they are contributing in a major way to the well-being of their 

communities. And they are, Mr. Speaker. I think it is fair to say 

that members on both sides of the House would think that the 

justices of the peace are contributing in a meaningful way to our 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just so that individuals who may be watching have 

some sense of what justices of the peace do, they administer 

oaths on behalf of . . . for criminal charges, pardon me, laid by 

the police in . . . for the public, Mr. Speaker. They confirm or 

cancelling police-issued processes and they . . . things like 

promises to appear, appearance notices, or recognizance, Mr. 

Speaker. And most importantly these are the individuals who 

are available to police 24 hours a day in smaller communities to 

review issues that are before the police and determine whether 

or not the individual should in fact be returned to the 

community or remanded into custody until they can go before a 

judge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These individuals play a very important part in our community, 

Mr. Speaker. These are people who have earned the trust of 

their communities, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, these 

individuals generally have several years of professional 

experience in the profession before being undertaken to 

acceptance as a Justice of the Peace, generally have lived in the 

communities in which they are Justice of the Peace most of 

their lives, Mr. Speaker, and represent those communities and 

the individuals in the communities on issues that are before the 

police and before the courts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, trust is a very important thing. For a 

community to value the services of a Justice of the Peace, they 

need to be able to trust that individual. Mr. Speaker, trust is 

something that we as citizens in our community and our society 

value greatly. And, Mr. Speaker, trust is something that we 

should all endeavour to obtain from those who we represent and 

from the community in which we live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see some irony in the Bill before us and the 

situation we face based on the budget that’s before the House. 

Mr. Speaker, as justices of the peace work so hard to obtain the 

trust of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, so should 

governments work just as hard to obtain the trust of the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a budget before us today in this 

legislature that, quite frankly, has broken that trust. And if you 

break the trust, Mr. Speaker, of the people, then you can no 

longer in good faith represent those people in a meaningful 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4865 

way. And just as a Justice of the Peace in Bill 112, The Justices 

of the Peace Amendment Act, work hard to keep the trust of the 

people of Saskatchewan, it should be incumbent upon 

governments to work just as hard to keep the trust of the people. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, many people are asking questions of us, 

members of the Assembly but in particular of the government. 

Why today are people not getting kidney transplants in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Why are people not 

getting those much needed medical services, Mr. Speaker? And 

should the people any longer have trust in that those services 

can and will be delivered by the government, Mr. Speaker? 

Now as we know, justices of the peace have . . . they work hard 

to keep the trust of the people. Governments must also work 

hard to keep the trust of the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today many families in the province who have 

loved ones who need kidney transplant surgery, Mr. Speaker, 

don’t trust the government to deliver that service any more. 

They simply don’t. The transplant surgery program for kidneys 

in the province of Saskatchewan has been shut down. And those 

families no longer trust the government to look after the best 

interest of their loved ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any family who experiences a child or a spouse or 

a parent that’s in dire need of a medical procedure and can’t get 

it, if that person is in fact dying, Mr. Speaker, it is probably the 

most significant, significant situation that you face in a lifetime. 

But yet today in Saskatchewan, many families have lost that 

trust in their government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, trust is important. As we expect there to be 

trust with the justices of peace in our province, as we trust 

others to look after our best interests as they are either elected 

or appointed to do so, Mr. Speaker, that trust is a bonding 

between the community and the individual and the respect of 

that individual for the rights of those in the community which 

they represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that trust is absolutely important. If you’re in a 

situation in your life where you don’t have the ability yourself 

to deal with a problem, that you must rely upon somebody else, 

that you must have some faith in somebody else to help you 

deal with the situation before you, and, Mr. Speaker, in those 

circumstances, trust is perhaps most important of all, most 

important of all feelings you can have, Mr. Speaker, or not 

have. 

 

It’s a similar situation if you are dealing with somebody who 

has impacted your life in a criminal situation and you’re afraid 

that that person might come back to your home, Mr. Speaker. 

You have to trust that that Justice of the Peace is going to 

analyze that information very carefully and protect your best 

interest. Mr. Speaker, we believe justices of the peace work 

very, very hard to represent and to protect the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, people should 

expect no less of their government. 

 

Today there are several families in the province of 

Saskatchewan who have a loved one waiting for kidney 

transplant surgery, Mr. Speaker. They no longer trust that their 

government will act in their best interests, that their government 

will respond to meet the needs of their loved one. Today at least 

one individual is wondering whether or not their loved one’s 

going to be with them much longer. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

because that individual isn’t getting that kidney transplant 

surgery that they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several other serious situations that 

people of Saskatchewan have to examine in regards to trust, as 

they do with their justices of the peace if they are appointed on 

behalf of themselves and their communities to represent their 

best interests. 

 

One of them, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, is one that astounds 

most people in the province. We have today a government 

releasing health information to foundations to raise money for 

capital for hospitals and for equipment in hospitals that used to 

be funded by government. They have to raise the money today 

because the government’s not properly funding and resourcing 

health services in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But today people are most concerned about the release of their 

private information that they’ve been in the hospital, that 

they’ve had treatment, Mr. Speaker. That’s information others 

don’t have a right to know. But that’s information the 

government, by a change of regulation in the last week, has 

determined that health trust foundations in fact have a right to 

have. Mr. Speaker, they don’t even necessarily keep the 

information to themselves. It can be passed on to a third-party 

fundraising agency, Mr. Speaker, and this is people’s private 

health information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, polls on this very issue show more than 90 per 

cent of people in the province of Saskatchewan do not want 

their health information released by their government to either a 

health foundation or a third-party fundraiser, Mr. Speaker. That 

breaches the trust between the patient, the citizen of our 

province, and their government because it’s their government 

that determined that that information should be released — a 

government they elected in good faith. Did the government tell 

them that they would release their private health information 

when they ran for office? No, Mr. Speaker, so they broke the 

trust. Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan people are asking, 

why should we support a government that wants to release our 

private health information? 

 

Mr. Speaker, just like justices of the peace and the fact that we 

have to rely and trust upon their better judgment and their good 

judgment, Mr. Speaker, to act and represent the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, people also believe that they should 

be able to trust their government to act in their best interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s the role of the government, it’s the role of the 

elected officials of a government, Mr. Speaker, to deliver health 

services in our province because that’s what our legislation 

says, Mr. Speaker. And it should be properly funded to deliver 

those services so families know, Mr. Speaker, that their health 

information doesn’t have to be released to the public for 

fundraising and so the public have confidence that if you have a 

medical emergency, Mr. Speaker, or if your life is at risk, you 

are going to get the services you need. 

 

Earlier this week, we had a young wife in the Assembly sitting 

in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, who was here to plea on behalf of 

her husband, her husband who may die because he hasn’t been 



4866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

able to get a kidney transplant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a kidney transplant program in this 

province for over 20 years. It survived Saskatchewan’s most 

difficult financial times, Mr. Speaker. It survived through the 

early 1990s when this province had no money at all. It survived. 

And people could rely on getting those transplant surgeries 

here. They knew their loved ones would get the treatment they 

needed here. So they wouldn’t be denied treatment if their 

medical condition got so bad that it was a risk to move them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And people have to have trust in their governments. Just as we 

trust . . . As I indicated in Bill 112, we’re making amendments 

to The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

Justices of the peace have the trust of the people which they 

serve and that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. Now justices of 

the peace aren’t elected; they’re appointed. But they’re 

appointed from a group of men and women across our province 

that have the respect of their communities and have the respect 

of the people in their communities, Mr. Speaker. But they have 

to have the trust. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few more minutes talking 

about a few other circumstances in our province that I think 

deal with the issue of trust. Mr. Speaker, when the government 

was first elected in November of 2007, there was a plan in place 

to build two surgical ambulatory surgical centres in the 

province of Saskatchewan — one in Regina, one in Saskatoon 

— from the previous government. There was money put aside 

to do that. One of the first things the new government did was 

take that money, cancel — cancel, Mr. Speaker — the building 

of those facilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we face today, some two and a half, nearly 

three years later, a growing crisis in surgical wait times. The 

people of this province were promised in the last election by the 

government that they would deal with this problem and they’d 

deal with it promptly, and they would improve the well-being, 

the health and well-being of the people of our province. Two 

and a half years into the mandate, what do we get? We get the 

government announcing another program that over the next four 

years they will take some steps to improve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people had faith and trust that the government 

would in fact do as they said. Today people are facing an 

increasingly critical situation for health services. Two and a half 

years later, the government who thought they could fix 

everything, an incoming government, are making plans to deal 

with problems over the next four years when they promised 

they would deal with in their first four years — in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, more rapidly than that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, trust is a cornerstone for appointment to 

being a Justice of the Peace. Mr. Speaker, trust also needs to be 

a cornerstone of any government. Mr. Speaker, I would say that 

today the people of the province of Saskatchewan have grave 

concerns about the trust of the government before them. I think 

they would probably prefer to have justices of the peace making 

decisions on health matters than the current Health minister, 

because at least a Justice of the Peace would meet with them, 

probably. He would probably take the time to listen to them 

because that’s what they do. And, Mr. Speaker, he would try to 

fix the problems as quickly as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend just a few more minutes talking 

about some of the issues contained in The Justices of the Peace 

Act, Mr. Speaker. Justices of the peace hold various hearings 

and undertake various undertakings and differently, not 

necessarily the same in all parts of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

In some cases, as an example, you will have justices who act on 

traffic issues. In other cases you will have them act on criminal 

issues, Mr. Speaker, and make the initial determination whether 

or not the person should be released on their own recognizance 

or released back into the community under conditions to appear 

before a court in a timely manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The individuals doing that have my utmost respect, Mr. 

Speaker. They are people who work to improve the stability of 

our communities. They work to provide a peace of mind for 

citizens in the communities in which they live. And they work 

to protect the well-being of all our citizens, Mr. Speaker, in 

ensuring that individuals who may be a continuing threat to 

them are in fact remanded into custody and remain in custody 

until which time a judge and a full-blown hearing is able to be 

held, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important piece of legislation both 

for justices of the peace and for the province, Mr. Speaker. It is 

a Bill that we have spent some time discussing over the last 

several months, Mr. Speaker, examining in detail the 

implications upon the community, upon the province, and upon 

the justices of the peace themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to move this Bill 

to committee so that we can ask more detailed questions on the 

specifics that may not be clear, may be uncertain at this time. 

But the committee gives us the opportunity to do a more 

detailed examination of some of the specifics before the 

legislation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 112, The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 now be read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this 

committee Bill be referred? I recognize the Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 112, The 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4867 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 

2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise and participate in this debate on The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act. Again this does a number of 

things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of making certain 

consequential amendments and also repealing The Laws 

Declaratory Act. Some of them are housekeeping, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Some of them are certainly a bit more substantive. 

 

Some of them are of great symbolic interest or importance 

historically in terms of what constitutes a legal authority in 

Saskatchewan, the transition from the period of being the 

North-West Territories to becoming a province. Indeed the 

transfer of the Rupert’s Land territory, as it was known, from 

the Hudson’s Bay Company, that being chartered in 1670, how 

that persisted through until 1870, and different amendments in 

this Act relating to statutes that have been set out back in those 

days, Mr. Speaker, in 1870 when The North-West Territories 

Act was brought before the . . . was passed in the House of 

Commons. 

 

So again it goes a number of different places. Fairly interesting. 

But, you know, from housecleaning or . . . housecleaning. 

Housekeeping. Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s probably that 

spring cleaning time and I’ve got things on my mind, 

housecleaning-wise. But housekeeping items in this legislation 

and the different sort of updating measures that take place here, 

the relocation of certain measures from other pieces of 

legislation and then the restatement of the authority, which in 

this case removes the declaratory Act or the changes to the 

declaratory Act. 

 

So one of the interesting points in this is the abolishment of the 

clause that had previously dealt with the cause of action for 

breach of promise to marry. The Minister of Justice, in his 

introductory comments and certainly the remarks that would 

follow in this House, the explanatory notes provided by the 

drafters would argue that this is unconstitutional. And certainly 

in The Queen’s Bench Act being sort of a catch-all of different 

legislation, that this would find, this measure would find itself 

there, is of interest. And again the development of law and 

legislation is often an evolutionary process and there’s always a 

need to be diligent and keep up with the times, so that 

something has survived in this legislation that is 

unconstitutional and is worthy of housecleaning — or 

housekeeping — is as it should be. 

 

It’s also interesting to note that there are changes to The Trustee 

Act and some of the powers under that piece of legislation. That 

particular recommendation comes out of some work done by 

the Law Reform Commission in 2002. It is of course 

interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve been talking in this 

Chamber about different matters related to trustees. And of 

course we wait with great interest to see developments on that 

front. But certainly The Trustee Act and its relation to The 

Queen’s Bench Act is clarified in the proposal put forward in 

this legislation. So we’re interested to see how that plays out in 

fact. 

 

I guess another interesting aspect is the proposed amendment as 

it relates to the Agreement on Internal Trade. Certainly in the 

explanatory notes it indicates that all provinces have agreed to 

adopt this provision, and Manitoba, Quebec, Alberta, and the 

federal government have already done so. We’re interested to 

see though, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this relates to the 

Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement that the 

members opposite have had a different revolving relationship to 

over time, being, you know, at one time the biggest 

cheerleaders for it in the province, then next coming out against 

it, and then upon taking government, entering into negotiations 

with Alberta and BC [British Columbia] to implement what 

would seem to be from our perspective a very similar set of 

agreements. 

 

You know, and oftentimes they’re cloaked in ambiguity, such 

as the Western Economic Partnership Agreement. And again, 

it’s always interesting to try and figure out what the gap 

between what the proclaimed intent is with this government and 

how things actually play out in reality. So on trade agreements, 

as in so many other sectors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re trying 

to figure out what the real impact of these things is. And we’re 

not just going to take it on trust from the members opposite. 

 

Again, in terms of The Queen’s Bench Act being a bit of a 

catch-all, it’s sort of an eclectic array of the different items of 

legislation. So we come to the measures around the changes to 

the declaratory Act, and again the transfer of land and authority 

to the Hudson’s Bay Company with Rupert’s Land, and that 

charter being granted in 1670, that transfer being returned or 

being assumed by the Dominion of Canada in 1870, and the 

need in law to keep your statutes current and to keep the 

developments moving forward. 

 

So I guess the one thing I’d wonder . . . Certainly my colleague 

from Regina Lakeview gave a very lengthy speech on this and a 

very interesting speech and had a lot of thoughtful things to say 

about this. I don’t know if I can add much to that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but certainly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now I’m 

being egged on by the member from Cypress Hills, but I’ll not 

rise to the baiting. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time, given the 

discussion that’s taking place at this stage of the proceedings, 

on the opposition side we think that it would be more fruitful, 

more productive to move this Bill on to committee. And as 

such, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we send this Bill 

to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 



4868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 115, The 

Queen’s Bench amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 115, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

committee. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Bill No. 127 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 127 — The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to put a few comments 

on the record on Bill No. 127, The Assessment Management 

Agency Amendment Act, 2009, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an 

important piece of legislation for our province. 

 

The Assessment Management Agency provides a valuable role 

in assessing property in our province for the purpose of 

taxation, Mr. Speaker. It’s important, this agency, for the work, 

it’s important work that this agency does. People rely, and it’s a 

high value of trust placed in this agency. And any changes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, should not be taken lightly that are made by 

this agency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now especially changes that 

the government is proposing and has indicated that this agency 

should be more in line with the government goals. 

 

Now hopefully, Mr. Speaker, as we go through, there are some 

things that we have to look at more carefully, but those sort of 

statements, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do probably give some of us a 

little cause for concern in terms of meanings of that, in terms of 

what that exactly would mean. 

 

One of the more important things though that I . . . and the 

minister when he spoke, introduced the Bill, was that he said 

and I quote here, “And you know, Mr. Speaker, this 

reassessment brings Saskatchewan up to 2006 values — 2006. 

That does not cover the boom.” 

 

And of course we all know that started under the previous 

government, the boom, and I thank that minister for 

acknowledging that as they seem to have had difficulties with 

that prior to that — giving credit to where in fact the economy 

took off, the health of our economy — to give credit where 

credit was due to the previous government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, moving forward from that, we again here, 

just to point out that previous record to this record of this 

government in terms of dealing with legislation, concerns 

regarding consultation. These have become sort of ongoing 

things that no matter which piece that is brought forward, we 

hope that the consultation — and we always have to raise this; 

this should be perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that we 

don’t have to go into — but each time we have a piece of 

legislation, we find ourselves on the cusp of questioning the 

consultation procedures used by this government, because they 

definitely . . . their track record on this is definitely lacking, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And so the question of consultation. Who did they consult? 

When did they consult? The records, we did not hear anything 

of that. We simply again have to go on the trust of the minister. 

And I think, as my colleague from Regina Dewdney spoke 

previously, we have seen many times what trust has brought us. 

The kind of trust that where things are promised, people are 

given indications of certain actions, of certain legislative 

changes that will be brought forward, certain things that will not 

be brought forward — we have heard many of those over the 

past over two years now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and quite the 

record that this government has compiled in this area. Quite the 

record. 

 

I wouldn’t say it would be something that I, for myself or our 

side that we’d be holding that up, but each time we go through 

these Bills we have to be careful and give them the due 

diligence necessary because no longer is there that ability to 

simply give credibility. 

 

Now again, this is not to take away that each Bill that we look 

at that we need to carefully go over the Bills, so give them the 

due diligence that is necessary and particularly something that 

is important as this Bill which the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency does, as I mentioned earlier, carry this 

valuable role in assessing property in our province for the 

purpose of taxation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just on the issue of taxation, it was the 

previous government that brought in many positive changes in 

that area. And so we know that it is important because, Mr. 

Speaker, you have to get . . . Part of getting your taxation right 

is getting the finances right. And again here we see where the 

government, where I spoke before of trust, where they were 

handed a balanced budget, they were handed money in the 

bank, and how soon thereafter we find ourselves in a debt, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — a $622 million deficit. And that is simply as 

a result of the folks across. 

 

Many other indicators that were, again the minister responsible 

here speaks of, we can remember him speaking about the oil, 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4869 

for example, the number of wells drilled. And if that minister 

would care to look at that, he would realize that the levels, he 

should check the levels in 2002 and the oil levels that are at 

now. And then maybe he would be getting up and piping from 

his seat once he has had the ability to check on those. 

 

Now these are the kinds of things for us that bring concerns and 

put into question the credibility, the credibility and the work 

that is done here when we hear things such as that the oil well 

drilling is up. And in fact when you check the records, I would 

ask that minister to look at the records from 2002 and see what 

is going on in the province and not simply . . . I would dare say 

I’m not sure who’s spreading those wild rumours on that side, 

perhaps the Minister of Energy and Resources, but I would say 

that they would be well-advised to maybe look at the facts. 

 

So it is with those kind of statements that are made in the 

legislature here that we then, it gives us cause for concern in 

terms of then listening to the minister come forward and 

propose changes to the Act. We need to then look twice as hard. 

We need to not, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . You know, that we 

would always do the due diligence on the Bills, which is part of 

the opposition in a democratic institution such as this. 

 

And I would say that we on this side have respected this 

institution and its principles, what it stands for, what it means to 

the people of this province. But it becomes difficult, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when you not only have to do due diligence, 

but you have to be ever wary that we might get figures such as 

the oil wells are now higher than they have ever been before. 

And it’s not quite like that when you check the records, and I 

would ask that minister to check the records from 2002 in terms 

of oil well drilling. 

 

So again as I say, we on this side hold this institution very dear 

and near to our hearts. We make, in the statements we attempt 

to make here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we keep one eye on that 

because we are sent here to uphold those democratic principles 

and to do the work that the official opposition has been elected 

to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And getting to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you cannot leave 

assessment in Saskatchewan simply to the whim of, as I dare 

say, politics. Now again to suggest that SAMA [Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency] should change to better 

reflect the government’s priorities, as the minister has, causes 

again another area for me of some concern. 

 

Because the daily whims of this government in terms of the 

work that they say they are doing or continuing to do, as we 

heard earlier today with the Department of Health and the 

minister, where they are always looking forward to doing 

something in the future, and they . . . When at some point in 

time it is wearing rather thin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we 

hear continually of what this side did for 16 years because we 

are, we are proud of that record of what we did on this side. 

And it is disconcerting that that is still raised in this Assembly 

as an argument for not doing the job. They were elected to the 

job. They are doing it. And people will, to their detriment, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’ll be to their detriment when people judge 

them in November of 2011. 

 

Now the other concern that has, when you look at this, and it is 

in terms of where the money will flow, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that the minister indicated that the money will flow through the 

Ministry of Finance where it formerly — if I understand this 

correctly — came through the Department of Education. Now 

the Department of Education has its own particular concerns 

right at the time. They are concerned about a number of issues 

in terms of funding, what has occurred, what will be happening. 

They are looking very hard. And the department has created a 

difficult situation for our education in this province, similarly to 

health care where the issues are now coming forward, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, on a daily basis, phone calls in terms of 

services not being provided. 

 

And I dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is all . . . It could 

be traced back to the mismanagement of the finances, of finding 

the books in order, finding money in the cupboard, and now we 

have to open the cupboard and it is bare. And now we hide 

behind a lack of services and cuts to services, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in all, as we on a daily basis, hear in all the 

departments, cuts, even to the human rights as we heard earlier. 

And it is disturbing. 

 

And then of course we have to deal with this because we have 

to be sure that we get this valuable role, as I said previously, 

role in assessing the property in our province for the purpose of 

taxation. It is a continuous, continuous struggle. Continually we 

have to look and give a second look and second sober thought 

to this. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the SAMA people are a group of 

professional individuals who work hard in our province to make 

sure that assessments are done professionally and appropriately. 

Now again their work, I dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

difficult work. They do a professional job and no doubt have 

some difficult questions. And I would hope that members on the 

other side, the minister would, would again as I mentioned in 

terms of the few times we have heard pronouncements from 

that minister, in terms whether it be the oil or some of the 

pronouncements we’ve heard, that I would hope that there 

would be research and due diligence done by him on these 

issues and that we are getting the just service that we deserve 

around this file. 

 

There are no doubt difficult questions, things that need to be 

researched, things that we have to understand, and for our part 

on this side we are doing that due diligence to deal with these 

issues. 

 

But again when we hear comments and when we see daily the 

cuts to services — whether it’s the Dutch elm program being 

cut, West Nile, Mr. Deputy Speaker — many programs which 

are dear to the people’s hearts. When we first heard, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that in fact what was occurring was that simply they 

had cut funding to 18 long-term care homes around the 

province, people were wondering about that. But every day 

there’s a rollout of new cuts, new cuts to services and, quite 

frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my phone is, the phone calls to 

my office have definitely increased. I would say spiked, much 

like we had the spike in the economy when we were in 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the system of managing the property 

assessments in our province, some have said it isn’t perfect by 



4870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

any stretch, but perhaps, you know, but given the complicated 

process that SAMA undertakes to have legitimate, accurate 

assessments any, again any . . . you know perhaps there can be 

some leeway there for some small errors. But I don’t want the 

minister to get the wrong impression here, the wrong 

impression that in fact we are talking about massive 

miscalculations, such as the potash for example. We’re not 

talking about that. So I would want him to understand that 

we’re not talking about small errors in assessment like that, 

we’re not talking about small errors in when he talks about the 

oil spiking in this province. We hope that they get those figures 

right. 

 

[12:00] 

 

So this is, as you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why we have 

legitimate concerns. Why we on this side, when we hear 

pronouncements about that the work, that the consultations have 

been done, we have numerous things that we can look at which 

causes issues of trust, issues of trust that are not easily, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we cannot easily overlook because we are 

not certain what is in fact coming behind that. 

 

Because if we had a feeling of . . . And I think ours is . . . 

Perhaps this happens to us sooner in here, that we lose that trust 

or that the ministers lose credibility with us, but I think it’s 

slowly rolling out to the people who have to on a daily basis do 

the work in, whether that be in the school boards or cities or the 

different groups that have lost funding, how they have to 

manage when they are in fact or were led to believe that the 

finances of this government were in order or that here’s where 

the things that they were doing, many, many promises made; 

many promises broken now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It is starting to look a bit like a shambles, not only here that we 

witness every day, but moving out very quickly as they roll out 

their plans or lack of plans into the province, into the province. 

 

And one of the all-time, one of the all-time favourites on here 

was a billboard in Saskatoon . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a 

billboard in Prince Albert regarding the pulp mill. One of the 

promises made was a vote for Hickie is a vote for the mill, and 

that was from what the billboard said. Now that we should’ve 

known, we should’ve known right at that point in time. We 

should’ve known right at that point in time that when that 

member from Prince Alberta put that billboard up that what we 

were in for . . . But it continues to roll out. 

 

And then we had the decreasing debt billboard. We all 

remember that one. The Premier’s face all over the place. And I 

would dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that billboard was 

probably accurate for the first day that it was put up, and after 

that . . . Maybe a day and a half. Maybe a day and a half and 

after that it was a downhill slide after that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

A downhill slide, a slippery slope to a deficit. A slippery slope. 

It’s unbelievable. In fact people have a hard time, until we show 

them the facts, to believe that something like that could be 

possible. Unbelievable. 

 

Now our main concern here is again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

this deep concern lying, lying with the government, the 

unwillingness to consult with the people regarding legislation. 

So they might say they consulted, but a lot of times we then 

find out later in fact from letters that there has been no 

consultation, no consultation, no consultation, and this is what 

we’re left to deal with. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this sort of thing it does leave us 

more. It makes us start at the two levels that I spoke of. Not 

only do we have to do the due diligence that we would normally 

have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only is there the due 

diligence around that, but also then we have to deal with the 

issue that we are never certain that even ministers of the Crown 

are giving us the facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, giving us the facts. 

And I’ve just raised a number of points where the minister was 

talking about oil production in the province. What was that? 

What was that all about? 

 

We heard the promises to the school boards. We heard the 

promises to the cities. We heard the promise for the mill. We 

heard the . . . We wonder sometimes from here what is going on 

over there and I think the people are as well. The people are as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now again just to summarize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

summarize this, the Saskatchewan management agency 

provides a valuable role in assessing property in our province 

for the purpose of taxation. We take our hats off to them for the 

hard work they do. It’s a difficult job. It’s a difficult, 

demanding job that they have to do. They should be . . . 

Changes should be made that help their work. It is at the base, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because without the economy, without 

getting this big piece of taxation right, we cannot deliver 

services to the people which the people expect from us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not only that but the people have a right, they 

have a right to expect that we will deliver, deliver the services 

for the tax money. So we are somewhat concerned in terms of 

what is happening to that tax money. And people are asking me. 

I had the opportunity over our Easter break to go and talk and 

do some door knocking. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was, 

where has all the money gone? Where has all the money gone? 

Because when the good folks of Saskatoon Fairview looked 

around, there wasn’t a lot that they see that was being done. 

 

They did know though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have heard 

they’ve cut the Dutch elm program. They did hear that they are 

not getting money, that their city is not getting the money that 

they were promised. They did hear about the difficulties in the 

education sector. They did hear about the balloon that the 

Minister of Education floated regarding the educational 

assistants, and it turned out to be somewhat of a lead balloon. 

And there is some confusion out there as to what actually is 

happening because there are some school boards that are, in 

fact, following that. 

 

But again it’s the kind of lack of leadership that is provided on 

that side where we poke our head out much like the gophers 

will be doing very shortly, but then hiding, hiding. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Because they killed all the coyotes. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — And there are a lot of gophers now because 

the coyotes are gone, yes, so they’ll be popping their heads up 

soon. But these folks have been doing it all since we started 

here, earlier than the rest of the gophers in Saskatchewan, yes. 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4871 

So this is what’s happening here, and people are wondering 

when the next minister will be popping their heads up and 

making pronouncements and then ducking back down because 

oops, that’s not quite right. Where do we go here? And so then 

they pop out and make announcements about programs that 

they’ve cut, followed up very quickly by that they will . . . 

followed very quickly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by 

pronouncements that they will have to work on it, much like our 

Minister of Health. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I digress from The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act. And again 

just that this is important work. This is important work. We 

have to get this right. We are concerned because of the track 

record of this government. But, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a 

number of other members that want to speak on various Bills 

and, Mr. Speaker, with that I would be moving this Bill to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the committee is Bill No. 

127, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate Bill No. 127, The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 be 

referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 134 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 134 — The 

Opticians Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise and speak about The Opticians Act. And this is legislation 

that’s been brought forward to update The Ophthalmic 

Dispensers Act which was passed in 1978. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when one looks at this kind of legislation, the issue is always 

trust between the various health professions, but also trust in the 

government in what they’re doing. And, Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately some of the trust issues in the Health department 

are playing themselves over into some of the legislation that’s 

showing up on the order paper today. 

 

What we know in the community, every part of Saskatchewan, 

every small town, every big town, every RM [rural 

municipality], there are people who feel that their trust has been 

broken as it relates to the chiropractors and the traditional way 

that chiropractors have been part of the health system in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that same kind of uneasiness and 

lack of trust goes then into all of the professional legislation that 

we have within the Department of Health. And in fact this 

particular legislation has some difficulties. 

 

And at this point I’ll state upfront that I think it may be that the 

Minister of Health will have to withdraw this legislation and 

correct it, because a number of issues have arisen since this 

legislation has been introduced that need to be resolved. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I will put on the record two quite opposing 

views of what should happen in this particular case. 

 

Our critic, the member from Saskatoon Eastview, doing her job, 

has written to various groups that are affected, and we have 

received some responses. And the first response that I will read 

which is sort of the official line comes from the Saskatchewan 

Opthalmic Dispensers Association, Mr. Paul Johnson, 

president. And this letter was received on April the 6th, 2010. 

And this is a letter to the official opposition Health critic. This 

letter with respect to Bill 134, An Act respecting the Profession 

of Opticians: 

 

[12:15] 

 

This is further to our earlier response to you on March 27, 

2010, wherein we provided information relative to your 

request for input concerning Bill 134. 

 

Further to that response, we would like to provide you 

with additional information that we hope would assist you 

in better understanding the need and importance of Bill 

134. 

 

The “Opthalmic Dispensers Act” is the original legislation 

that was passed by the legislature in 1978 when opticians 

first became regulated members of the health care circle. 

That legislation is still in effect today. Since its inception, 

the “Opthalmic Dispensers Act” has received very few 

changes, updates or amendments and as a result, has 

become terribly outdated. Subsequently, Bill 134 was 

introduced to modernize and update the legislation. 

 

For example, with the exception of Saskatchewan, 

opthalmic dispensers in every other province are know as 

“opticians”. Bill 134 addresses that anomaly. 

Saskatchewan’s optometrists who have owned the rights to 

the title graciously agreed to give up their right to the title 

so that “opthalmic dispensers” could make the title change 

to “optician” from “opthalmic dispenser”. 

 

Once Bill 134 finally takes effect, Saskatchewan’s 

opthalmic dispensers will legally become “opticians” and 

will finally be on par with all other opticians across the 

country. In addition to adding an extra degree of 

professionalism to the profession, this act ads clarity for 

the public who recognizes the title “optician”. This is a 

well-known and respected title throughout the health care 

industry. 

 



4872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

Under the “Opthalmic Dispensers Act”, many of the 

duties or functions currently being provided by opthalmic 

dispensers are not specifically clarified or described in the 

legislation. Bill 134 addresses those shortcomings by 

setting out and clarifying the duties and responsibilities of 

opticians. 

 

Also included in Bill 134, is a change from the 

“Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association” to the 

“Saskatchewan College of Opticians.” This change is a 

significant change for opticians. The “Saskatchewan 

Ophthalmic Dispensers Association” have always put the 

publics best interests first, however, by making the change 

from an association to a college, Bill 134, unlike the 

current “Ophthalmic Dispensers Act”, explicitly sets out 

the duty and objectives of the college. 

 

Bill 134 was drafted very carefully and in conjunction 

with Ministry officials. Stakeholders were fully consulted 

as required and have made their appropriate responses or 

representations to the Ministry. The ministry has weighed 

and addressed their concerns very carefully during the 

process. All parties have agreed to this legislation prior to 

it being presented. 

 

Finally, Bill 134 provides opticians with the tools 

necessary to do their jobs properly now and into the future 

while ensuring the safety and best interests of the public 

are met. It also takes into consideration the legislation of 

other health care providers and ensures that it is 

compatible with their legislation. It also ensures that it will 

conform to the future umbrella legislation that is being 

planned for health care providers. 

 

Ms Junor, the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Association (SODA) considers this legislation to be a very 

important piece of legislation for the public as well as 

opticians. The SODA is respectfully requesting the 

support of you and your colleagues in helping this Bill 

through the legislative process without undue delay. 

 

Yours truly, 

 

Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association 

 

Paul Johnson 

President 

 

cc: Megan Rumbold 

cc: The Hon. Don McMorris 

cc: Judy Junor . . . [and] 

cc: Ken Sorenson Registrar SODA 

 

So that’s the letter that’s come from the opticians which is dated 

April 6th. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will now read the letter that has gone to 

our opposition Health critic from the Saskatchewan Association 

of Optometrists, and this is dated March 29th, 2010: 

 

Dear Mrs. Junor, 

 

In response to the Official Opposition’s March 16, 2010 

inquiry regarding the Saskatchewan Association of 

Optometrists position on Bill No. 134 An Act respecting 

the Profession of Opticians we advise that we strongly 

oppose the Bill. 

 

As communicated to Sandra Cripps of the Workforce 

Planning Branch we have a number of issues with the 

legislation as outlined in our Sept 21, 2009 submission. 

Our primary concern is with Section 23 “Authorized 

Practices”. It is our understanding that template legislation 

does not contain provisions regarding scope of practice 

and that scope issues are to be addressed within regulatory 

bylaws. It is our position that the wording contained 

within Section 23, however, creates a potential for a 

fundamental change in the ophthalmic dispensers scope. 

The existing Ophthalmic Dispensers Act contains 

interpretations that specifically define several important 

terms. One of these terms is “ophthalmic dispensing 

service”. This is defined as “the measuring, adjusting, or 

adapting of ophthalmic appliances to the needs of the 

intended wearer”. In the proposed template legislation, 

under Section 23, the wording is changed subtly, but 

profoundly, to “interpret and adapt a prescription and 

determine the necessary specifications to correct a client’s 

eyesight in accordance with regulatory bylaws”. There is a 

huge fundamental difference between adapting an 

appliance, and adapting a prescription. The intent of 

template legislation may be to simply be [may be to 

simply, or may be simply too broad to be] . . . enough to 

allow for future changes to a profession, which we 

support, however, this “small” change leaves the Act open 

for interpretation of the term “adapt” and allows for the 

change in the role of an optician from dispensing to 

prescribing. To appreciate its potential impact, the phrase 

“adapt a prescription” must be interpreted in its most 

liberal sense, meaning to “change” a prescription, which 

as mentioned above, represents a fundamental change in 

the scope of an ophthalmic dispenser. In addition, the 

phrase “determine the necessary specifications to correct a 

clients eyesight”, in our opinion, subtly establish scope 

and any such wording should be confined to bylaws rather 

than contained within the Act. We understand that 

regulatory bylaws, once drafted, allow for control of 

scope, however, the current phrasing of Section 23 creates 

an immediate and entrenched change in scope within the 

Act itself. From our discussion, it is clear that this is not 

the intent of the Workforce Planning Branch, however we 

have concerns that the true intent of this specific wording 

has been misrepresented by SODA. Since it is not the 

intent to address scope within the Act, we believe without 

question, that this section requires amendment. 

 

Also it is our opinion that specific referral to the term 

“prescription” within Section 23 of the proposed Act, 

creates a requirement for a specific definition of 

“prescription” and “prescriber” also within the Act, which 

is easily facilitated within template legislation. 

Interpretations of “prescription” and “prescriber” are key 

definitions within the existing Ophthalmic Dispensers Act, 

and we can think of no reason why they would not be 

contained within the new template legislation. Once again, 

“small” change with profound agenda-driven implications. 

 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4873 

In our Sept, 2009 submission, we also expressed our 

concern over release of the title “Optician” in Section 22. 

It was our initial intention to allow SODA to use the title, 

but not relinquish our own rights to the usage. The titles 

“optician” and “contact lens technician” have been, and 

continue to be, commonly used terms within Optometric 

practices and it is our intent to continue their usage. We 

see no reason why this is not possible through suitable 

wording within the template Act. 

 

Our final concern is the process through which these Act 

changes were developed. We received the proposed Act 

changes on Sept 10, 2009 (sent by your office Sept 2, 

2009) with a deadline for response of Sept 15, 2009 which 

was subsequently changed to Sept 22, 2009 at our request. 

Legislative change of this magnitude requires a much 

wider time frame for proper and thorough review. Through 

informal telephone conversations and emails, we were left 

with the impression that there would be further 

consultation, and that the Act changes would not formally 

proceed until bylaws were drafted and properly reviewed 

by stakeholders. We were caught completely off-guard 

when we were advised that Bill 134 had already passed 

2nd reading. In our opinion the process has been 

compromised and as a result, our concerns were not given 

due consideration. We respectfully ask that Bill 134 be 

withdrawn and amended to address these concerns. Thank 

you for the opportunity to clarify our position. 

 

Yours truly, 

Dr. Michael York, President 

Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve read these rather lengthy letters into the 

record because they once again go to this question of trust in the 

people who are working to try to develop legislation and in the 

Department of Health and I assume in other parts of this 

government. And so what’s happened is that you have a group 

that is directly and profoundly affected by this legislation who 

on March 29th send a letter to the official opposition saying, we 

respectfully ask that Bill 134 be withdrawn and amended to 

deal with their particular concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are in a position where we’re asking the 

question, what is consultation? Why do people who are 

professionals and who are directly involved and working with 

Health officials and the Minister of Health feeling as if they’re 

completely left out in the cold? And, Mr. Speaker, 

unfortunately for the people of Saskatchewan, we have an 

example of the Minister of Health doing that with chiropractors. 

Where they negotiate an agreement, all of the people that are 

appropriately doing their jobs are then undercut by the minister 

and by the Premier in dealing with chiropractors. 

 

We have that kind of a situation that happens again and again. 

We have the whole situation around the trust and lack of 

consultation as it relates to SCN. We have lack of trust and no 

consultation in a whole number of the decisions that are taking 

place.  

 

The only slight change that we have seen from the members 

opposite was when the Minister of Environment added a few 

dollars back into the Dutch elm disease to deal with the lack of 

consultation there. But unfortunately that’s not sufficient. 

 

So what we seem to see is a whole record of bumbling and 

tripping and falling and doing things that basically cause all 

kinds of difficult. Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying here today, 

as it relates to the optometrists and the opticians, that this kind 

of legislation should not be presented in this House until they 

have sorted out the issues that are between them. And it makes 

it very difficult for all of the people who work in the various 

professions in our province if they can’t trust the Minister of 

Health to be doing his job properly and making sure that 

legislation is brought forward. 

 

Now one of the issues that always comes is, what kind of 

comments are made by the minister in developing this particular 

legislation? So if we go back to the speech of the Minister of 

Health on March 15th, 2010 — this is just, you know, three, 

four weeks ago — the minister says on page 4175 “In 

developing this legislation, the government has consulted 

closely with the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Association.” And he had Mr. Johnson and other people in the 

gallery when he gave this speech. 

 

Now that’s the particular problem that we have here, is that the 

people that have a concern about this legislation, the 

optometrists are pushed to the side. But what’s even more 

concerning is you have a rather extensive piece of legislation, 

and you have the minister giving a very cursory report into this 

legislature. 

 

And this is one of the reasons that I think many people also 

have a lack of trust for this government because part of the 

record about legislation being introduced to the House are the 

second reading speeches of the minister which set out the policy 

and the plan and what’s to be done. What we’ve seen with this 

government is such skimpy information when legislation’s 

brought forward that we end up then having to go and dig and 

find all of the problems that are there. 

 

So here we have an example today in Bill 134. Within two 

weeks of the legislation being introduced, the main group that’s 

being affected — which is being somehow glossed over that 

they don’t like this even though some of the department people 

seem to know this — comes out and says, we oppose this Bill. 

We don’t think it should go through this House. But we all 

know, Mr. Speaker, from long years in this particular legislature 

that when it comes to professional legislation, there need to be 

discussions, consultations, often compromise and discussion 

again and then compromise and discussion. And that may take 

years to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has not done his job. The 

other people who were involved in helping draft legislation 

have not done their job. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we have no 

other choice today other than to adjourn debate on this matter. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

adjourned debate on Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



4874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

[12:30] 

 

Bill No. 135 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 135 — The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to rise on Bill No. 135 which is a health Bill, An 

Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act. And if we ever had 

concerns with Bill 135, An Act to amend The Prescription 

Drugs Act, if we had concerns before, we’ve got double the 

concerns today. 

 

Just this week, we’ve had concerns on the floor of the 

legislature respecting confidentiality of patient information. If 

you look at the daily newspapers or listen to the television and 

some of the radio stations, they will be talking about a 

pharmacist that misused some information. That is clearly in the 

news. And now this Bill, part of The Prescription Drugs Act 

amendment is dealing with privacy issues, particularly as it 

respects to some of drugs that have codeine products in it, but it 

clearly would affect more than that. 

 

We’ve got a situation where in question period the minister 

certainly didn’t make it any clearer that there’s a handle on 

how, where to proceed from here with respect to privacy issues. 

It is just really unclear. And yet, the privacy issue with respect 

to The Prescription Drugs Act is a significant part of this Bill 

and what it’s all about. So again I say, if we had concerns 

before, we’ve got doubly the concerns today that we had with 

this. 

 

We see in health care, Mr. Speaker, we see a kidney transplant 

program in Saskatoon that’s been shut down under the Sask 

Party administration despite the fact that all the information 

says the same number of specialists, the same specialties that 

were operating the program before are in place in Saskatoon 

today. And despite that, we have a kidney transplant program 

that’s shut down, and it’s causing some real concerns for 

people. 

 

It makes me wonder, you know, if the government has too 

much on its plate, if it shouldn’t, perhaps instead of trying to 

amend a prescription drug Act as this is happening, if it 

wouldn’t have been better off spending that effort and that time 

dealing with the kidney transplant program and making sure 

that a program that had run successfully for many years and 

done a lot of kidney transplants, made sure that that was able to 

continue. 

 

Because clearly there’s value in saving lives; that’s what the 

Department of Health is all about. That’s part of what 

prescriptions are all about too, is making life better for people, 

enhancing health, or at least minimizing the detrimental aspects 

that some of us, most of us face at one time or another — I’ll 

put it that way. 

 

Because it’s of course very common . . . It’s very uncommon — 

I’ll put it this way — it’s very uncommon for any person in 

Saskatchewan not to at some point in their life be dealing with a 

prescription drug. It’s less common for us to deal with 

prescription drugs with codeine, although that’s fairly common 

too. It’s pretty darn prevalent if you’ve got chronic pain or 

those sorts of issues. 

 

But we need to get it right. We need, if we’re going to be 

changing a Bill here in the legislature, we need to get it right. 

And we’re distressed because again earlier this very week we 

didn’t get any clarification out of the Minister of Health when 

we asked direct questions around prescription drugs and how 

the pharmacists would control the privacy issues. So that’s one 

of the things. 

 

We’re not at all confident that the consultation that is required 

to make sure that this gets done right has been done. We’re not 

confident that the pharmaceutical association or pharmacists 

collectively or individually have been consulted. We’re not at 

all confident that there’s been a patient advocate that’s been 

consulted. Certainly I don’t know, I’m not aware of any call to 

the general public for opinions around this. And we want, with 

the track history of the Minister of Health, the Sask Party 

government, around prescription drugs and privacy issues, we 

want, Mr. Speaker, to make as sure as we can that the 

government gets it right. So, huge concerns. 

 

We see a government that is bringing forward this amendment 

to The Prescription Drugs Act when they could have perhaps 

spent the time honouring the contract that the chiropractors had 

negotiated. Instead that was tore up, and that’s a shame because 

that was a direct benefit to a great number of Saskatchewan 

people, tens of thousands. The number escapes me at the 

moment, but tens of thousands would be understating those of 

us that have benefitted from chiropractic manipulation over the 

years. And it was such a small budget item in the relative 

scheme of things. 

 

But we think that the government would be better off spending 

the time making sure that the chiropractic negotiations had been 

successful and that that continued to be co-funded as opposed to 

perhaps getting a prescription drug Act amendment wrong. 

There was no, again I say, no mention earlier in the week that 

this Act that’s before the Assembly is in any way going to 

change the status quo, is in any way going to make things 

better, is in any way going to address some of those issues. So 

we’ve just got these huge concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Prescription Drugs Act has, according to the government, 

some need for repair. But this is the same government that said 

that they were going to fix the vacancies in rural Saskatchewan 

respecting doctors. And the harsh reality is that the number of 

vacancies in rural Saskatchewan doctor practices is up over 50 

per cent since the Sask Party formed government. By their own 

Ministry of Health numbers, an increase in vacancies in rural 

Saskatchewan of doctors more than 50 per cent from when New 

Democrats were in government. 

 

And you have to ask yourself, how does this work coming from 

a government that had all of the answers the night before the 

election in 2007? Well here we are, fast-forward, it’s 2010 and 

we’re going backwards. How does that work? 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4875 

We need, we need to get the promises that were made delivered 

on. I think the people of Saskatchewan have a right to deserve 

that. They’d like to see those vacancies in doctors’ practices 

throughout rural Saskatchewan reduced. We of course want 

more doctors everywhere. We want to see, Mr. Speaker, we 

want to see the wait-list for surgeries reduced instead of 

growing where, for example, in the Swift Current Health 

District the wait-list is approximately double what it was in 

2007. It just belies the . . . the reality belies the promises. 

There’s just some complete disconnect between what was 

promised and what the reality is. And that’s no small part of 

why we have these concerns around the Act to amend The 

Prescription Drugs Act. 

 

Sticking with health care, we’ve got a situation where, instead 

of bringing forward these changes that we have no confidence 

are accurate, are going to fix a problem, instead of bringing 

forward this amendment to The Prescription Drugs Act, we 

would argue that the Ministry of Health and the minister would 

be better advised to spend some time making sure that the 

majority of health care workers aren’t without a contract. The 

majority being those members of CUPE [Canadian Union of 

Public Employees], SEIU [Service Employees International 

Union], and SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 

Employees’ Union] — the more than 50 per cent of workers in 

the health care industry that are working without a contract for 

about a year now. 

 

And our argument is that the ministry and the government 

would be far better advised to take care of the things that they 

led the people of Saskatchewan to believe was going to be 

fixed, that they had a fix for, would be better advised to be 

doing that than to bring forward any legislation, but particularly 

this legislation, when so very recently, so very recently earlier 

this week, in most of the major media in Saskatchewan and in 

this very Chamber in question period, questions are asked and 

the answers just generate confusion. We don’t know where it’s 

going. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a Bill that requires pharmacies to 

record the sale of non-prescription codeine products to the 

pharmaceutical information program, that PIP program. And 

that’s the very program that, if you pick up the Leader-Post, 

StarPhoenix, and I’m sure other daily papers in the province, if 

you listen to any of the major radio stations, watch TV, you’ll 

find out that there was a case that recently was before the courts 

where a pharmacist misused the PIP program and was able to 

access the file on some people that it was inappropriate for that 

pharmacist who accessed the file. 

 

And yet we ask in question period about it and there’s no 

answer. There’s just no, not even . . . I didn’t even hear an 

acknowledgement that there was a problem. I didn’t hear, for 

example, yes this happened. It was not contemplated and, you 

know, we’ve got the ministry taking steps. They’re going be 

bringing . . . I’ve asked them to bring advice and they’ll bring 

advice for me as quick as they can on how we can block up that 

hole, that problem, so that it does not happen again in the 

future. Well we never heard that. We never heard that. 

 

Nobody on this side would pretend that the Minister of Health 

personally is the one that operates the pharmaceutical 

information program, that he’s got a master computer in his 

ministerial office and that all of the information goes there. 

That’s not what we’re suggesting at all. What we do suggest is 

that the minister is responsible for his ministry. The ministry 

has a problem that was identified that in fact all MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] got a report of that 

problem in our mail. I know I read mine and read it very 

carefully. 

 

But what’s missing is the public acknowledgement there was a 

problem, the public acknowledgement that needs to find a 

solution. That’s totally missing. And in the absence of those 

things, it’s difficult for us to find much joy in Bill 135, the Bill 

that’s before us today. We need more signs from the minister, 

more signs from the ministry that the existing problems in 

health, the very real and existing problems in health, are first 

acknowledged, and then secondly taken seriously enough that 

the minister and ministry would try and find some solutions for 

my constituents and all of our constituents, the people of 

Saskatchewan. Because that’s, at the end of the day, what we’re 

here for. 

 

[12:45] 

 

This Bill 135 on prescription drug amendment Act brings more 

centralized reporting to be done, and it centralizes that reporting 

in the hope of preventing drug abuse. But how is that to help us 

when that very centralized reporting is, in no small measure, the 

problems that we read about in the paper respecting the 

pharmaceutical information program? How is it that centralized 

information without the proper guidelines and constraints and 

controls, how is it that that can help? Because none of us want 

unfettered access to our medical records. 

 

It’s inappropriate for my seatmate to know about my health — 

good, bad, and indifferent — in any way other than what I want 

to share with him. It is my business. And arguably my spouse’s 

business, my family’s business, but that’s where it should end. 

And I should be confident that when I see a pharmacist, that 

whatever I’m seeing that pharmacist about is between that 

pharmacist and me. 

 

I should be equally confident that when I go and see a doctor, 

it’s between my doctor or the doctor I have chosen to see and 

myself. It is not, not a matter of public record what I might be 

doctoring for or what I might be consulting about or what I 

might be concerned with. 

 

It’s no matter whether my concern is for myself or for someone 

else. It’s got to be confidential. And that’s the principle that 

we’ve operated on in the health care system for many years 

now. And it’s a principle, Mr. Speaker, that really, really is 

under fire these days. It’s very much under fire and that’s a 

shame. 

 

Because for us to make progress as members in this great 

Chamber, for us to genuinely bring forward legislation that’s 

going to benefit the people of Saskatchewan, we have to have 

confidence that existing identified problems are being taken 

seriously by the respective ministry and by the government. We 

lack that confidence that the Sask Party government is taking it 

seriously. We lack that confidence that the minister and the 

ministry is taking these issues as seriously as they should. 

 



4876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2010 

Now let me not put too fine a point on that. There’s a huge 

number of people in the pharmaceutical industry and in the 

Ministry of Health that care deeply about this and are acting in 

good faith. But the action always has to start and come from the 

top, the head of the ministry. In this case that’s the Minister of 

Health, that’s the Premier, that’s Executive Council. And we’re 

just not seeing it. 

 

We’re seeing a ministry that had lots of promise. We see a 

ministry that is run at a time of unprecedented economic growth 

in Saskatchewan. We see a Ministry of Health that when the 

government collectively inherited roughly $2 billion surplus at 

the time of the last election in November of 2007 and we see 

that having turned into a deficit. But we see a $3 billion 

turnaround, is the best way I can describe it, Mr. Speaker, in 

short terms. We see a $3 billion turnaround and we see all of 

the . . . so many of the indicators of Health going in the wrong 

direction. And we have to ask ourselves how does this, how’s 

this possibly work? 

 

It’s just doesn’t make sense that we would have higher waiting 

lists today than in 2007, almost double the wait list in the Swift 

Current health region than it was in 2007. That’s almost double 

in the Premier’s own, in his own health district. And this from a 

Premier and a Sask Party government that had all of the 

answers the day before the last provincial election. 

 

So we see failure. We see problems in health care. We see for 

example the . . . right after the budget was delivered not two 

weeks ago we see the Minister of Finance speculating about the 

need for a user fee or a deterrent fee. Call it what you want. It’s 

a health tax on people who are sick and it’s a very big tax on 

people who don’t have the money. And I say this in all 

seriousness because, without putting too fine a point on it, I’ve 

been there. 

 

Without putting too fine a point on it, I recall a personal 

situation where a deterrent fee would have prevented one of my 

family members — one of my children — from receiving 

medical care. And it would have. It would have. I know it’s 

hard to believe that a parent could be that callous. I’d be happy 

to explain the situation to anyone that wants to ask without 

giving any of the medical details, but it was a situation that 

involved three doctors in as many days. And if there’d been a 

deterrent fee in those days, we’d have found $10 for the first 

one; we probably would’ve found $10 for the second one, but 

after the second time I don’t think we could’ve. We’d have been 

forced to trust that not one but two doctors were right, and the 

first two doctors were not right. It would have been very, very, 

very serious. The cost would have been horrendous. 

 

So we’ve got health care where everything’s going . . . not 

everything, but where the leading indicators are going 

backwards. We’ve got a kidney transplant program that’s not 

being in operation. It’s not being funded. It’s not, despite the 

fact that there is all of the appropriate specialists in place. All of 

the staffing is in place. If you listen to the Sask Party 

government, the RNs [registered nurse] are increasing in 

number. So it seems to me that with that, and an increase in the 

Ministry of Health’s budget, we should be seeing a better 

kidney transplant program, not an axed kidney transplant 

program. 

 

We should be seeing that the chiropractic association is funded, 

and that would help a significant number of people in 

Saskatchewan. We should see that the doctor vacancies in rural 

Saskatchewan, that have increased more than 50 per cent under 

the Sask Party watch, more than 50 per cent, we should see that 

having decreased, Mr. Speaker, not increased by 50 per cent in 

two and a half years. We should see wait lists for surgeries 

clearly going down. We shouldn’t see, in the Swift Current 

health region, wait lists virtually double what it was in 2007. 

 

We should see the majority of health care workers, those 

members of SGEU and SEIU and CUPE that have been 

operating for now close to a year without a contract, we should 

see them having their reasonable offer and a contract in the 

way. We should see a government focusing on the very real 

problems in health care. That’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan elected the government to do. That’s what they 

were promised to do and that’s what they should do. 

 

And the other thing — and I’m not going to go long in this — 

but the other thing tying it directly to The Prescription Drugs 

Act is that the Privacy Commissioner should be acknowledged, 

should be listened to very seriously, and the Privacy 

Commissioner’s concerns respecting the pharmaceutical 

information program, or PIP, should be addressed in an 

appropriate manner that would deal with the privacy issues. 

 

We should see people of Saskatchewan that can present 

themselves to a pharmacist or a doctor or a hospital and not 

expect that six weeks later they’re going to get a beg letter 

requesting a donation to the health foundation fund. And the 

health foundations are great organizations, but they shouldn’t 

ought to get your name just because you’ve accessed the health 

care system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At one point, at one point that was the situation before, before 

there was legislation passed respecting the privacy of 

information and respecting the privacy of health information. 

And I remember because I was in the caucus when we changed 

that Act. At one time, what is being contemplated was done 

because that was normal. You’d go to the hospital and you 

could reasonably expect that before too many weeks went by, 

you’d get a letter asking you to make a donation so that the 

health facilities could be improved. 

 

But we recognized when the legislation was introduced that it 

was inappropriate to continue doing that. We had a discussion 

about it, and the discussion was fairly short. Why did we agree 

to follow the legislation? It was the right thing to do. It was our 

legislation, and it was the proper thing to do. And in no way did 

it detract from my ability as an individual or anyone else’s 

ability as an individual to make a donation to a foundation, a 

health foundation or a hospital or a facility. It did not detract 

from that one little bit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a pharmaceutical Bill. We’re being 

asked, we’re being asked to support An Act to amend The 

Prescription Drug Act when there’s all these other very real 

problems in the health care system. All of these problems are 

there. All of these problems are crying out to be addressed. 

Most of these problems the Sask Party claimed they had the 

solution to before the election in 2007. Most of them they had 

the answer to, and it was just a slam dunk. 



April 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4877 

Just get those darn New Democrats out of the way and Sask 

Party would fix it all. That was the promise. That’s what the 

hope was. That’s I think in no small measure why the Sask 

Party was elected in 2007, Mr. Speaker. I do believe that. But 

the reality just is something diametrically opposed to what those 

promises were. 

 

We’ve got, Mr. Speaker, a situation where the government had 

more than $2 billion surplus, turned it into . . . There’s been a 

$3 billion turnaround. We’ve had a situation where there’s all 

kinds of opportunity to deal with privacy issues — that’s 

relatively a non-monetary thing — but all kinds of opportunity 

to deal with the privacy issues. But what did the government do 

instead of that? Instead of that, they were too busy finding ways 

to get rid of the $2 billion surplus and more. They were too 

busy trying to heap blame on the former government for all of 

the errors, and it’s something that they continue to do to this 

day. 

 

And I’m not for a second trying to pretend that the New 

Democrat government was perfect. You don’t get perfection in 

politics or in any operation. But I want to tell you that I was 

always proud that we tried to be as straightforward as we could 

with the people of Saskatchewan. We ran a kidney transplant 

program, and we ran it successfully for a great number of years. 

And there’s a lot of people alive and relatively well today as a 

result of that. 

 

We funded the chiropractors and co-funded chiropractors for 

many, many, many years. We discussed it in 1992 in the peak 

of our financial problems; we discussed whether we could 

afford to continue it. And the answer was, we couldn’t afford 

not to because for every dollar you spend on chiropractors, 

you’re saving $3 or more in other places. 

 

We worked on doctor recruitment and with a fair degree of 

success. The reason I say, with a fair degree of success, Mr. 

Speaker, is you look at doctor vacancies in rural Saskatchewan 

today, up over 50 per cent by the Ministry of Health’s own 

numbers. Vacancies in rural Saskatchewan, up over 50 per cent 

under the Sask Party government, more than 50 . . . under them, 

they who had all of the answers, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me 

New Democrats maybe weren’t as terrible as they were told by 

Sask Party members that we are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wait-lists up nearly double in the Premier’s own 

health region from when they formed government. This is the 

reality of health care. This is a reality of Saskatchewan today. 

We have a $2 billion surplus when the Sask Party formed 

government, turned into close to a $1 billion deficit today. A $2 

billion promise of revenue in potash last year that turned into 

. . . The last thing they did is wrote a $300 million cheque to the 

potash industry . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

is adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4849 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4849 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4849 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4849 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4849 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4850 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4850 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4850 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4850 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4850 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4851 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4851 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4851 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4851 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4852 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Poltava Ensemble Reunion 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4852 

 Emergency Telecommunicators Week 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4852 

 National Poetry Month 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4853 

 Cycling Trip to Raise Funds for Children’s Hospital 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4853 

 Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Celebrates 25 Years 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4853 

 New Printing Plant To Open in Estevan 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4853 

 Words and Actions 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4854 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Unparliamentary Language 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4854 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Kidney Transplants 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4854 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4854 

 Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4856 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4856 

 Legal Issues and Changes to Legislation 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4857 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4857 

 Consultation with First Nations and Métis People 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4857 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4857 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4859 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4860 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4859 

 Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4860 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4860 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4861 



 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4862 

 Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4862 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4860 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4861 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4861 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4862 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 904 — The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment Act, 2010 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4862 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4863 

MOTIONS 

 Government Orders 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4863 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4864 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4866 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4867 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4868 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4868 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4871 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4871 

 Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4874 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




