




















































Hansard: October 27, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 1A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2010, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5671 

 October 27, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 14:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the arrival of the vice 

regal party. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:00.] 

 

His Honour: — Now be seated. 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, Honoured 

Guests, people of Saskatchewan; 

 

Welcome to the opening of the Fourth Session of the Twenty 

Sixth Legislature. 

 

The poet Robert Frost ends his most famous poem with these 

lines: 

 

Two roads diverged in the wood and I, 

I took the one less travelled by, 

And that has made all the difference; 

 

Today, in the new Saskatchewan, we are on the road less 

travelled. 

 

It is a new road for our province – and it has made all the 

difference. 

 

This new road is marked by strong and continued growth. 

 

Our population hit an all-time high of 1,045,622 people, 16,498 

more than last year — the largest year-over-year increase since 

1953. 

 

A recent survey shows Saskatchewan business owners are some 

of the most optimistic in Canada. 

 

According to the most recent Financial Post/CFIB rankings, 

Saskatchewan has three of Canada’s top ten entrepreneurial 

cities — Lloydminster, Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 

 

Saskatchewan recently set a record for the most people working 

in our province. 

 

There are now 6,300 more people working in our province than 

one year ago. 

 

Chartered banks are predicting nation-leading growth for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the benefits of that growth are being widely distributed. 

 

For the first time ever, wage rates in our province are rising 

above the national average, with a percentage increase that is 

third highest in Canada. 

 

However, this growth is not an end in itself. 

 

Growth simply marks the way to a better quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

On the new road, we don’t just talk about a new Children’s 

Hospital for Saskatchewan. 

 

We fund and are beginning to build a new Children’s Hospital 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

On the old road, there were no targets set to tackle a serious 

nursing shortage. 

 

On the new road, the target of 800 was not only set, it now has 

been surpassed. 

 

On the new road, we also find unique and innovative solutions 

to reduce surgical wait times. 

 

In last year’s throne speech, our government set another 

ambitious target to reduce surgical wait times to no more than 

three months, within four years. 

 

My government is already beginning to make significant 

progress. 

 

In Saskatoon for example, the number of patients waiting more 

than a year for hip and knee procedures has dropped 71 per cent 

in the past year. 

 

My government will continue to make further investments to 

continue working towards our surgical wait times goal. 

 

On the new road, we are doing more to help those in need. 

 

Services are now underway or in development for 308 

individuals, reducing the community living waiting list. 

 

Since the last Speech From the Throne, 161 affordable housing 

units have been built or have been rejuvenated. 

 

Over the same period, 175 housing units for persons with 

intellectual disabilities have been completed or started. 

 

The new road means, quite literally, new roads. 

 

Efforts to improve and repair Saskatchewan’s long-neglected 

highways continue. 

 

Work on 1,129 more kilometers of highways was tendered in 

the past year. 

 

An additional 793 kilometers of maintenance and safety 

improvements were completed by the Ministry of Highways 

and Infrastructure as of the end of this summer. 

 

The Global Transportation Hub is also emerging as a major 

economic force in our province. 

 

This project, driven by private sector investment and public 

sector infrastructure, is already hiring hundreds of new workers, 

with more jobs to come. 

 



5672 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2010 

In recognition of the need for everyone to have the opportunity 

to participate in the workforce, my government has improved 

childcare. 

 

Since November of 2007, funding has been allocated for over 

2,900 new licensed childcare spaces. 

 

By the end of March next year, the number of childcare spaces 

in Saskatchewan will have increased by over 30 per cent. 

 

Our workforce is also being bolstered by bright young minds 

that have decided to stay right here in Saskatchewan, because of 

initiatives like the Graduate Retention Program. 

 

This trend will be enhanced in the coming months by the 

addition of a new Scholarship Fund. 

 

This year, about ten thousand new immigrants are also calling 

Saskatchewan their new home. 

 

These families will help increase our workforce while creating a 

brighter, more dynamic and diverse province of the future. 

 

My government has been more responsive to Saskatchewan 

farmers and farm families. 

 

This year will be remembered by many farm families as the 

year Mother Nature conspired to create conditions that were 

virtually impossible for many. 

 

My government acted quickly and significantly in partnership 

with our federal counterparts to ease this pain. 

 

The result was $360 million made available to help those hit by 

flooded croplands. 

 

My government is also providing support to flooded areas 

through Crop Insurance, AgriStability and Agri-Invest. 

 

Crop Insurance alone has already paid out over one quarter of a 

billion dollars to producers this year, with many more post 

harvest claims soon to be processed. 

 

It’s estimated that this year’s agriculture budget could be the 

largest in Saskatchewan history. 

 

The next decade will see a significant and meaningful 

commitment to rehabilitating Saskatchewan’s irrigation system. 

 

This is an investment in our future. 

 

Over $30 million will be committed over the next ten years to 

restore and repair irrigation infrastructure in the Lake 

Diefenbaker area. 

 

This will include over $1 million this year for repair of the M1 

canal in Central Saskatchewan, which provides water for 

55,000 acres of irrigation, 8 communities, three potash mines 

and 26 domestic users. 

 

Not only are Saskatchewan farm families getting more, they are 

paying less as a result of implementation of Phase I of an 

historic education property tax reduction plan. 

That plan means farmers and ranchers no longer have to pay a 

disproportionate share of education property taxes. 

 

In addition, rural and urban dwellers now benefit from a more 

effective and nimble government response in times of natural 

disaster. 

 

My government would like to extend its thanks to the many 

local volunteers and municipal officials who worked tirelessly 

this past summer under very difficult conditions and made 

suggestions to improve disaster programs. 

 

My government is investing significantly in a new public safety 

telecommunications network that will ensure communities can 

keep in touch during emergencies. 

 

This new state-of-the-art system will be in place by January of 

next year. 

 

Saskatchewan streets will be safer with the addition of new 

police officers. 

 

By the end of this fiscal year, a total of 90 new officers will be 

on the streets, with money for thirty more to be included in the 

next budget. 

 

The fight against organized crime and gangs will also be 

expanding to adult correctional centres. 

 

My government will introduce legislation authorizing it to 

monitor telephone conversations by inmates in correctional 

centres. 

 

All of these initiatives have taken place against the backdrop of 

lower government debt—meaning current prosperity is being 

shared with future generations. 

 

Government debt is now $4.1 billion, compared to $6.8 billion 

when my government took office. 

 

In this session, my government will also introduce a regulatory 

accountability initiative, designed to cut red tape for 

Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

There will be a renewed focus on citizen-centred services, with 

people getting what they need from their government, in a way 

that is useful to them. 

 

In addition to tax cuts and lower government spending, life 

remains affordable in Saskatchewan. 

 

Average wages paid to workers in our province are up by five 

per cent compared to a year ago, well above the rate of 

inflation. 

 

Utility costs remain among the lowest in Canada. 

 

In fact, Saskatchewan families will benefit from a seven per 

cent decrease for the average residential natural gas customer, 

effective November 1st. 

 

Since the fall of 2007, when Saskatchewan voters bestowed 

upon my government its first mandate, over one hundred 



October 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5673 

campaign promises have been kept. 

 

A few promises that remain outstanding will be completed 

during this session. 

 

In the coming year, Saskatchewan’s new road will take us to the 

establishment of a revenue sharing formula with our municipal 

partners, based on one full percentage point of the provincial 

sales tax. 

 

This will represent the highest level of operational support ever 

provided to municipalities. 

 

A further promise to continue reducing the amount paid in 

education property taxes will also be met. 

 

This means the education portion of property tax will have 

dropped by an average of 20 per cent since 2008. 

 

For agricultural land, that tax bill will drop by an average of 80 

per cent. 

 

This is a substantial improvement and a real accomplishment. 

 

In health care, my government is beginning to plan for a 

significant expansion of emergency medical services in 

cooperation with the STARS (Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Service) program in Alberta. 

 

This helicopter-based system would supplement existing air 

ambulance and ground ambulance services. 

 

When acute trauma incidents occur, time is of the essence. 

 

A new helicopter EMS system like STARS could be the 

difference between life and death. 

 

The number of registered nursing students being educated in 

our province is also increasing. 

 

A total of 130 seats have already been added, with an additional 

170 seats on the way. 

 

Efforts to increase the number of physicians across 

Saskatchewan also continue through the establishment of 

Saskatchewan’s physician recruitment agency. 

 

However, efforts to assure every Saskatchewan resident has 

access to a qualified physician regardless of where they live 

will go even further. 

 

My government is in the process of implementing a realistic, 

made-in-Saskatchewan assessment process for internationally 

trained medical graduates. 

 

And to further ensure the needs and rights of patients remain 

paramount, my government will fulfill a promise to create a 

health ombudsman within the office of the current provincial 

ombudsman. 

 

Work will continue on the re-establishment of a dedicated 

addictions agency and the creation of an additional 100 

long-term addictions recovery spaces in the province. 

As we travel down Saskatchewan’s new road, we must make 

every effort to ensure we stand shoulder to shoulder with First 

Nations and Métis. 

 

This is why my government is committed to improving 

educational outcomes for our First Nations and Métis students. 

 

The education of these students is a crucial precursor to their 

full participation in the labour market, and in Saskatchewan’s 

future prosperity. 

 

This is why several of my government’s ministries are working 

collaboratively with First Nations and Métis leaders. 

 

The goal is simple and profound: create a strategy best suited to 

the needs of this important group of students. 

 

The initial focus will be on early learners. 

 

Saskatchewan’s new road also includes a demonstrated 

commitment to pre-kindergarten programs for vulnerable three 

and four year-olds across our province. 

 

Since coming into office, my government has added an 

additional 75 such programs, serving 3,680 children. 

 

This represents an overall increase of 45 per cent in the number 

of pre-kindergarten programs offered, since 2007. 

 

First Nations and Métis partners are also part of my 

government’s new and innovative approach to development of 

our northern forests under a new forestry management 

agreement. 

 

This new approach sees industry partners fully cooperating with 

these groups, to manage the forest in an economic and 

sustainable manner. 

 

In the words of Montreal Lake Cree Nation Chief Roger Bird: 

 

―We would like to thank the Minister … for making a great 

move to include First Nations in this endeavor, and we now 

have the task and challenge to create a better future for our 

young people in the forestry sector.‖ 

 

My government is also committed to working with local school 

boards to enhance business literacy, entrepreneurship and career 

education. 

 

Not everyone on Saskatchewan’s new road starts at the same 

place. 

 

Some need a helping hand. 

 

Others need continued support. 

 

Upon entering office, my government addressed a 

long-standing concern by doubling benefits provided to seniors. 

 

These benefits had remained unchanged for over a decade. 

 

Yet another challenge was an infrastructure deficit in long-term 

care. 



5674 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2010 

New facilities are much needed and some existing facilities are 

in dire need of capital improvements and repairs. 

 

My government is addressing these issues through extensive 

community consultations, detailed planning plus significant 

financial support for the needed engineering, architectural and 

design work. 

 

However, the innovation goes further. 

 

My government is committed to pursue innovative funding 

models to address the shortage of long term care beds through 

partnerships with reputable third party agencies. 

 

At least one of these new, innovative projects is underway right 

now in Saskatoon, with more to follow. 

 

Work also continues on providing home safety audits for 

low-income seniors across our province. 

 

From the Great Sand Hills in the southwest to our pristine 

northern boreal forest lakes, Saskatchewan’s landscape is 

comprised of many unique and irreplaceable features. 

 

These features must be protected for the enjoyment of future 

generations. 

 

This is why my government will be introducing measures 

designed specifically to protect these beautiful regions of our 

province. 

 

My government is also demonstrating its commitment to 

sustainability through support of expanded wind power 

capacity. 

 

That capacity will double between now and 2015 to a total of 

up to 400 megawatts of clean, green wind power. 

 

Another signal of my government’s commitment to the 

environment is its continued support for the EnerGuide 

program. 

 

EnerGuide and the federal ecoENERGY Retrofit-Homes 

program were designed to assist families in making their homes 

more energy efficient. 

 

These programs have helped Saskatchewan homeowners reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions by an estimated 75,535 tonnes per 

year. 

 

That’s the same as taking 13,730 cars off the road. 

 

Despite a federal decision to suspend the ecoENERGY 

program, my government this year allocated an additional $9.4 

million to the EnerGuide budget. 

 

With EnerGuide scheduled to wind-down in the spring, my 

government will use this opportunity to develop a new program 

that will continue to encourage homeowners to make energy 

efficiency upgrades. 

 

My government is also moving ahead with a new multi-material 

recycling program in Saskatchewan. 

Innovation is the wellspring from which future prosperity is 

drawn. 

 

In addition to the many steps my government has already taken 

to encourage growth in innovation, my government is pledging 

to invest $20 million over the next five years in a new 

technology commercialization fund. 

 

With the backing of the federal government, Saskatchewan 

universities and the private sector, my government’s plan is to 

enhance our support for Saskatchewan graduate students, 

especially in fields of new technologies and 

telecommunications. 

 

There may be unexpected turns along the way as Saskatchewan 

travels on its new road. 

 

For example, in recent weeks, there has been tremendous 

interest in the future of PotashCorp. 

 

My government has made it clear that, no matter who owns the 

potash mines, the potash belongs to the people of Saskatchewan 

 

This principle, and the best interests of our province and its 

people, will guide the actions of my government in its 

deliberations on this important matter. 

 

In the next few weeks, my government will review a series of 

recommendations from the Independent Panel examining 

Saskatchewan’s Child Welfare system. 

 

This review will provide my government with an opportunity to 

review longstanding efforts in this area, and continue a 

commitment to improve the lives of vulnerable children and 

youth. 

 

One initiative my government looks back on with justifiable 

pride was the launch in October of 2009 of the Saskatchewan 

Assured Income for Disability program. 

 

Work will continue on expanding enrollment and examining 

further opportunities for a more individualized income support 

system. 

 

My government realizes that a lack of affordable homes is 

creating challenges across Saskatchewan. 

 

To address this issue, details will soon be provided regarding a 

new program, Headstart On a Home. 

 

This new initiative will see my government help in the private 

sector construction of 1,000 new affordable homes over the 

next five years. 

 

Saskatchewan’s new road followed the torch to Vancouver for 

the Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. 

 

In order to succeed, future Saskatchewan Olympians and 

paralympians require more than our moral support. 

 

My government, in cooperation with SaskSport, is creating a 

special program for high performance athletes. 

 



October 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5675 

The new Saskatchewan Program for Athletic Excellence will 

support these young people as they train. 

 

This new program will support high performance athletes to a 

maximum of $6,000 each year in addition to existing funding 

programs. 

 

Saskatchewan’s new road will take visitors to new provincial 

parks. 

 

This fall, my government will begin identifying locations for 

new provincial parks and begin public consultations. 

 

This is in addition to the 1,000 electrified campsites my 

government has promised. 

 

Work on fulfilling that promise is ahead of schedule. 

 

My government remains committed to ensuring children in our 

province get enough exercise. 

 

The Ministry of Education has developed guidelines to make 

sure this happens. 

 

To date, there have been some promising success stories. 

 

Based on this success, the Ministry of Education will launch a 

new program, called ―Active Kids, Healthy Kids‖. 

 

Students will get at least 30 minutes of exercise each day and be 

urged to make healthy food choices at school and at home. 

 

A new emphasis on fostering relationships with other 

jurisdictions and engaging the world has led to the creation of a 

New West Partnership with Alberta and British Columbia. 

 

Together, these three jurisdictions are telling the powerful story 

of western Canada to the rest of the world. 

 

My government has made a concerted effort to tell the 

Saskatchewan success story throughout Canada and around the 

world. 

 

This effort will continue through a new national advertising 

campaign, targeting investors, ex-patriots and skilled workers. 

 

During the summer months, a decision by my government to 

fund clinical trials for a new MS treatment garnered 

considerable public and media attention. 

 

Our province has one of the highest rates of MS in the world. 

 

The decision was based on the broad, but admittedly anecdotal 

evidence concerning the efficacy of this treatment. 

 

Many Canadian and some Saskatchewan patients have gone to 

considerable expense and inconvenience to receive this new 

treatment. 

 

They deserve the best answers science can provide. 

 

This is why my government is moving forward with these trials. 

To that end, my government is committing $5 million to fund 

MS liberation clinical trials in Saskatchewan, based on 

proposals we receive from the scientific communities. 

 

A successful proposal will be chosen in early 2011, with 

clinical trials slated to begin this spring. 

 

Governments can choose to wait on the sidelines, simply 

benefiting from the investments of others. 

 

Or, governments can take an active role in advancing scientific 

understanding. 

 

On Saskatchewan’s new road, this is the approach we will take. 

 

THE LEGISLATIVE AGENDA 

 

In the coming months, members of this Assembly will have the 

opportunity to debate a series of important pieces of legislation, 

aimed at improving the lives of Saskatchewan people. 

 

New legislation will be introduced this fall to protect 

whistleblowers in Saskatchewan’s public service through the 

establishment of a new Public Disclosure Commissioner. 

 

There will be legislation to increase penalties for those who 

mistreat farm animals. 

 

Changes will be proposed to reduce provincial court delays and 

increase transparency and accountability for complaints 

involving provincial court judges. 

 

My government will also introduce new human rights 

legislation to streamline the complaints process and improve 

efficiency. 

 

Changes to the Local Government Election Act will establish 

four-year terms for municipal politicians and give 

municipalities the authority to require photo ID when 

conducting local elections. 

 

My government will also be introducing a similar act, requiring 

voters to produce photo ID when voting in provincial elections. 

 

CONCLUSION 

 

During this session, the Estimates for the New Year 

commencing April 1, 2011 will be submitted to you. 

 

The Public Accounts for the current year have been tabled. 

 

Saskatchewan is now well on its journey down the new road. 

 

The story of that journey is being told by many different voices. 

 

There are the voices of the women and men coming to our 

province from throughout Canada and from around the globe. 

 

They come to our province in search of a prosperity that is 

entrenched and opportunity that is available to all. 

 

There are the voices of the most vulnerable in our society, now 

more able to live in independence. 

 



5676 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2010 

There are the voices of our seniors, now being afforded the 

dignity and respect they deserve. 

 

And there are the voices of children, who will travel the furthest 

on this new road. 

 

The author and essayist Neil Postman says children are the 

living messages we send to a time we will not see. 

 

Today, our new road leads to the future we desire for ourselves 

and for our children. 

 

Today, the new road leads to Saskatchewan. 

 

On this road in the new Saskatchewan, the greatest traits of 

Saskatchewan people are manifest. 

 

Their resolve is strong. 

 

Their compassion is unrivaled. 

 

Their vision is clear. 

 

And their future is brighter than it has ever been before. 

 

Together, we travel down this new road with anticipation and 

confidence. 

 

I now leave you to the business of the Session, knowing that 

you will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May divine providence continue to bless our province and guide 

this Assembly in all of its deliberations. 

 

God Bless Saskatchewan. 

 

God Bless Canada. 

 

And God Save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask all of those gathered here this 

afternoon to rise as we pray, offer the traditional prayer, and 

then I’m going to invite Pastor Wells from Harvest City to offer 

a prayer for the province. 

 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious 

favour and further us with thy continual help, that in all our 

works, begun, continued, and ended in Thee, we may glorify 

thy holy name, and finally by Thy mercy attain everlasting life. 

Amen. 

 

I now invite Pastor Wells to offer a prayer for our province. 

 

Pastor Wells: — Let us pray. 

 

Dear Heavenly Father, we come before you today with our 

hearts full of thanksgiving for the privilege of living in such a 

great country and living in such a wonderful province. May we 

never take for granted the wonderful country in which we live 

and of the opportunities that we have to be here. 

 

Father we thank you for the freedom and we thank you for the 

future, the bright future that we have as citizens of this country 

and as citizens of this province. 

 

And today, Father, we sincerely ask you that you would give 

the members of this House grace and wisdom to govern this 

province in fairness, in justice, in truth, and in righteousness. 

Help them to have the insight and the foresight necessary to 

make the decisions which will increase the prosperity and the 

well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. Help them, Father, 

to work together effectively during this session and that much 

would be accomplished to move us forward as a province. 

 

Father, it is a heavy responsibility to govern a people, and I 

pray for each member of this House that you would strengthen 

their minds and strengthen their hearts and their hands. And 

Father, give them the grace necessary to fulfill their duties as 

elected members of this House. 

 

Father, may they lead us well. 

 

May the Lord bless you and be gracious to you. May he lift up 

his countenance upon you and give you peace. 

 

In Jesus’ name, we pray. Amen. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you Pastor Wells for your benediction 

for our province. 

 

Please remain standing for the departure of Their Honours. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:31.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a Bill 

respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be Laura Billet, Alana Dusyk, Sydney 

Lemieux, Kayla Malinowski, Quinn Nikulak, and Tristan 

Robertson. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — At this time I wish to inform the Assembly 



October 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5677 

that in order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the 

speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay 

on the Table. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Monday, November 1, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Monday, November 1, 2010. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

First of all, I would like to thank the guests and the members of 

the public for joining us today, and given the weather 

conditions those of you who were able to make it from outside 

of the city of Regina, we really want to thank you. Those from 

the city of Regina who joined us, thank you so much for joining 

us today. 

 

I would like to also thank the Hon. John Klebuc, Chief Justice 

of Saskatchewan; the Hon. R.D. Laing, Chief Justice of the 

Court of Queen’s Bench; the Hon. C.A. Snell, Chief Judge of 

the Provincial Court; and the members of the judiciary for your 

attendance today. 

 

And I would like to thank Pastor Dave Wells from Harvest City 

Church in Regina for taking part in today’s ceremony. 

 

Welcome to the children from Saskatoon — the children from 

Saskatoon from Celebration Choir. You’re wondering which 

children? They are seated in the west gallery, and they braved 

our weather conditions to join us today, and we extend a special 

welcome. We’ll look forward to hearing from you in a few 

short minutes. 

 

I would like to also thank the members of the following 

Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 

providing us with the guard of honour earlier this afternoon: 

Land Force Western Area Domestic Operations Detachment, 15 

Wing Moose Jaw, 17 Wing Detachment Dundurn, Royal 

Regina Rifles, North Saskatchewan Regiment, Saskatchewan 

Dragoons, 734 Communications Squadron, 737 

Communications Squadron, 16 Service Battalion, 16 Field 

Ambulance, HMCS Queen, and HMCS Unicorn. 

 

As well I would like to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 

Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun salute, the Royal Canadian 

Artillery band and 2 Wing Canadian Forces flying training 

school at 15 Wing for the flypast. 

 

I would also like to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 

immediately following the Chamber ceremonies. The tea will 

take place in two locations — room 218 in the west wing to 

your left as you exit the Chamber, and the library reading room 

in the east wing to your right as you exit the Chamber. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

I would now like to welcome the Celebration Choir from the 

Christian Centre Academy in Saskatoon. The choir is under the 

direction of Mrs. Andrea Johnson and accompanied by Mrs. 

Anne MacMillan. 

 

The choir will sing two selections for us this afternoon — 

―Holy is the Lord‖ and ―Movin’ Up To Glory Land.‖ 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, the Celebration Choir. 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, I want to thank the 

choir for that excellent performance. Truly, we truly enjoyed 

your music and we just trust you’ll just keep on singing. 

 

They will also be performing for us in the rotunda this 

afternoon, so if you have another opportunity just to listen to 

some of their music, take that time. I’m sure you’ll be blessed 

and it’ll be uplifting. 

 

Before our departures, I have one more announcement. I would 

ask the members and guests to observe the following order 

when departing the Chamber: the Speaker’s party will be 

followed by His Honour’s party, the Premier and the Provincial 

Secretary, Leader of the Opposition and Mrs. Lingenfelter, 

judges of the Court of Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial 

Court, members of the cabinet and their spouses, other members 

of the Legislative Assembly and their spouses, and guests. 

 

And don’t forget please join us for tea, room 218 and the 

Library. 

 

This House stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:45.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE ................................................................................................................................................. 5671 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5676 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5676 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5676 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5677 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


