




















































Hansard: March 07, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 26B  MONDAY, MARCH 7, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6529 

 March 7, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Debate will resume on Bill No. 149. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is again a pleasure to resume the debate on this very important 

topic. You know, we get Bills in the fall and we read about 

them and we do our research. And we start to think about what 

does this really mean for the province of Saskatchewan, does it 

mean for the people for Saskatchewan, of course. We come 

back with a lot of questions that need to be answered. 

 

We are in some very serious times when it comes to mining and 

industry related to mining, that we need to make sure we‟re 

doing it right and that we‟ve thought it all the way through and 

all the structures are in place, all the scenarios have been 

thought of, that we know what‟s going to happen in the best 

case scenario that‟s good news for everyone; we know what‟s 

going to happen in the worst case scenario. We hope that 

doesn‟t happen, but what happens if it does? And also the most 

likely scenario, and that‟s the one that the plans are I think quite 

often laid out for. 

 

And so in this case we are talking about Bill No. 149, An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. And I want to read, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, some of the notes because it is very important 

that we get it on record. Many of the folks who are watching 

today at home or wherever they may be don‟t know, don‟t have 

access to all the information we do, and so they may be 

wondering what‟s behind this. So I want to take a minute and 

just quote the explanation behind clause 3, I believe it is, of the 

Bill. And the explanation, and I quote: 

 

On December 3, 2009, the Government announced (via 

news release and Ministerial statement by the Minister of 

Enterprise) a new targeted tax incentive that would 

provide a five-year [five-year] corporate income tax 

holiday for corporations that process mineral imported 

into the province. 

 

It continues, and I quote: 

 

A new section is being created in The Income Tax Act, 

2000 to provide for a five-year corporate income tax 

holiday for companies that engage in the processing of 

minerals imported into Saskatchewan from elsewhere in 

Canada. 

 

To be eligible, a corporation must be in the business of 

mineral processing and must make a minimum capital 

investment of $125 million in Saskatchewan. In addition, 

the corporation must employ a minimum of 75 employees 

in Saskatchewan and must allocate at least 90 per cent of 

its taxable income to Saskatchewan for income tax 

purposes. 

 

So that‟s relatively straightforward. It‟s a two-pager of 

explanations, so what could be wrong with something so short? 

Well I tell you that really when we have that kind of lack of 

clarity, we come forward with a lot of questions. We don‟t 

know what was the history behind this suggestion, this Bill. 

Where did it come from? Are there particular industries that are 

targeted that we‟re looking for? We don‟t know the size of 

businesses. We see minimums that they must have at least 75 

employees in Saskatchewan, so we‟re not sure who are these 

folks that we‟re talking about. It seems like a pretty blanket 

statement. And then you might ask, well how could we be 

against something so neutral? I mean how could this be wrong? 

 

Well you know, sometimes the best laid plans come awry when 

we really haven‟t thought everything out, and so I do worry 

about this. What kind of thinking was behind this, you know, 

and especially from this government? And we‟ve seen it in a 

variety of areas last session. We need to just talk about the 

wildlife habitat Act — relatively straightforward. Well clearly 

there were problems with that. 

 

We see this even today with questions in question period 

around the education funding formula and what‟s happening 

with that. Why is it that we have to wait until after the election 

when it was promised that there would be a formula in place 

that everybody would know beforehand about what is actually 

happening to the education funding? And they say it‟s too 

complex. It‟s too complex. You have to wait another year. You 

have to wait. And we‟ve already waited one year. Why do we 

have to wait? What is it? What is the problem here? 

 

These folks, when they made these announcements around 

education property tax . . . Very welcome news, but was it well 

thought out? Was it well thought out? I have to ask that 

question. So we have to ask about, where did this come from? 

And we have some real, real concerns about that because 

there‟s some real questions about the skill sets that this 

government has been demonstrating that would lead one to ask 

some serious questions. And I hope the public is watching this 

because clearly when it comes to resources in Saskatchewan, 

people are keying in now, wondering what‟s happening with 

Saskatchewan people. Are they getting their fair share? Have 

we sold the deal a little too easily? This is really, really an 

issue, you know. 

 

And I will talk more about this because there‟s a lot of parallels 

that we can make with the Potash Corp of Saskatchewan and 

the royalty structure there. Of course that‟s royalty and some of 

the profit taxes, that type of thing. These industries of course, I 

would assume, would not be paying royalties because they‟re 

bringing the resources in from out of the province, so they 

would be paying royalties out of the province, I assume, just the 

corporate taxes here in Saskatchewan. So we want to make sure 

we understand that, you know. 



6530 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

And of course, and I‟ll refer to this in a few minutes, there‟s 

been some interesting writing that‟s been going on by a lot of 

folks who‟ve been paying a lot of attention about pledges and 

what do pledges mean. Pledges of full-time jobs and new 

investments mean different things to different people. And of 

course if they‟re not written down, when we get right into the 

heart of the business, then that‟s where problems arise and 

misinterpretations: and I thought you meant this; and okay, 

that‟s good enough for now, we don‟t want to rock the boat. 

But we need to make sure we understand everything upfront. 

And this is quite the thing when we have mining companies 

looking for tax holidays, and what have they pledged in 

exchange for these tax holidays? And we want to make sure this 

government holds them to account for their promises. 

 

And of course we have some real issues about how successful 

this government has been at holding companies to their 

commitments. And so we have questions about, where did this 

piece of legislation come from? Who benefits? What were the 

origins, and where will the benefits likely go? Will there be 

new greenfield investments? Is this intended to benefit one or 

two players? Who asked for it? We have a lot of questions, and 

of course we will have some time to do that when we get into 

committee, and we‟re looking forward to that. 

 

But of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to refer to some 

of the wording in the Act tonight because we want to make sure 

that people understand what we were talking about. And I know 

some of my colleagues on this side have asked some questions 

about why iron ore at a certain stage is exempt or not allowed 

and exempt in other circumstances. But I want to read section 

(5) of section 64.1, the mineral processing tax refund. 64.5 goes 

on: 

 

On receipt of an application pursuant to subsection (2), the 

minister may: 

 

if the minister is satisfied that the applicant is an 

eligible corporation and has complied with this section, 

grant a refund for the taxation year for which the 

refund is claimed and each of the next four taxation 

years equal to the amount of the corporation‟s refund 

within the meaning of subsection (6) for each of those 

taxation years; 

 

And I want to read into the record what subsection (6), just in 

case actually not only the people at home but some of the 

members opposite may not have read this as well, and I know 

sometimes that has happened. And I quote subsection (6): 

 

The amount of a corporation‟s refund for a taxation year 

is equal to the amount of tax payable and paid by the 

corporation pursuant to this Act for the taxation . . . after 

claiming all deductions and credits to which it is entitled 

for the taxation year. 

 

So there‟s no percentages; there‟s no cap. These folks just get it 

all back. And we don‟t know what . . . We talk about minimums 

of the number of employees that are in the province. It‟s got to 

be 75, the 90 per cent in the province. But there‟s no 

maximums. There‟s no . . . What happens if that particular 

mineral, when it‟s finished being refined, is really doing well in 

the marketplace? And we go, well we didn‟t see that happening. 

We didn‟t see that happening. Maybe we should have had an 

opportunity to put a cap on this. We have a minimum but we 

don‟t have a maximum. Is that good planning, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? I have to ask that. 

 

Earlier I talked about the different scenarios: good case, bad 

case. What happens if they do really well and people in 

Saskatchewan are saying, we could be getting more for this? 

We could be getting more for this. We didn‟t realize that we 

were giving away all our corporate taxes here for five years, for 

five years. And there‟s no end date to this as well. This is not 

targeted for the next 10 or 20 years. This is open-ended. This 

goes on. This just goes on. 

 

And so I have some real concerns about this because this is not 

targeting a certain resource to say we want to develop it 

because it would compliment what we do here in 

Saskatchewan. It doesn‟t seem to fit into that kind of thinking. 

It doesn‟t target a specific one, and it doesn‟t target within a 

specific time frame to say, okay. 

 

And we‟ve heard this government say about royalties now that 

they‟re not going to look at it for the next three or four terms, 

that they at one point had said for a long time into the future, 

but at least that‟s a time limit. Here there‟s no time limit on this. 

And so I have some real concerns about this because this really 

opens up the door, really opens up the door to say, you said we 

could do this forever. You said we could do this forever. 

 

How many times can they do it? Is it just a one five-year period 

and then they‟ve got that when they enter into Saskatchewan to 

start up their new refining facilities, that type of thing? So I 

have some real concerns about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because I think this is opening up the gate, and clearly we can 

see what has happened in some of the other resources in our 

province within that mining sector. 

 

And I know the debate that‟s upon us right now fits very well 

into Bill 149 around royalties because clearly they are a mirror. 

They‟re very much parallel to each other because it talks about 

good management skills. How do you encourage an industry to 

come to a province? How do you encourage an industry to 

expand? 

 

So I have a few quotes I would like to share with you and share 

with the House, share with the people at home because I think 

in a lot of ways this sheds a lot of light on why we should have 

some concerns about Bill 149 and why we will have a lot of 

questions when it comes to the House. 

 

I want to quote Erin Weir. Now some of you may have heard of 

Erin. Erin is a senior economist at the international trade union 

convention in Brussels. And he wrote in February 10th, and I 

quote, “The evidence, however . . . is that Saskatchewan is 

collecting far too little revenue from potash and could collect 

substantially more without impeding development.” 

 

So here we have a question here: five years tax holiday, tax 

holiday. They‟re not paying royalties, so in fact these folks 

come in and it‟s wide open, open-ended. Are we going to have 

the same scenario with these other companies here? And here, I 

think this is a very important quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He 

goes on and he says, “Potash prices have tripled since 2004.” 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6531 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carry on. I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a pleasure 

to see two individuals seated up in the Assembly here tonight 

that are friends likely of many members inside this Assembly 

here today. And I would like to welcome Heather McIntyre and 

Jennifer Milne Bisson to their Assembly, and I ask all members 

to join with me in providing them a warm welcome. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. And I‟d like to say that we‟ll 

welcome the guests as well. But I‟d like to continue on with 

what Mr. Weir has said, and I quote: 

 

Potash prices have tripled since 2004. Incentives that 

might have seemed reasonable to prompt mine 

expansions in August 2003 or April 2005 are not needed 

to justify continuing those expansions today. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what he‟s making a point is times 

change. And how will we live with times that change here with 

these, with this kind of Bill before us in Bill 149? 

 

[19:15] 

 

And I go on: 

 

Even if the government continues some or all of its 

incentives for new production, there are other ways to 

increase revenue. For example, profit tax rates could be 

raised on sales up to the 2001-2002 . . . [range]. 

 

But there is other ways to get these folks in there, other ways. It 

should have been much more explicit in terms of caps on how 

much these folks would be able to keep. What would be a 

reasonable amount in terms of the profits that they are making 

and will make in Saskatchewan? So we have some real 

questions, we have some real questions about this. And of 

course Mr. Erin Weir goes on, and I quote: 

 

However, Wall‟s “shareholders” are the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. His speech that rejected BHP‟s takeover 

bid for PCS seemed to recognize the public interest. 

Specifically, Wall referred to, “Your revenue, the rent 

you should be getting for the resource that you own.” 

 

So here he is pointing out the hypocrisy over here where you 

have them sticking up and saying we should be getting our fair 

share, we should be getting our fair rent. But when it comes to 

other ones, they have some real questions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to another, another article 

that I think can share some light on this. And this is one that 

we‟re all familiar with, and this would be Mr. Murray Mandryk 

who wrote in the Leader Post, “A fair return for potash the 

most important pledge.” Well what Mr. Mandryk says, and I 

quote: 

 

But while we should be grateful for the generosity and 

renewed commitment to good corporate citizenry 

PotashCorp displayed on Monday, we shouldn‟t be 

distracted from the fact that what PotashCorp really owes 

the people of Saskatchewan is fair value for the right to 

mine our potash resources. 

 

Now that‟s talking about the royalties, but again we could be 

making the case for taxes paid in Saskatchewan, especially 

when you come to a five-year tax holiday. Here he‟s talking 

about, we‟ll probably see corporations who are very generous. 

And I do want to say that it‟s great when corporations do their 

bit and show good corporate citizenry. But one part that they 

should be making sure they do is pay their taxes. 

 

And so when you have an open-ended Bill like this, I do have 

some real questions about this. Because I see, are we going 

down this road yet again? We have an open-ended Bill that 

really doesn‟t take into account all the different scenarios that 

might happen, that might happen. We all hope for the very best. 

We all hope for the very best. But what happens if things either 

go really well or really badly, and you have some issues here 

and you really didn‟t mean for all those things to happen? So 

we have some real concerns. 

 

And Mr. Mandryk goes on, and I quote: 

 

But contrast that with what national business leaders like 

money expert Stephen Jarislowsky of Jarislowsky Fraser 

are saying. During the PotashCorp takeover he questioned 

not only the profitability of resource companies, but also 

why resource company and other corporate executives 

feel entitled to massive salaries and share benefits. It‟s 

reassuring that some business leaders do “get it” in the 

wake of the 2008 corporate bailouts. 

 

So here we have a situation that we may be allowing 

corporations — and of course again we don‟t know who these 

corporations are — to really have some fantastic wages and 

salaries and benefits. And people in Saskatchewan are 

wondering, are we getting our fair share of our corporate taxes 

these people should be paying? Do we know? Do we know? 

Well I tell you, by the information we‟ve received, no, we don‟t 

know. We absolutely don‟t know. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go on to another letter that 



6532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

came out in the Leader-Post. And this one was February 15, 

2011, and the headline is “Fair return for Saskatchewan 

potash?” And this is written by John R. McClement. And John 

writes, and I quote: 

 

However if one pays attention to what is going on in 

today‟s global market place, the royalty structure is 

broken, out of touch with today‟s reality. PotashCorp 

CEO Bill Doyle observed that the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan has a bright future, a future that‟s driven 

by increased demand and higher prices, not as he 

suggests, by the tax structure put in place by the NDP. 

 

He goes on, and I quote: 

 

With dwindling food stocks driving up the demand for 

the potash needed to help maximize production from the 

world‟s dwindling arable lands, Saskatchewan need no 

longer set royalties with the misguided notion that royalty 

rates determine the level of mining in the province. The 

marketplace has and will continue to set the price and 

demand for potash. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this sounds like a free market 

person who‟s talking about the marketplace will set the action, 

the growth of the industry. So here we have the Sask Party over 

here willing to get involved in a very sloppy way. I‟ve got to 

tell you, as I‟ve alluded to many times, some very open-ended 

questions here, some loose ends that we don‟t know where 

they‟re going to go. And we‟re going to have the same kind of 

questions being asked around what‟s happened with potash. 

 

We don‟t know how big these companies are. We know the 

minimum. We know there‟s at least 75 employees and they‟ve 

got to invest 125 million in Saskatchewan. Those are the floors 

of the numbers, but we don‟t know how big it will be. But we 

do know they‟re going to get at least a five-year tax holiday. 

And maybe they get a year off and then they come back and get 

another five-year tax holiday. And they pay one year out of 11 

years. Who knows? Those are questions that we need to know. 

 

Hey the government sort of smiles at that but, you know, it‟s 

not spelled out here very carefully. And they need to have some 

answers — that‟s a one time only. I didn‟t see that in the notes. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to just read from an 

editorial, Tuesday, February 15th, the day after that Valentine‟s 

Day event up in Saskatoon. And I thought this was very 

interesting: The StarPhoenix opinion that day, “Royalty regime 

needs revisiting despite pledges.” And I quote, “With apologies 

to Robert Service, „there are strange things done in 

Saskatchewan by the men who moil for potash.‟” 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

And since Mr. Service‟s poem is, at its essence, a 

cautionary tale about the dangers in making promises 

under stress, the cross-promises set out at Monday‟s 

chamber luncheon are worth noting. 

 

So here you have a situation where promises have been made. 

We don‟t know who the promises have been made to. We don‟t 

know who are the players here. We have no idea how big these 

companies are. All we know is they get a five-year tax holiday. 

And I have some real concerns, you know. I have some real 

concerns. 

 

Now it goes on, and I quote: 

 

To its credit, the PotashCorp has been one of the most 

significant private benefactors to the charitable sector in 

Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. The abundant use of its 

name across athletic fields and facilities at the University 

of Saskatchewan is a testament to that. 

 

And that‟s for sure. But, and I continue my quote: 

 

After all, as Mr. Service wrote, “Now a promise made is a 

debt unpaid, and the trail has its own stern code.” 

 

Yes, well: 

 

This is particularly the case considering the state of 

industry. Not only have PotashCorp shares since soared 

well above what BHP was offering in its takeover 

attempt, but 2010 was the second most profitable in 

PCS‟s history. 

 

Profits are very good. It continues to go on: 

 

For one thing [and I quote, for one thing] this may very well be 

a debt that Mr. Wall might not be able to cover, since the tax 

regime always lies within the purview of the government in 

power. While the premier can commit to keep the tax at any 

level he wants, politics may have something else to say about it. 

 

And it goes on: 

 

And there is evidence that Mr. Wall‟s commitment may 

be better for the potash company than for his own 

constituents. While it is important to assure a predictable 

tax regime remains in place, it‟s even more important that 

the taxes are fair to the people who own the resource. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that just underlines the case, that taxes are 

fair — now in this case where the people own the resource, but 

for all the people in this province. Here we‟ve been talking 

about a five-year tax holiday. Who gets a five-year tax holiday? 

I haven‟t got one. Many of my constituents won‟t get one. And 

this is really an issue. Now they may think this is a little light; 

this is not a big deal. What‟s a five-year tax holiday? But this is 

really, really a problem. 

 

And I would like to continue with how it ends. And I quote, 

“One appreciates the commitment by the PotashCorp, but Mr. 

Wall‟s promise makes one wonder whether we aren‟t being 

bought cheaply with our own money.” 

 

So I have to ask over there, are we being bought cheaply by our 

own money? Are we being bought cheaply by our own money? 

I think this is really an issue. 

 

And I‟ll end it with a very last line because I think it‟s very 

good, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Again, with apologies to Mr. Service, Saskatchewan 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6533 

could be left “With a corpse half hid that it couldn‟t get 

rid, because of a promise given.” 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a real, this is a real issue here. 

And we have a Bill that‟s promising a tax holiday for five 

years. Now of course there will be, there will be some benefits, 

some benefits. We‟re not arguing that there won‟t be any 

benefits. But we are saying, is it fair and is it balanced? 

 

Here this Bill does not have a cap on how much the company 

will save in corporate taxes. It‟s a holiday. They don‟t pay any. 

It sounds like from this they won‟t pay any. And if this 

government can live with that, I have some questions because I 

know, I know there‟s lots of things we could be spending with 

resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province we see poverty 

increasing. We see housing issues that need to be resolved. This 

government just recently announced some $34 million in a 

housing initiative — very few details in their press release. 

They talked about it going to 100 communities. We don‟t know 

how much each community will get. But we see next door in 

Alberta with a housing strategy, a complete comprehensive 

housing strategy, they‟re putting money in there. This 

government is refusing to do that. They‟ve gone on a 

pre-election spending spree. There is no sustainability to it and 

this, this really underlines that kind of thinking, that kind of 

thinking. We‟re wondering how sustainable can this be here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so as I come to the end of my remarks, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as again I say I have some real, real questions. And I 

know many people before me have spoken on this issue, and I 

think there is some real concerns that we have. We have some 

real concerns because as people across this province become 

more aware of our resources that we have in Saskatchewan and 

our right to have a fair return on those resources, both in terms 

of taxes and in terms of royalties, people are making sure that 

we do get our share, our share. It‟s only reasonable. And 

nobody‟s arguing or shouldn‟t be arguing, no, you folks, you 

can‟t get your fair share. We want to make sure that we bring in 

corporations at any cost. And I think that‟s dangerous when we 

say at any cost. 

 

The background here is very thin, very thin. We don‟t know 

who we‟re targeting. Who are the corporations we‟re trying to 

entice, trying to bring in here. And I think that would be only 

incumbent on the government to come forth with that and say, 

this is what we‟re trying to do. This is the kind of industry 

we‟re trying to develop, and we have a 10-year plan, we have a 

10-year plan to do it. Here there‟s no, there is no end in sight. 

 

And so I have some real issues with Bill No. 149. And of 

course we are looking forward to seeing in committee but, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I move now to adjourn debate on Bill 149. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

this evening to join in on the discussion in adjourned debates 

with a focus on Bill No. 150, An Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is not overly long 

compared to some other pieces of legislation that are considered 

by the Assembly here. But as you know and as listeners at 

home know, every piece of legislation requires scrutiny. 

Because when you look below the surface, when you look at 

the details of any piece of legislation and what some of the 

implications are, one can often be surprised about what can be 

revealed about the intention behind a piece of legislation and 

some of the potential problems that may exist with a proposed 

piece of legislation even if it does not appear to be overly 

extensive. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, in looking at Bill No. 150, it‟s one 

example where we see a bit of a mix with respect to bits of the 

legislation that deal with housekeeping measures and other ones 

that have more serious implications with respect to the 

transparency that operates within the Legislative Assembly — 

transparency with respect to spending for employees or 

contractors and transparency for the public to have an 

understanding of where their tax dollars are going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill No. 150 addresses issues that can be 

grouped into three different aspects. The first one, Mr. Speaker, 

as the minister said in his second reading speech, addresses the 

calculation of the surviving spouse‟s pension after the member 

has retired. So, Mr. Speaker, basically a piece of legislation that 

proposes greater clarification with respect to how the pension 

that one is entitled to is handled when an individual passes 

away, and there‟s a surviving member who was married to or 

attached to the person who passed away, and how that is 

calculated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for this type of thing it is of course fitting that the Assembly 

introduces legislation that can assist with that process and 

provide greater clarity. Certainly when an individual passes 

away, and finances and dealing with estates and that sort of 

thing are inevitably involved when someone passes away, 

whatever role this province can have in dealing with the 

benefits that someone is entitled to and ensuring that that is 

done in a clear and transparent and smooth manner, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s in the benefit of all people. And it‟s something 

that the government should endeavour to facilitate and 

encourage. 

 



6534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

So on that aspect of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, if it is simply 

to improve that process, provide greater clarity to that process, 

a process that will benefit a surviving partner when someone 

has passed away, Mr. Speaker, I think many members and 

people in the public would agree that that‟s an appropriate and a 

smart thing to do. 

 

The second part of Bill 150, Mr. Speaker, as described by the 

minister in his second reading remarks, is section 48.1. And it‟s 

described as a housekeeping change that‟ll make the Act 

comply with the Income Tax Act of Canada. So in this aspect of 

the legislation, obviously an understanding that there are 

implications for what occurs on the provincial level with 

respect to taxation at the federal level, and that certain 

housekeeping changes need to occur in order to ensure that a 

matter is dealt with properly and that there aren‟t problems 

from a consistency perspective between the two jurisdictions. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, as is the case with many types of 

legislation that can be characterized as housekeeping, if the 

proposed changes are in fact simply about housekeeping and 

about modernizing legislation to ensure that it complies with 

other aspects of legislation or meets the needs of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, I think that is part of the routine business 

of the Legislative Assembly in ensuring that the legislation in 

the province is up to date and consistent with other types of 

legislation. 

 

So from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, that seems like a decent 

approach to pursue. And I know officials in the Ministry of 

Justice certainly review legislation on an ongoing basis, identify 

where housekeeping matters need to take place, and it‟s brought 

forward in that manner. And that‟s appropriate to do so if in 

fact it is simply housekeeping, and I will place that caveat on 

the statement. 

 

And I place that caveat on the statement, Mr. Speaker, because 

what we have seen often from members opposite is an attempt 

to make changes, describe them as housekeeping, but then not 

be fully open with respect to some of the more broad 

implications that a potential change may in fact have. 

 

And the third aspect, Mr. Speaker, where I do see some 

concerns and some problems and perhaps an effort by members 

opposite to not be fully transparent with respect to what the 

game plan is and what the intent is for a certain piece of 

legislation, that is the third aspect to Bill 150. And, in the 

minister‟s words on the second reading speech, it stated, 

“Three, the third amendment to section 69 will eliminate the 

need to include personal information in the pension plan annual 

reports.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand when that bit of information is 

included with two other measures that seem largely about 

housekeeping or improving an existing process. I think the third 

aspect though, Mr. Speaker, cannot be categorized in the same 

as the first two measures. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because 

I think there are more serious implications with this change. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with the implications around 

transparency, about being upfront with the people of 

Saskatchewan, and about being open and accountable to the 

Saskatchewan people with respect to the spending decisions 

that are made by the government. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, members will know and many people at 

home will know, Mr. Speaker, that when it‟s required that for 

expenditures going to an individual or a corporation that is 

providing a service to the province of Saskatchewan, when an 

individual makes more than $50,000 a year, that information is 

publicly disclosed in public accounts. And that‟s done, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure transparency and accountability. 

 

It‟s done so that members of the public are able to receive the 

documents associated with public accounts, they are able to go 

through the documents, and they are able to see who is 

providing the service, who is doing work, and how much that 

individual is getting paid if it‟s over $50,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that‟s an appropriate thing because when making 

decisions about contracts or about decisions that occur in a 

local situation in a given area or in a given sector or field, in 

order to ensure transparency and in order to ensure that 

everything remains above board with respect to the selection of 

individuals, it‟s necessary for the public to know who is 

receiving funding. Because after all, Mr. Speaker, it is their 

resources and it is their province so the people of Saskatchewan 

have a right to know who, in fact, cheques are going to in 

exchange for services given. 

 

And that is an appropriate thing, and it‟s a basic principle of the 

public accounts process. And it‟s something, Mr. Speaker, that 

separates a democracy from a process that . . . from a country or 

a situation or a local environment that does not follow 

democratic protocol, that is not open, that is not transparent, 

that does not ensure that the public‟s interest is first and 

foremost when making decisions. 

 

Now my concern, Mr. Speaker, is that with the proposed 

changes in section three, it eliminates the need to disclose that 

sort of information for individuals who are retired and receiving 

a pension. Now for many individuals if they are retired, they are 

in fact retired, and that is they‟re on the golf course or they‟re 

spending time with family and grandchildren or they‟re 

pursuing a hobby or they‟ve done maybe perhaps a complete 

shift in change in career goals and doing something completely 

different. That‟s what many retirees choose to do. And that‟s 

certainly an appropriate thing to do for those who are retired. 

They‟re entitled to do so, and it‟s understandable if individuals 

want to work or pursue interests in a completely different area. 

 

We do know, Mr. Speaker, from time to time individuals who 

are retired want to use the skills and the experience that they‟ve 

gained throughout the course of their careers. They may not 

want to work in the exact same venue or they may not want to 

work with the same structure or they might not want to do all of 

the job that they once did, but they may want to stay engaged. 

They may want to pursue employment and receive contracts of 

some nature. And so, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the case in many 

sectors and that is also the case in the public sector. There are 

individuals who have served the province very faithfully and 

honestly and diligently for many years, and when they hit the 

point where it‟s in their interest that they may want to retire and 

try something else, that‟s the case with civil servants. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that civil servant who has experience is 

retired, receiving a pension, and has experience and wants to 

pursue a contract or an employment that is within the public 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6535 

sector, that‟s when it becomes an interesting question, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to policy, with respect to transparency, 

with respect to being upfront and open with the Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s why the third aspect of this proposed 

legislation, where the amount paid to individuals would no 

longer have to be disclosed, that‟s where there is in my opinion 

a problem and a need for increased transparency in order to 

ensure, in order to ensure that the public‟s interest is being 

promoted, is being defended, and is in fact being advanced. I 

think that is something that all Saskatchewan people would 

agree with. 

 

And the interesting bit, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to other issues 

that have been going on in the province and actions that have 

been done by members opposite in their role as government, 

really this issue gains even more relevance and importance 

when looking at decisions members opposite have made about 

reducing the staffing levels within the civil service. There has 

been a very clear and open plan by members opposite to reduce 

the size of the civil service — I think commonly referred to as a 

four by four — where there is a stated intent by members 

opposite to reduce the civil service by 4 per cent in each year 

over four years. That‟s where the four by four comes from. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are entitled to make such 

a decision because they‟re the government. And if that‟s a 

decision that they want to make, then they‟re entitled to do so. 

They‟re entitled to . . . They ought to let people know about that 

decision and be very open and transparent about that decision. 

 

Now the catch is, Mr. Speaker, while it may be a political aim 

and a political goal to reduce the size of the civil service, we do 

know that civil servants provide a very, very important role on 

a daily basis in providing services to Saskatchewan people 

whether that . . . in whatever ministry they are operating in, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that civil servants, especially in 

Saskatchewan, have a very sound reputation for providing 

high-quality services to Saskatchewan people and services that 

Saskatchewan people appreciate. That‟s an important thing. 

 

So we know that while members opposite may have a stated 

intent to reduce the civil service four by four, 4 per cent over 

each of the four years, we also know, Mr. Speaker, that 

members opposite will have pressure from the public to 

continue delivering services to Saskatchewan people because 

that‟s what Saskatchewan people expect. There‟s a high value 

placed on the public services that are provided to the general 

public population by our public servants. 

 

So the issue is, there‟s a stated political goal that members 

opposite have in shrinking the public service by 4 per cent over 

four years in each year, but there‟s also another political 

pressure, Mr. Speaker, to continue providing the same level of 

services, if not greater services, to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So the problem is those are two competing goals, Mr. Speaker, 

because yes, while at times perhaps there are some efficiencies 

that can be gained and there are certain steps that can be taken 

in order to continue providing services, but at the end of the 

day, Mr. Speaker, it requires people to provide the services, to 

make decisions, give recommendations to ministers, and so on. 

And it requires people, it requires civil servants to run a quality 

civil service. I know that may be a shocker to some members 

opposite, but the civil servants in the province are in many 

ways the backbone to the public services that are provided to 

the people of Saskatchewan throughout the year. 

 

So we can see a situation, when members have a stated goal to 

shrink the civil service but also have a goal to provide the same 

level of services or greater services, they‟re in a bit of a tight 

spot, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s where it could be, in certain 

instances, attractive to engage retirees in employment or in 

contracts in order to meet the expectations that Saskatchewan 

people have about services provided by the public service. So 

increasingly as we see individuals of retiring age taking up their 

rightful option to retire, we may also see in the province an 

increased use of these retirees in meeting the needs of the civil 

service and, in so doing, meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So we could be in a situation where there is an increasing 

reliance on retired civil servants to be fulfilling the previous 

role that they served in or perhaps a component of the previous 

role that they served in or perhaps using the expertise that they 

have from one area and applying it to a different area. But still 

the issue that we may see increasingly in the province is retirees 

who have moved away from the standard job that they had and 

pursuing different options. And I could see the attraction, Mr. 

Speaker, of the government when, in order to meet the 

four-by-four target that they have listed for shrinking the size of 

the civil service, I could see an increasing reliance on these 

retirees to provide many of the services that are needed. 

 

Now the issue is, Mr. Speaker, is the transparency around who 

they are hiring, how much those people are being repaid, and if 

in fact it is a recent retiree from the civil service who is now 

providing a very similar service or a portion of the services that 

they provided as an employee. So what this could get us into, 

Mr. Speaker, if the government is successful in bringing 

forward this third aspect of the legislation and not disclosing 

the amount that retirees receive, it could lead us into the 

situation, Mr. Speaker, of a shell game where there are 

individuals who were once employed in the civil service, who 

were receiving a wage as an employee, they‟re now working as 

a contractor or employment through a different means within 

the civil service, but they are collecting their pension as well as 

their new source of income based on the work that they are 

providing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in many circumstances it may make good 

sense to have a retiree stay on board to help with the transition 

for a new individual, to provide, to do a job-share relationship 

as someone else is brought on as experience is gained. In those 

situations, engaging a retiree to do work in the province may be 

a smart thing to do. It may be a good transition strategy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s only a good strategy if it‟s done in a 

transparent and open manner. And that requires the public to 

have the knowledge about what an individual is receiving. 

Because if that approach of using individuals on a part-time or 

on a contract basis to provide a service, that is a major aspect of 

what the public service is going to do on the instruction of the 



6536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

government. And if that approach is also tied to their goal of 

reducing the civil service four by four — 4 per cent over each 

of the four years . . . in each year over four years — then, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s not being open and transparent. Because while 

individuals may have shifted from one type of employment to 

another type of employment or contract, they‟re still working 

for the province. 

 

But if those numbers are counted in such a way that when the 

individuals make that transition they are counted as supporting 

the four-by-four reduction, well I don‟t think that‟s being very 

open and transparent with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, because the public is paying twice for these 

individuals. 

 

And I think for a government that came in and promised open 

and transparent government in the same way that the Harper 

administration in Ottawa has done so, Mr. Speaker, for them to 

take this approach where they want to be able to hide what an 

individual is earning but still engage them on a contract or 

part-time basis, I don‟t think that is an approach that I 

appreciate. I know it‟s not an approach that I appreciate. And I 

know for the many Saskatchewan people who want 

transparency and openness and straight-up clearness with what 

decisions are being made and how that is affecting the bottom 

line in the province, I don‟t think that‟s an approach that they 

also want. 

 

Well members opposite may not appreciate what I just said, and 

they may not agree with it. And in past pieces of legislation, as 

has been the case when members opposite haven‟t agreed with 

something, they‟ve often just said, well trust me. Trust us, Mr. 

Speaker, is what members opposite have said. You can trust 

that we are doing X, and we‟re accomplishing it this way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think when it comes to being open and 

transparent, there‟s a clear record from members opposite, a 

clear record that they‟re not exactly happy to be open and 

transparent in all circumstances. They‟re not exactly jumping at 

the opportunity to provide Saskatchewan people with the most 

current and with the most relevant information. 

 

The example, Mr. Speaker — while I could go through the bits 

of legislation that we‟ve addressed over the past year or so, and 

there are many examples — the most recent example that many 

individuals at home will recall is the failed venture the 

members opposite have participated in, which is the carbon 

capture and sequestration project. And members in the 

Assembly and individuals at home will recall a huge 

announcement that was made by the Premier with respect to 

carbon capture and sequestration — how this was a game 

changer, as an expression the Premier may like to use from time 

to time, that this was a new era that we were leading on this 

issue in the world, an example for the rest of the world to 

follow on this particular issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean it was a nice photo op for members 

opposite and garnered some attention for a period of time. But, 

Mr. Speaker, what did we just find out recently in the last week 

or so? Well we actually found out that that project is completely 

dead. All of the hype, all of the glitz, all of the glam that was 

associated with that project and with the fanfare that surrounded 

that, Mr. Speaker, it failed. It‟s over. It‟s done. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s one thing, it‟s one thing if the awareness of that 

flop had just come to the members opposite in knowledge. It‟d 

be one thing . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. The 

conversations are getting a little loud. I‟m having a hard time 

hearing the member. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. So when the 

public and the opposition learned of the failed carbon capture 

and sequestration project, despite the huge, huge deal that was 

made of it in this Assembly and elsewhere, it would be one 

thing, Mr. Speaker, if that flop, the failure had just occurred. 

But what we discovered was it actually had died last fall. It had 

died months and months ago. And members opposite simply 

failed to let folks know about it. 

 

Oh, did we forget to tell you about that? I‟m sorry. Remember 

that huge, huge deal we made about a huge, huge 

accomplishment that we had done? Well it actually didn‟t 

happen. And it actually happened many, many months ago — 

the failure for it to go forward. 

 

So when members opposite take this approach — well please 

just trust us; we will be open; we will be transparent; we will 

give you all the information you need when it comes to 

decisions that the provincial government is making, Mr. 

Speaker — I‟m more than a little reluctant to take members 

opposite at their word on that issue based alone on the burying 

that occurred with respect to the failed carbon capture project, 

despite the hype and the game-changing reality that it was to 

bring to the province, based on the remarks of members 

opposite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I have covered in my remarks this evening, 

when we deal with a piece of legislation, even when it‟s a small 

piece of legislation, even when it‟s largely described as 

housekeeping or routine business, there can be very important 

but hidden aspects to the legislation that have very significant 

implications for transparency and accountability in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And based on the member opposite‟s assertion that we should 

simply trust them, that they will be open and transparent, Mr. 

Speaker, based on that assertion and based on the track record 

that we‟ve seen from members opposite on that issue, I‟m not 

willing to buy that one, Mr. Speaker. And I think that the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve more transparency, better 

transparency, and deserve clear talk when it comes to that issue. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

150, and I will adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6537 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Can we have a little order in the court? The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, of course Bills 153 and 154, I‟ll get into those 

right away, Mr. Speaker, but I believe one of my colleagues has 

a very important individual he‟d like to introduce in the 

Speaker‟s gallery. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member 

from Cumberland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d like all 

the members to join me in welcoming Gary Tinker. He‟s with 

the Gary Tinker Federation. Gary is a northern resident of 

Pinehouse. 

 

He works hard advocating for people with disabilities in the 

North. He‟s done a great job not only for the North, but he‟s an 

ambassador. He‟s done an awesome job, I guess, bringing 

issues, concerns forward. Gary has worked hard with 

community leaders, with the government of the day, with the 

past government. Gary has always advocated for northern 

people and tried to get a good deal for people with disabilities. 

 

And Gary, I just want to welcome you to your legislature and 

say thank you for the good work you do. I ask all members to 

join me in welcoming him to his legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I too would like to join those welcoming Mr. Gary Tinker 

to his Legislative Assembly. It‟s a long haul down, and he‟s 

made that trip a few times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one time 

during the Walk of Hope coming down decades ago. It‟s a 

pleasure to have you here in the gallery tonight, Mr. Gary 

Tinker. 

 

So returning to the matter at hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, Bill 153, again it‟s 

interesting observing the actions of this government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, trying to discern the intent and the origin of 

certain of their actions, what their motivations are. 

 

This Bill of course it‟s . . . Any time that, as my colleague from 

Lakeview has pointed out, any time that you have the 

legislature dealing with the affairs of the court system as one of 

the branches of our parliamentary democracy and all the sort of 

issues around the division of powers that that entails in a free 

and functioning democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

government, be it of whatever stripe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

well advised to tread thoughtfully and carefully. 

 

Of course with this piece of legislation and the subsequent 

amendments contained in Bill 154, certain of these amendments 

originate with the Law Society and their input into the Judicial 

Council and their participation therein. One of them is an 

administrative matter as pertains to the eligibility for disability 

benefits. Those matters seem to be fairly clear in their origin, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But my colleague, himself a past minister of Justice and a 

lawyer and litigator of some repute in this province, very wisely 

pointed out that the origin of certain of the measures contained 

in these two pieces of legislation, it‟s not clear as to who is 

putting this forward and who is making the case for them at this 

time. So there are certain things that we‟re left to suppose 

about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And chief among those would be 

the repealing of the civil division of the Provincial Court and 

the transfer of significant responsibilities that are currently 

handled by Provincial Court judges to justices of the peace. 

 

Now of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the devil, as with so many 

things in this, lies with the details. If this is a holus-bolus 

change, moving to do in the civil division and to take the 

supplementary role of the justices of the peace and to move 

them into the main role that is currently played by provincial 

court judges, many of whom have specific expertise related to 

cases that arise under the civil division, again on the part of the 

opposition we see the work that justices of the peace do. We 

think that they, in many cases, do a fine job. 

 

But I think as the system was originally constructed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they were there in a supplementary role. They 

were there in a role to not exactly stopgap, but certainly the idea 

was that you have judges for a very good reason and you have 

justices of the peace for a very good reason. And what we see 

in this is the possibility to move justices of the peace from that 

supplementary role and moving them into a main role and 

taking over duties that were previously handled by provincial 

court judges. 

 

Now if this is motivated by a desire to expedite matters through 

the lengthy delays that have arisen in our system, you know, we 

can certainly have some sympathy for that motivation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But we would, on the part of the opposition 

and I think on the part of thinking people throughout this 

province, we would want that explained clearly. 



6538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

[20:00] 

 

And we would also want it explained very clearly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that if justices of the peace are to supplant the role of 

provincial court judges — again provincial court judges, many 

of whom have specific expertise when it comes to matters of 

civil law — that would appear by this legislation to be handed 

over to justices of the peace with the repealing of the civil 

division. Then again we think that that‟s something that the 

government should be more clear about. 

 

One of the things that‟s also sort of presented as a time-saving 

measure, but again the origin of this is less than clear as 

compared to other matters that originate with the Law Society, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the matter of bringing in 

out-of-province . . . formalizing the procedures whereby if 

provincial judges need to recuse themselves on certain matters 

whereby you bring in judges from out-of-province to deal with 

matters arising. Again, if this is more on an expedited role or a 

supplementary role, that is one thing. But as this practice 

becomes formalized, we‟ll be very interested to see how this 

government avails themself of this change in legislation and 

this formalizing or this institutionalizing of what has hitherto 

been a supplement in the system. 

 

I guess the one thing additionally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 

of the appointment of judges previously, and fundamentally, 

administrative matters were handled by the chief judge. We 

want to hear very clearly from that Minister of Justice what 

actions initiate with him and with that government across, and 

what is the division with the chief judge. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I return to the opening, sort of, 

premise of my remarks tonight. When you have one of the 

branches of our democratic system dealing with other of the 

branches, such as the legislative branch dealing with the 

judicial branch, people should be very clear as to what the 

motivation is and to know what the arguments are and be able 

to judge them for themselves. Because these may seem to be 

fairly arcane or mundane kind of matters, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but these are the very underpinnings of this democratic system 

that we enjoy. These are some of the fundamental building 

blocks of the rule of law and the division of powers that serves 

this country very well and this province very well and in point 

of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which are the kind of democratic 

structures that we see people protesting for right throughout the 

Middle East, things that we take for granted. 

 

So again if the government of the day is going to move forward 

on these, we think they owe it to the people to be very clear on 

their motivations. But we also think they should tread very, 

very carefully in terms of what are the changes that they‟re 

making to fundamental aspects of the judicial system, and what 

is to be gained and what is to be lost by moving justices of the 

peace from a supplemental role into a more mainstream, 

mainstay role within the system, and what is to be lost by the 

repealing of the civil division of the Provincial Court. 

 

So I guess those are the fundamental issues that we see on this 

side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are some other 

matters contained in the legislation where it allows for greater 

public disclosure of the results of investigation into the conduct 

of judges under the Judicial Council. And again greater public 

transparency on the one hand is a good thing, but on the other, 

we see this as a government that has practiced curtailing 

accountability and providing less transparency when it comes to 

things as Orwellian, with your Orwellian title, such as the 

public interest disclosure post where, in the name of greater 

public disclosure, they curtail the ability of things to be brought 

to the light of day. 

 

So again, as we see the government preach one thing on the one 

hand and practice something else on the other, we‟ll be vigilant 

on that. But their record, as it relates to proclaiming 

transparency and accountability and then practising something 

very different, we think speaks volumes for itself, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

With that, I guess I would bring my remarks on this piece of 

legislation to a close, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟ll have something 

to say about Bill 154 in short order. But with that, I would 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved adjourned debate on Bill 153, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 

picking up where I left off with Bill 153, the consequential 

amendments contained in this Act make amendment to The 

Small Claims Act, allowing the government to repeal the civil 

division of the Provincial Court and transfer significant 

responsibilities currently handled by Provincial Court judges to 

justices of the peace. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there may be some merit to doing 

this on a limited or supplemental basis. But there are some 

highly serious implications in terms of the expertise that resides 

within the civil division of the Provincial Court and transferring 

that over to justices of the peace that in point of fact may not 

have the same expertise as has been invested in the civil 

division of the provincial court. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I would reiterate my 

concerns about what happens when you‟ve got one branch of 

our democratic system taking steps to alter or curtail the 

conduct of another of the fundamental branches of our system 

and the way that impacts the rule of law in this democratic 

country of ours, Canada, and both in a more qualitative kind of 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6539 

way that this can impact the conduct of these cases. Again, 

justices of the peace are a good feature of our system as 

currently constructed, but there is an expertise in the civil 

division of that Provincial Court that it hasn‟t been adequately 

described, by this Minister of Justice and by this current 

government, how moving that expertise away from the civil 

division and turning that over to the justices of the peace, that 

may expedite some of the matters, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

does that provide us with assurance around the quality of the 

judgments that are being rendered? 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s expertise that has been 

amassed within that civil division, and we look on this with 

some concern. And we also look to see what are the origins of 

this movement and this change. But with that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think I‟ve said my piece for both of these pieces of 

legislation, and as such I will move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 154. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

154, The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s 

my pleasure to weigh in on debate and discussion as it relates to 

Bill No. 155, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, here 

tonight. It relates specifically to matters that are very special 

and close to my heart, Mr. Speaker, that being the protection of 

wildlife habitat, the enhancement of that habitat, protection of 

our wildlife, and the hunting and fishing that‟s so special to our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m a big believer that hunters and fishers are strong stewards 

of the land and through their pursuit of their activity have a 

very special connection to our natural environment. They 

recognize and they participate in our beautiful and special 

ecological diversity across our exceptional province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When you think of the various regions that sport fishers and 

hunters partake in in this province, we‟re truly blessed — 

bespeckled North of lakes and rivers and Canadian Shield, 

forest and trees and rock. Just a beautiful region, Mr. Speaker, 

right across all the many regions, through the parkland, down 

through the South and in through the valleys and all regions of 

our Prairies, Mr. Speaker. We have this beautiful diversity 

that‟s unique to each of those regions and this wonderful 

interplay of hunters and fishers who are there for sport but also 

there as stewards of the land and recognize their roles in this 

capacity. 

 

So as I weigh in on Bill 155, certainly it is close to my heart. 

And when we look at it, at first it seems to appear to be a bit 

innocuous. However we certainly do have questions about 

potential implications or unintended consequences of the 

changes that have been put forward. This specifically relates 

with the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and in particular 

the role played by the advisory council. 

 

And it‟s fair to say that the opposition and that I, as a private 

member, support the work of that fund and that group of 

individuals who have advised that spending for many years, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟ve done some very special work as it relates to 

both land protection and habitat protection, but also researching 

best practice, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to habitat and wildlife 

management and looking at ways to enhance and protect our 

ecological diversity, Mr. Speaker. And this is important and 

special work. So we thank them for that work. We commend 

them for that work. 

 

What we question here, at this point in time, is that we 

recognize that that fund has through time been funded with 30 

per cent of the fees and licences that hunters and anglers pay 

here in Saskatchewan, and that‟s furnished those revenues for 

that fund. Now what we see is a broadening of the scope and 

the mandate of that fund. We have questions about the 

sustainability of new revenue sources that are being deliberated 

by this government to ensure that the projects that are put 

forward are both sustainable and also as effective as they 

should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s, to be frank, Mr. Speaker, it‟s with the record of this 

government as it relates to hunters and fishers and the 

protection of wildlife lands, Mr. Speaker, of habitat, is a poor 

one. And it‟s with looking to that record, Mr. Speaker, and to 

see the outright changes that impact this sector, that we have 

cause for concern when this government opens up legislation 

that impacts our beautiful ecological diversity, the important 

role that hunters and fishers, First Nations play within this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And so it‟s with that in mind, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have caution as we look to this piece of 

legislation. 

 

It was just last spring, Mr. Speaker, that we saw historic 

legislation put forward by the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker, that took away protection from 3.5 million acres of 

land, Mr. Speaker, that had been protected for ecological 

purposes, that had been protected for purpose of promoting the 

diversity that exists, that supported the work of hunters and 

fishers, that respected First Nations and Métis people, Mr. 

Speaker. And not only did they make sweeping changes in 

taking away the protection for these lands, Mr. Speaker, putting 

forward a historic sell-off of these protected lands by the people 

of this province, they did so unilaterally without consulting the 

people for whom it affected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And further to that, which was of great concern, is that they 

actually told us otherwise. So not only did they not consult, but 

they actually told us that they had, Mr. Speaker. And when we, 

of course, came around to doing those consultations ourselves, 

we recognized that those stakeholders hadn‟t been consulted, 



6540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 2011 

were not part of the process, and in fact didn‟t support the 

legislation. 

 

And those individuals, Mr. Speaker . . . I mean we‟re talking 

about the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Mr. Speaker, a 

proud organization in this province with a rich history, Mr. 

Speaker, and 30,000 members or thereabouts province-wide 

that have a significant role to play in this province both now 

and into the future, but have historically as well. And other 

organizations that weren‟t consulted would include Ducks 

Unlimited, Mr. Speaker, that have the best interests of wildlife 

protection, enhancement in habitat protection and enhancement 

at heart, Mr. Speaker, that work hard to fundraise, to achieve 

further enhancement of these kinds of landscapes only to see 

that all swept away by sweeping unilateral change of this Sask 

Party government who lifted the protection of 3.5 million 

sensitive habitat acres, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And we can go further. Certainly the outfitters weren‟t 

consulted, Mr. Speaker. And we can look at the nature groups 

and environmental societies within Saskatchewan, Nature 

Conservancy or environmental groups. They weren‟t consulted, 

Mr. Speaker. And they know first-hand the importance of us 

protecting this land and holding it, not only to the care and the 

stocks and the circumstance that we have now, Mr. Speaker, but 

also making sure that‟s enhanced for future generations, Mr. 

Speaker, for many years into the future to make sure that 

individuals in Saskatchewan can come to Saskatchewan, live in 

Saskatchewan, and interplay with this incredible natural 

landscape, Mr. Speaker, that we have. I believe it‟s one of the 

huge advantages to living within Saskatchewan that within just 

a short drive you can be in such an exceptional natural 

environment that has wonderful stocks of habitat or 

well-managed fisheries, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is 

something that we need to be protecting, not diminishing, not 

selling off as the Sask Party is. And they should be ashamed of 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would speak specifically to First Nations and Métis 

people, Mr. Speaker, our first people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, who have a duty to be consulted with, Mr. Speaker, 

who weren‟t consulted with as well in this historic sell-off of 

these lands that served Saskatchewan people, both for 

generations before, Mr. Speaker — my great-grandfather and 

many others — and certainly generations to come, Mr. Speaker, 

if managed properly. 

 

But sell-offs of land, lack of consultation, and disregard for 

important environmental and hunting and fishing stakeholders, 

Mr. Speaker, have consequences for our fisheries, for our 

wildlife stocks, for our habitat, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m 

disappointed. I‟m upset and I‟m angered by the disregard, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Sask Party has displayed to these vital 

stakeholders of our natural environment, our ecological 

diversity that makes us so special. So it‟s with that lens, Mr. 

Speaker, that I judge these changes. 

 

And I notice that in the minister, who‟s now the Minister of 

Environment, Mr. Speaker, I recognized in his statements that 

he was highlighting the fact that this fund through its historic 

role, the Wildlife Development Fund, had protected 212,000 

acres of land, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s significant. And it‟s 

worthwhile work, and we commend that work. But at the same 

time, while the minister is highlighting 212,000 acres as 

something of an achievement and something that we should be 

looking to with pride — and I certainly agree on that front — 

he dismisses the fact that it was he and his government, the 

Sask Party government, that put up for sale 3.5 million acres of 

protected habitat lands, Mr. Speaker, lands that were there for 

the same purposes, there to protect flora and fauna and the 

wonderful landscape that we have here in this province. 

 

So it‟s pretty rich, Mr. Speaker, for that minister who has failed 

Saskatchewan people . . . He became a minister after the first 

Bill had been enacted, and it should have been his first action as 

a responsible minister to remedy that, to withdraw that Bill, to 

repeal that Bill, and to fix that circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know hunters and fishers across Saskatchewan are hugely 

disappointed with the new Environment minister for not doing 

so. I know they‟re hugely disappointed with this Premier and 

the Sask Party government for not fixing something that is to 

the detriment of Saskatchewan people, whether you live in rural 

Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, whether 

you love simply the outdoors and the beauty of our wildlife and 

our flora and our fauna, Mr. Speaker, or whether you‟re a 

hunter and a fisher, Mr. Speaker, these aspects all interconnect. 

And when we‟re talking about environmental degradation and 

the disrespect of key stakeholders across Saskatchewan who 

play such a vital role in protecting and enhancing those lands, 

those wildlife stocks, I have a huge concern. 

 

And of course we‟ve been consulting across Saskatchewan with 

the Wildlife Federation, with the regional branches, who each 

of them I know have or many of them have expressed great 

concern that the new minister wouldn‟t have made that his first 

priority, to repeal that Bill. They know that this minister now is 

going to stick to the guns of the Premier, the Sask Party 

Premier, on this one, and is going to allow the degradation of 

these lands, Mr. Speaker, the sell-off of these habitat lands. 

 

But it‟s a great disappointment, Mr. Speaker, both to myself, to 

our opposition, but also to these many vital groups across this 

province. And I know specifically in the minister‟s own home 

riding, many from the wildlife branch in his own community of 

Weyburn are very disappointed by his lack of action to remedy 

something that is not in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And it‟s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that people of this province 

have worked incredibly hard. Many people put in a lot of time 

volunteering, fundraising, building capacity within these 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, to be able to build the kind of 

protection that we had in place. And what they‟d like to see is 

us move the line on that, Mr. Speaker, to enhance that, to apply 

best practice that is relayed to us through research and to invest 

in that research as well to make sure we‟re able to move 

forward as a province that is not only proud of our rich history, 

of our environmental assets, but that we are in fact enhancing 

and promoting those as we move forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look to this Bill through that lens, and it‟s 

with that background, that context, that I look to this Bill with 

caution. Questions as far as the scope of the mandate, well what 



March 7, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6541 

does this mean? What are the intended consequences of this? 

We haven‟t exactly gleaned this yet from the minister. What are 

the unintended consequences that are as a result of this Bill? 

We need to make sure we fully understand those aspects. 

 

What about the sustainability, Mr. Speaker, of the very 

important projects that need to be undertaken, Mr. Speaker, on 

the environmental front, on the front of protection and 

enhancement? What certainty do we have with the revenue 

sources that are attached to this new scope, this new mandate? 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, there‟s more questions than answers on 

this Bill. And this government‟s record speaks for itself, and 

it‟s one of damaging our proud relationship with key 

stakeholders across Saskatchewan, and one that has put key 

environmentally protected habitat lands up for sale, Mr. 

Speaker, up for auction — lands that have been in some cases 

possibly bequested by an estate or through the hard work of 

local chapters and fundraisers. And the government can laugh, 

Mr. Speaker, all they want, but it‟s simply not a laughing matter 

across this province, Mr. Speaker. Quite the opposite. 

 

We recognize this as potentially another example of a growing 

propensity of this government to offload responsibilities to 

another organization other than itself, and with that we question 

the accountability of this government to the taxpayers‟ dollar 

for an intended purpose, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s important for us 

to recognize that it‟s the members of this legislature, myself and 

all other 58 members, that need to be held responsible for the 

spending of taxpayers‟ dollars, and we continue to see this 

government shirk that responsibility, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

that certainly to be a detriment to Saskatchewan people as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to say that we have many more questions, 

consultations with key stakeholders across this sector, Mr. 

Speaker, that will continue with the Wildlife Federation, with 

our outfitters, through Ducks Unlimited and our organizations, 

the Nature Conservancy, the environmental societies, Mr. 

Speaker, and First Nations and Métis people of this province, to 

understand their positions with respect to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

and to ensure that their voices are heard, Mr. Speaker, and not 

rejected, dismissed, as they were during the last Bill that was 

put forward that was so damaging, Mr. Speaker, to wildlife 

lands, to our environment, and to hunters and fishers, Mr. 

Speaker, across this province. 

 

So at this point in time tonight I will conclude my remarks and 

we will continue to embark on those consultations. And at this 

point in time I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:26.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6529 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6533 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6537 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6538 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6539 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6531 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6537 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


