




















































Hansard: April 14, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 14, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7267 

 April 14, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. If I could have members’ 

attention before we move to introduction of guests, I’d like to 

lay on the Table in accordance with section 30 of The 

Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, its 38th annual 

report. I so lay on the Table. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 

introduce to the members of the Assembly the Leader of the 

Saskatchewan Green Party, Larissa Shasko who is with us in 

your gallery. Larissa, if you’d just stand up and give a wave. I 

just wanted to introduce Larissa as the Leader of the Green 

Party. She has been very active in the politics of Saskatchewan, 

having been a candidate I think once or twice. 

 

And I just want to wish her all the best. Good luck but not too 

much good luck, Larissa, in the next election. But welcome, 

welcome to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly a group 

of 54 grade 10 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate. And 

this is located in the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

They are here with their teacher, Michelle McKillop. 

 

Winston Knoll is a wonderful school with great students and 

staff, and I will be meeting with the students later this morning 

for pictures and for an opportunity for them to ask questions 

and find out a little more about the Legislative Building and the 

facility and what goes on here. I hope they enjoy question 

period today and that they will be enlightened by the 

proceedings they observe today. Please everyone join with me 

in welcoming this fine group of young students from Winston 

Knoll. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to introduce to you and all members of the Assembly a group of 

citizens that have come from across the province to see a 

petition that they’ve been involved with entered into the official 

record of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks are concerned about nuclear 

development in the province, and in particularly they would 

like to see legislation concerning the storage of nuclear waste. 

Mr. Speaker, they are here to have all members of the 

Legislative Assembly hear their voice, and I would like to 

welcome them to the Saskatchewan Assembly this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before we move on, I would also 

like to acknowledge, and I apologize for not doing that 

immediately, Mr. Kevin Fenwick, the Provincial Ombudsman, 

and his staff who have joined him this morning. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions on behalf of people who are citizens of 

Saskatchewan, supporting maintaining quality health care 

services. And the signatures on these petitions are from over 40 

people from Wakaw, Saskatoon, Domremy, Hoey, Rosthern, 

and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I am presenting a petition today 

signed by over 4,500 people who are concerned about the 

nuclear industry and in particular about nuclear waste and 

storage in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these people have come 

to the Assembly to ensure that their voices are heard by all 

members of the Legislative Assembly. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition concerning the need for hospice and palliative care: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end of life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the running of deficits and increasing of debt at a time of record 

highs in revenues in this province. That record includes the 

increasing of debt to the tune of $1.3 billion over the past three 

years and $548 million of debt being added to the people’s 

public books here this year alone, Mr. Speaker. Of course this 

has consequences, not only for now but also well into the 

future. And the prayer reads as follows: 



7268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Weyburn, Sedley, Saskatoon, North Battleford, and Radville. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Remembering Lisa Rendall 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in the 

Assembly today to pay tribute to the life and work of Lisa 

Rendall, a former C95 broadcaster who died yesterday after a 

long battle with cancer. 

 

Diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer at the age of 35, she 

fought for over 10 years, not only for herself but also for the 

countless other women diagnosed — sorry, Mr. Speaker — but 

also for the countless other women diagnosed with breast 

cancer and their families and friends. By telling her story, she 

helped put a human face on the disease and bring courage and 

hope to the many affected by it. 

 

There are many noteworthy chapters in this story of courage, 

Mr. Speaker. Lisa Rendall was CTV [Canadian Television 

Network Ltd.] Saskatoon’s Citizen of the Year in 2010. She 

was awarded the YWCA’s [Young Women’s Christian 

Association] Woman of Distinction Award. And in April of 

2009, she was one of 19 women honoured for their 

achievements at the Mayor’s Prayer Breakfast in Saskatoon. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, Lisa’s story was not about herself but 

about the others who shared her fight against breast cancer. Her 

advocacy and fundraising efforts made her one of 

Saskatchewan’s true champions in this battle. Just last year, the 

11th annual C95 Marathon for Breast Cancer raised nearly a 

quarter of a million dollars for breast cancer research. Over 2.5 

million has been raised through such efforts as this marathon 

and the Lisa Rendall Golf Classic, ensuring that the search for a 

cure will go on. 

 

April is Cancer Awareness Month, Mr. Speaker, and so I ask all 

members to join with me today in paying tribute to Lisa 

Rendall, a voice for cancer awareness that will never be 

silenced. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, April is National Cancer Month. 

During this time, many initiatives are enacted that not only raise 

awareness of the disease, but promote fundraising for research, 

treatment, and finding a cure. Cancer is a terrible disease that 

manifests itself on a global level as well as locally in our 

community. There were approximately 2,500 men and women 

in Saskatchewan diagnosed with cancer in 2010. Tragically, 

2,400 individuals have lost the battle to cancer in the last year. 

Mr. Speaker, these people are our neighbours, friends, family 

members, mothers, and sisters. 

 

One of those just lost yesterday was Lisa Marie Rendall. Lisa 

was the Saskatoon radio personality best known for her number 

one morning show: Rob, Lisa, and Rambling Dave on C95 in 

Saskatoon. 

 

Lisa was tirelessly campaigning on behalf of breast cancer 

victims and their families. To date, over $2.5 million has been 

raised for breast cancer research at the Saskatoon Cancer 

Agency through events such as the C95 Radio Marathon for 

Breast Cancer Research and the Lisa Rendall Golf Classic. 

Since her diagnosis 10 years ago, Lisa worked tirelessly to 

make us all more aware. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have lost far too many loved ones to cancer. 

We must honour them and keep their struggle in our hearts and 

minds by making their struggle our own. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Beauval Resident Works Around the World 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

honour a constituent of mine and a resident of Beauval, 

Saskatchewan. John Granberg has worked in the rail line 

industry for over 40 years. He has worked in the industry not 

only in Saskatchewan, but also all over the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, John worked for CNR [Canadian National 

Railways] for 35 years. He retired in 1989; however, I struggle 

to call it retirement. After his alleged retirement, he began 

working for Harsco, a rail line servicing and installation 

company based out of South Carolina. This work enabled John 

to travel the world. Not bad for a small town guy from northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1990 he began machinery servicing for rail lines in India, 

and throughout the ’90s he worked all over India doing 

machinery work and servicing. And he was able to experience 

the work environment and the cultural riches that India has. 

John believes his time in India has been his most satisfying 

work and life experience. 

 

In 2000 he began similar work in Japan, again doing machine 

and servicing work in one of the world’s premier railway 

jurisdictions. These opportunities provided John the chance to 

share his expertise as well as learn more about his craft and 

countries advancing within the industry. 

 

While in Canada, John was able to work everywhere from 

Montreal to Vancouver Island. Not bad for someone with a 

grade 10 education. Although John believes strongly in 

education, he also thinks that, as he said to me, “It doesn’t 

matter how much education you have if you don’t also have the 

life experience to go with it.” 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7269 

Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to rise and recognize this northern 

constituent, John Granberg. And it’s proof that if you’re 

passionate about whatever it is you do, it can take you places 

you’ve never imagined. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Carrot River Hosts Drama Festival 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, on April 1st and 2nd, students 

from around the Northeast gathered in Carrot River for this 

year’s region no. 7 drama festival. Carrot River hosted this 

year’s event after winning provincials last year. 

 

I would like to congratulate all the participants on their success 

and mention the awards that Carrot River Valley constituents 

received. Cheers award went to Chantelle Delorme of Tisdale, 

Jocelyn Beyer of Carrot River, Taylor Nickel of Nipawin, and 

Jesse Rogalski and Matt Auger of Hudson Bay. 

 

Certificate of Merit for acting excellence: Brookelynn Allan, 

Tisdale; Kathy Manzini, Nipawin; Jared Lokken, Nipawin; and 

Jordan Wouters of Carrot River. 

 

Certificate of Merit for technical expertise: Taylor Nickel, 

Nipawin; Sara Woolsey, Nipawin; Natasha Stasiuk, Nipawin; 

and Emma Weighill of Carrot River. 

 

Best Stage Manager Award: Kelsey Haugen, Hudson Bay. And 

the Best Technical Crew Award went to Kelsey Pashell of 

Hudson Bay. Nakesh Madhar of Tisdale received a Technical 

Award of Merit, and Kelsey Pashell of Hudson Bay won the 

Best Technical Crew Award. Bob Hinitt Technical Performance 

for set design was won by Jade Bokinac of Carrot River. 

 

Sam Kozun of Carrot River walked away with the Mary Ellen 

Burgess Performance Award for acting excellence. Chris 

Deboth of Hudson Bay received the Acting Award of Merit. 

Dean Armstrong of Carrot River won the best visual 

presentation, with Leah Demmans of Nipawin runner-up. Leah 

Demmans won Best Technical Production Award, with Dean 

Armstrong placing second. 

 

Carrot River actually ended up winning the competition, is 

heading for Regina to the provincials, May 8th, 12th, and 14th. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Miss Teen Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, last week Melissa Menzies won, 

from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote, was crowned Miss Teen 

Saskatchewan finalist. Many family members and friends 

proudly watched as she received her honour. Melissa will now 

participate in the Miss Teen Canada World finals in Toronto in 

July where she’s looking forward to representing Prince Albert 

and Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Melissa is a 14-year-old youth and attends John 

Diefenbaker School. She’s been very active on her school’s 

student council and volunteers in many school events. She 

enjoys sports and plays volleyball, basketball, and softball. 

Additionally she’s a dancer. Having started at the age of five, 

she dances ballet, jazz, lyrical, modern, and tap. Melissa also 

volunteers at the Vic Hospital where she visits with patients. 

Her supervisor there reports that residents and patients are 

always happy when she comes to visit. They enjoy her bright 

smile, friendly attitude, and her compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to acknowledge Melissa’s success 

because I know her very well. Her mother, Nicole Rancourt, is 

also a very active volunteer in our city, and she and Melissa are 

often present together volunteering at many events in P.A. 

Northcote. 

 

Melissa is passionate about her community and feels that being 

involved with Miss Teen Canada World will help her be a 

positive role model for other youth. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all 

members join with me in congratulating Melissa and offering 

our best wishes for a successful competition in Toronto. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Consistent Support 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The leader of the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] is notorious for his many 

flip-flops on many issues, but he’s been consistent on one issue. 

It’s his support for uranium development and nuclear energy. 

 

On the issue of uranium development, the NDP leader said, and 

I quote, “If Tommy Douglas were here today, it would be 

exactly what he would be doing.” Just a few years ago the NDP 

leader delivered a speech to the North Saskatoon Business 

Association where he indicated that nuclear energy would, and 

I quote, “provide at least a third of the energy for the oil sands.” 

In that same speech, he also had an Al Gore moment when he 

said, and I quote, “I’m not talking about debating the pros and 

cons of nuclear power. That debate is over.” 

 

In a 2008 CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio 

interview, the NDP leader also said, and I quote, “Nuclear 

energy is and will continue to be part of the global solution to 

our energy problems.” And, Mr. Speaker, in an interview with 

The Sheaf he said, and I quote, “I think it’s immoral to say I 

want to mine uranium, but I don’t want to make power from it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we thank the Leader of the NDP for being crystal 

clear about his ongoing support for the uranium industry and 

nuclear energy in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatoon Council on Aging 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I attended 

the 20th anniversary party of the Saskatoon Council on Aging, 

SCOA. Mr. Speaker, in 1988 a group of older adults and 

agencies met to strategize how to meet the needs of older 

adults. Their vision was to have a one-stop resource centre and 



7270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

to address major issues of concern to older adults such as abuse, 

isolation, health, and caregiving. 

 

The first board was elected in 1991, and the resource centre was 

launched. 

 

Today the Saskatoon Council on Aging, as a non-profit 

organization, provides community leadership in the promotion 

of dignity, health, and independence of older adults through 

programs, services, education, and policy advocacy. The 

council is operated by a board of volunteers, the majority of 

whom are older adults, and has two main functions: operating a 

resource walk-in centre to enhance the quality of life for older 

adults; and working with local agencies to initiate, implement, 

and evaluate projects useful to older adults in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the founding board 

members who received awards from the Lieutenant Governor. I 

also want to congratulate the current president, Candace 

Skrapek, all board members past and present, and all volunteers 

past and present who have made the council such an enduring 

success. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Out-of-Province Medical Coverage 

 

Ms. Junor: — I barely got to sit down. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. In December the minister announced the creation of 

an arm’s-length committee to review government decisions on 

out-of-province and out-of-country medical coverage. The 

minister said the committee would be operational by early 

2011. 

 

To the minister: what is the status today of the committee, and 

will government decisions about out-of-province and 

out-of-country medical coverage made before the creation of 

the committee be able to be reviewed by the committee; in 

other words, retroactive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, after we reviewed the out-of-country coverage by the 

Ministry of Health — coverage that had been in place under the 

former NDP government, Mr. Speaker, adopted by our 

government — we realized that there was some deficiencies, 

Mr. Speaker. There wasn’t a great appeal process, I guess you 

could say, so we set up this committee. 

 

The ministry right now is talking to people that will be sitting 

on that committee. We would hope that those names will be 

able to be put forward in the very near future. I will say that this 

has taken a little bit longer than I wanted it to take, Mr. 

Speaker, but the committee is under way. We are contacting 

people as I speak, Mr. Speaker, to populate the committee so 

that it can do its work as we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

Ms. Junor: — Guess it’s difficult to find populating 

committees. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tchorzewski and his family are 

in the gallery today because in 2009 Mr. Tchorzewski was 

diagnosed with prostate cancer and referred to the Cancer 

Agency where it was recommended that he undergo radiation 

therapy instead of surgery because he was too old. 

 

Because of the history of aggressive prostate cancer in the 

family, Mr. Tchorzewski and his family frantically looked 

elsewhere for treatment options. He went to the Mayo Clinic 

where it was determined that the cancer was much more 

advanced than thought, and he was operated on immediately. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski went out of country, and it saved his life. He’s 

a 72-year-old pensioner, and it cost him almost $60,000, a bill 

the minister has refused to pay. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 

will he reconsider, do the right thing and pay the $60,000 it cost 

to save Mr. Tchorzewski’s life? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to 

say that the vast, vast majority of people that need health care 

are able to access that health care here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. There is the odd case where people will have to go out 

of province. There is a protocol to be followed when people go 

out of province. It needs to be pre-approved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There has been the odd case where government has covered 

people that have been out of province where the protocol 

wasn’t followed. Most of the time they have been reviewed by 

the Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. The Ombudsman has made his 

recommendations, and after those recommendations, Mr. 

Speaker, government has looked at those, at an individual case 

and covered most of them, Mr. Speaker, as far as I’m concerned 

since I have been the Minister of Health. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we have set up this external, 

arm’s-length committee that will begin in its work in the very 

near future, Mr. Speaker, once we have the people in place in 

order to conduct those reviews. It wouldn’t be appropriate for 

me to comment on any one case in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

but we are certainly willing to look at all cases that come 

forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Tchorzewski 

didn’t have time to jump through the hoops and wait for the 

bureaucracy to save his life. He acted on his own and because 

of that he is alive today. Due to unusual circumstances, 

uncertain diagnosis, and particularly the urgency because of the 

history of aggressive prostate cancer in his family, Mr. 

Tchorzewski needed timely treatment that was not being 

offered in Saskatchewan. Mr. Tchorzewski needs to have the 

circumstances of his case reviewed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister covered out-of-country medical 

treatment for Doug Bonderud, Jeff Lukye, and a man referred 

to as Christopher, due to what the minister described as special 

circumstances. Will the minister agree that Mr. Tchorzewski’s 

case also has special circumstances and review it and pay him? 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7271 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we are putting 

this committee in place, Mr. Speaker, that will review those 

situations. But I will say, Mr. Speaker, that as we move forward 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, as we move 

forward, Mr. Speaker, we are working very hard in the health 

care system to make sure we have the proper complement of 

health care professionals. 

 

I will say that for the first time in many years, the province is 

looking at waiting lists being actually reduced, Mr. Speaker, in 

this province. For 16 years, for 16 years the government 

oversaw the longest waiting lists in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re seeing those wait-lists come down. In fact CIHI 

[Canadian Institute of Health Information] named 

Saskatchewan the only province to see reductions in wait-lists 

of the five categories they looked at, Mr. Speaker. More work 

to do, but certainly a much better track record than the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Access to Grazing Land 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a proud, fourth-generation 

rancher, Jack Bryce, from the Moose Mountain region was 

banned from grazing his cattle in the provincial park for the 

coming year for alleged non-compliance. I had the opportunity 

in late November after the ban had been issued to meet with 

Mr. Bryce and tour the land in question in the Moose Mountain 

hills. This decision and judgment of this government have a 

great impact on Mr. Bryce’s life and his livelihood. As such 

Mr. Bryce should be provided a fair process to share his side of 

the story. To the Minister of Parks: does he agree? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

tourism, parks, resources, and culture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. I am aware of some of the 

circumstances of this particular situation. And I know that some 

of our ministry officials have been in constant contact with the 

individual, and we would welcome further discussions on this 

matter, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, all Mr. Bryce wanted was 

a fair process to tell his side of the story. I raised this matter in 

person with the Agriculture minister last year in December. I’ve 

raised it with the Parks minister’s office multiple times. I’ve 

discussed it in person multiple times with his local MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], the member from 

Cannington, and I’ve raised it with the Premier’s office. 

 

Mr. Bryce could not get a meeting with his MLA for months 

despite many efforts. He couldn’t get a response from the 

Ministry of Parks. Finally in late February, he was promised a 

hearing by his MLA and by a ministry official. He waited 

patiently. That hearing was promised to occur at the start of 

April, but it has never occurred despite continued requests. 

 

He needs to plan for grazing the herd this spring and this 

summer, right now as we speak. This decision has a great 

impact on his livelihood. He feels he’s been treated unfair. To 

the Minister of Parks: why has Mr. Bryce not had a chance to 

share his side of the story? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

welcome the member’s question. My understanding is that Mr. 

Bryce has had a number of opportunities to share his opinions 

with both the ministry officials and with his member of the 

legislature. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

members to allow the minister to respond. Give him the same 

privilege as the member had to pose the question. I recognize 

the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, we will 

resume our comments. Mr. Bryce has had ample opportunity to 

discuss his issues with the ministry officials, and in fact toured 

with the member from Cannington on a snowmobile recently to 

look at the situation face-to-face with his own representative. 

 

We welcome further opportunities to engage in this discussion, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, unbelievable answer from 

that member. The member from Cannington got on the 

snowmobile and went through the hills three months after he 

had been contacted many, many, many times in his office. And 

he hasn’t contacted or returned a call since then, Mr. Speaker. 

But at that meeting he promised a hearing to Mr. Bryce, and 

fairness. That hearing was promised; hasn’t occurred. It was not 

only promised by the member from Cannington, it was 

promised by a ministry official. And it was supposed to occur at 

the start of April. 

 

Mr. Bryce, who’s with us here today in our Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, deserves some answers, and he deserves a fair process. 

In fact Mr. Bryce has continued to call the ministry looking for 

answers. They’ve in fact, as I understand, started to block his 

calls and actually hung up on him yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

called the Premier’s office. Mr. Bryce has contacted the 

Premier’s office. All the Premier’s office does is direct us back 

to the Parks minister who doesn’t respond. 

 



7272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bryce has been stonewalled by this 

government. He’s here today in the city looking for answers. 

His 76-year-old father and his wife are covering off calving 

here today, and he’s looking for answers. Mr. Speaker, will the 

Parks minister finally show some accountability? Will he meet 

with Mr. Bryce here today and provide the hearing that’s been 

promised? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we can 

clear up the confusion on the part of the member who’s asking 

the questions. At one point he says Mr. Bryce has met with this 

member. The next instance he says he hasn’t met with this 

member. We confirm that he actually has met with this 

member, the member from Cannington. 

 

We’re also setting up a review process right now I’m told, Mr. 

Speaker. An email has already been sent out to Mr. Bryce. And 

furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I’d be delighted to meet with the 

gentleman today at his convenience. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 

Advanced Education. And let me be very clear with the 

minister: I’m not asking for what the Canadian University 

Guide says about our universities. Instead my very specific 

question is this: how much money are Saskatchewan families 

paying for the various investigations and audits into his pet 

college merger project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, let’s be clear. The talks began, Mr. Speaker, while the 

members opposite were in power, Mr. Speaker. We know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is an independent process. There 

was a proposal submitted last June, an independent process, Mr. 

Speaker, that then came forward, Mr. Speaker. That process 

then made a series of recommendations, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to the recommendations — which said no to the 

merger, Mr. Speaker, which we then ruled on and followed 

compliance with, Mr. Speaker — then we said there were a 

series of outstanding questions. Those questions, Mr. Speaker, 

are being followed up by Meyers Norris Penny, Mr. Speaker. 

That specific work, Mr. Speaker, is about $100,000. Have there 

been additional costs incurred? Yes there have, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that at Carlton Trail and St. Peter’s, Mr. Speaker, that 

the people of this province will have a full accounting for where 

those dollars are. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s deflection will not 

work. Everyone knows that this merger was his project. From 

the St. Peter’s College winter newsletter, “The provincial 

government is encouraging the merger.” From board minutes, 

at which the minister sent his ADM [assistant deputy minister] 

and a senior ministry official, the minutes say direction has 

been given from Minister Norris to proceed. Everyone knows 

this is his project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so far at least $402,000 of taxpayers’ money has 

been allocated to the various investigations and audits of the 

minister’s pet college merger project: $172,000 for Meyers 

Norris Penny; $70,000 for KPMG; and $160,000 for Deloitte & 

Touche, including over $50,000 per month for one individual. 

Talk about a stimulus fund for accounting firms, Mr. Speaker. 

And this $400,000 doesn’t include the expenses of the Ministry 

of Justice or the minister’s own political staff who are now 

acting as private investigators. 

 

To the minister: does he think it’s acceptable that over 

$400,000 of taxpayers’ money has to be devoted to getting to 

the bottom of the mess that he created? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite made 

some reference to the minutes, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said 

previously on numerous occasions, the minutes, Mr. Speaker, 

are actually being checked with references back within the 

ministry. And, Mr. Speaker, the full reference to that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

. . . Minister Responsible for Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

the reference we have from the ministry is that we would 

proceed with due process as we promised last year, Mr. 

Speaker. That due process began, Mr. Speaker, when the 

proposal was submitted. That was submitted in June. I’ve 

accepted, Mr. Speaker, that has taken too long. But when the 

final recommendation came in, we followed that 

recommendation, Mr. Speaker — no to the merger. 

 

Along the way, there were a series of questions. Essentially 

what we have, Mr. Speaker, what we have, Mr. Speaker, are a 

series of allegations . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I remind members that 

when the Speaker’s on his feet, members are to come to order. 

There have been a couple of members in the back bench of the 

opposition that have been continually trying to respond when 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7273 

the minister’s actually been recognized. I recognize the 

Minister Responsible for Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and so what we have are a series . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member for P.A. Northcote will 

come to order and allow the response. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 

today, Mr. Speaker, what we have, an independent process that 

determined, Mr. Speaker, an independent process made the 

recommendation that the merger not proceed. We took that, Mr. 

Speaker. We made that decision. There were also a 

recommendation from Meyers Norris Penny that outstanding 

questions then be investigated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that those allegations, and today that’s 

what they are . . . We are ensuring that there are a number of 

accounting firms on the ground to ensure that taxpayers’, that 

taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, will be accounted for and that 

all of this will . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I guess I would like to 

know if the opposition would like to hear the response or allow 

the public to hear the response. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education to finalize his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 

what we have today, we have a series of allegations and audits 

under way, Mr. Speaker. We are certainly making sure that 

every taxpayer dollar is going to be accounted for, Mr. Speaker, 

and most importantly that the students remain a priority for the 

people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what the minister just said is not 

correct. He said that the due process, so-called due process 

began when the proposal was submitted. Meyers Norris Penny 

did not start their work until November, and the proposal was 

submitted in June. Moreover, how much are we paying now for 

people to sift through minutes to check whether or not they are 

correct? Thousands and thousands of dollars. 

 

Let’s not forget about the $400,000 allocated to the 

investigations and audits is not even close to the full extent of 

public money that has been dumped into this mess. We know of 

another $408,000 of taxpayers’ money that flowed from the 

public college to the private college for things like furnishings, 

equipment, and so-called market research. And over $9 million 

of taxpayers’ money was funnelled toward the minister’s 

project through the knowledge infrastructure program. Millions 

of taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, and that’s before any, any of 

the financial irregularities are even taken into account. 

 

Again to the minister: does he think it’s acceptable that 

taxpayers have to spend over $400,000 to investigate a mess in 

which they’ve already poured millions into? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

references the knowledge infrastructure program, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’ll just give you a small example of the benefits that that 

infrastructure program that has been supported by the federal 

government and certainly supported here, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that there’s more than $117 million invested in 

post-secondary educational infrastructure right across the 

province, 21 different projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that students in Estevan are going to be 

benefiting from that. We know that students in Swift Current; 

we know that students in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker; we know 

students here in Regina; we know students in, certainly in 

Prince Albert; in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker; and indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, we also know in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, where 

there’s a joint-use facility, Mr. Speaker, and we wanted to make 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that we are maximizing those federal dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it a little bit peculiar that the member 

opposite would criticize this government for working with 

Ottawa to get those federal dollars on behalf of our students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what I find peculiar are the 

minister’s answers. The minster talks about knowledge 

infrastructure money flowing to private institutions. The 

minister ensured that $9 million of funding went to St. Peter’s 

College, a private institution. Briercrest College, a private 

institution, does anyone know how much they received? Fifty 

thousand dollars, Mr. Speaker, a huge imbalance. This minister 

clearly had a plan, and he was greasing the wheels. He knew 

what he was doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister completely redefined the 

Westminster parliamentary convention of ministerial 

responsibility when he said that it amounts to letting the chips 

fall where they may. Well he’s absolutely wrong. It’s about the 

minister being accountable and being responsible. He is the one 

who directed the transition board to proceed with the merger, 

but he will take no responsibility. He is the one who received 

emails and at least one fax, none of which he shared with his 

officials. In fact his own deputy said she only heard about 

rumours. He didn’t even tell her about the documents he 

received. But he will take no responsibility. He poured millions 

of taxpayers’ dollars into his pet merger project, and now over 

$400,000 is being spent to investigate that mess, but he will 

take no responsibility. 

 

To the minister: since he doesn’t understand the convention of 

ministerial responsibility, will he at least take personal 

responsibility for the mess he created and the millions of 

taxpayers’ dollars he has put at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 



7274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we have come in, we 

have found an enormous infrastructure deficit not simply in 

post-secondary educational institutions, but right across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of the reasons that we moved 

forward with $2.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, in order to support our 

students and our scholars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just one example, Mr. Speaker. Just one example, Mr. Speaker, 

is where we have moved forward on the Western College of 

Veterinary Medicine, a project, Mr. Speaker, that was started 

under the members opposite but, Mr. Speaker, they refused to 

finish it. Mr. Speaker, what they did is threw the tarps up, and 

therefore our researchers, in an institution that is known across 

this country, didn’t have the benefit of actually seeing that 

project finished. Mr. Speaker, it was the knowledge 

infrastructure program, and the investments made by . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, just one example where the 

members opposite put in jeopardy the reputation of the Western 

College of Veterinary Medicine. They didn’t fund it, Mr. 

Speaker, not to be completed. We were able to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, with the knowledge infrastructure program, a project 

that had been initiated years before. We took the tarps down 

and got it done so that the students and people right across this 

province and across Western Canada can benefit from the 

research and work that’s under way there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Arrangements for Office Space 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the minister, 

when we’ve seen spending increase almost 40 per cent by this 

government, I’m glad he could point to one instance where the 

money had been put to good use and not the questionable 

actions that have been happening at Carlton Trail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s great to see Saskatchewan businesses 

expanding and constructing new buildings. And I think we will 

all agree that it’s great for the economy. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

problem is when privately owned buildings are constructed 

using taxpayer-guaranteed leases while other private businesses 

use their own money. Mr. Speaker, that’s clearly picking 

winners and losers. And that’s what this government is doing 

with the Hill family tower in downtown Regina by guaranteeing 

the government will be the largest tenant for the next 20 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government going against everything 

they’ve said, picking winners and losers and pledging 

Saskatchewan taxpayers to a 20-year lease? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, the 

interests of the Saskatchewan taxpayer are best served when 

there is a competitive marketplace. And at the present time, 

there isn’t a competitive marketplace in commercial real estate. 

In fact in Regina, the vacancy rate is under 2 per cent. And 

government’s participation in Hill tower, even though it is less 

than 30 per cent . . . So the member opposite states that we are 

the largest; we are not the largest. 

 

So we are less than 30 per cent of the total space being 

provided, will help create a competitive marketplace. And in a 

competitive marketplace, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan comes out the winner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, if the government is going to 

play favourites and use guaranteed leases paid for by the 

taxpayers to allow private companies to build new facilities, it 

should at least be open about it. In this day and age, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers expect and deserve some real 

transparency. So far we’ve really seen precious little of that 

from this government despite election commitments. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, since this minister has committed to helping 

build the Hill family tower, at least she could do is tell 

taxpayers how much we are spending and she is committing 

taxpayers to over the next 20 years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at present our policy is consistent with what the other 

Western provinces have in place. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had 

the opportunity to talk to commercial realtors across the 

province. And I had a wonderful conversation with Dale 

Griesser. 

 

And in regards to . . . And this is what Dale has stated: 

 

In regards to disclosing specific information regarding 

lease transactions, that information in most cases is 

confidential between the landlord and the tenant. As such 

our policy is not to disclose specific details to the public 

without authorization from the parties we represent. 

 

In regards to leases in new buildings, the industry norm 

or preferred process is no longer initial terms like . . .  

 

Sorry, excuse me. 

 

. . . or preferred process is initial terms of likely 15 to 20 

years. And this is due to the underwriting requirements 

for the developer . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, on the first day that we raised 

this issue, the minister said this was a policy that they would 

review, and it’s purely a policy, Mr. Speaker. How businesses 

interact and do business with the Government of Saskatchewan 

is policy defined by this government. 

 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7275 

Mr. Speaker, then she went on to say, well other provinces do 

it. Well please review: you don’t care what other provinces do 

when it comes to the Human Rights Commission; you are 

destroying that whole facility. Mr. Speaker, they don’t care 

what other provinces are doing in a number of other areas. And, 

Mr. Speaker, they need to do what’s right for the province of 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan taxpayers expect transparency. 

When is this minister going to change her policy and address 

the issues of taxpayers’ dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite states that we don’t care. Well 

we do care. We care that this province is moving forward, that 

we are encouraging more head offices to choose to locate here. 

We care that more jobs are being created here. And we also 

care to ensure that we had a balanced budget, something that 

most other provinces were not able to do. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

are moving this province forward. That’s why it’s called the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

[10:45] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Royalty Rates 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. If I could have 

the members’ attention for a minute. We’re having a bit of a 

problem with the clock here, if members would just give us a 

minute. Order. I’d ask members to come to order. We’ll 

proceed with the 75-minute debate. I recognize the member 

from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

great pleasure for me to stand in this Assembly and speak about 

mineral royalties, royalties that this province charges to potash 

mining companies, oil and gas companies, and uranium mining 

companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A lot of rhetoric has been bandied about recently, all of it 

coming from the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, about the 

province not getting maximum benefit out of the royalties we 

charge these resource companies, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

go on record with some stats and a brief history of the 

development of particularly potash royalties, Mr. Speaker, but I 

want to put some facts on the record about all of our royalties. 

 

In the North . . . There’s terrible inconsistency from their 

benches, Mr. Speaker. They say one thing in one part of the 

province on this royalty issue and something quite different in 

another part of the province, Mr. Speaker. When they’re in the 

North, they talk about oil and gas and potash royalties and how 

they should be increased. They don’t mention uranium when 

they’re up there, Mr. Speaker, because they know and northern 

people know that increasing uranium royalties would kill 

thousands of jobs in the North. So they don’t talk about that 

when they’re in the North. 

 

But then they go down to the Southeast maybe or to the west 

side of the province in the oil and gas producing areas, Mr. 

Speaker. And when they’re there, they talk about increasing 

royalties on potash and on uranium. They don’t talk about 

increasing royalties on oil and gas when they’re in oil and gas 

producing areas, Mr. Speaker. They say what they think will 

sell as well as it possibly can to the people they’re talking to. 

They don’t seem to have any real principles or desire to do the 

right thing for the province as a whole. 

 

The only thing they are consistent about is increasing potash 

royalties, and so I will focus most of my remarks on potash, but 

they apply equally, Mr. Speaker, to oil and gas and uranium as 

well. My remarks will underscore inconsistencies between their 

actions as government and what they are talking about doing 

now, leaving no other conclusion, Mr. Speaker, than the NDP 

are willing to throw the economy of Saskatchewan and 

thousands of jobs — mostly union jobs, Mr. Speaker — under 

the NDP campaign bus, not, Mr. Speaker, to win an election but 

to attempt to consolidate something of a far left wing base upon 

which they hope to be able to build their political fortunes in 

the future sometime, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the 1990s the potash industry came to the government with 

concern that the tax burden on the potash industry was such that 

it was next to impossible to justify new investment. An analysis 

confirmed that the maximum marginal tax rate at that time of 

the industry exceeded 80 per cent. When considering its total 

tax burden, including federal and provincial corporate income 

tax and corporate capital tax resource surcharge, average tax 

rates on profits from potash operations exceeded 50 per cent 

then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1998, of course, under the NDP, the following changes were 

made. The highest profit tax bracket, 50 per cent, was 

eliminated, leaving 35 per cent as the top profit tax rate. The 

maximum base payment rate was frozen at its 1997 level, 

$12.33 per K2O [potassium oxide] tonne. The four different 

categories of mine capital were consolidated into one, giving a 

35 per cent depreciation rate. The categories of research and 

development costs eligible for a 40 per cent tax credit were 

broadened and their treatment made more consistent. The tax 

treatment of various other costs and revenues were clarified 

with a number of housekeeping measures. 

 

A provision was made that in 2001, the first profit tax bracket, 

15 per cent, was expanded from $35 to $40 profit per K2O 

tonne. 

 

In the early 2000s, the industry came back to the government 

with a concern that the tax burden was still too high to justify 

new investment in the industry. And this had become an issue 

as potash markets were growing rapidly and new investment 

was needed in order to meet increasing demand. The industry 

said, and rightly so, that potash divisions operated within larger 

corporate entities and had to compete with alternative 

investment opportunities that existed in other divisions. 

 

In 2003 the following changes to the PPT, the potash 



7276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

production tax, were implemented in regulations under the 

previous NDP government. The profit tax portion of the PPT 

was removed on sales of potash that were above the producer’s 

average of sales in ’01 and ’02. Producers were given an 

accelerated depreciation rate, 100 per cent, for capital 

investment in the year that was in excess of 90 per cent of the 

producer’s capital investment in 2002. 

 

After the 2003 tax changes were implemented by the NDP, the 

government and the industry agreed to discuss possible ways to 

further improve the system. And in 2005, also under the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker, the following changes to the PPT were 

implemented in regulations. Producers were given a 10-year 

holiday from the base payment portion of the PPT for potash 

produced from approved expansions of productive capacity. 

The accelerated depreciation rate for capital investment in 

excess of 90 per cent of the producer’s capital investment in ’02 

was increased from 100 per cent to 120 per cent. 

 

In 2010, Mr. Speaker, due to 2003 tax changes that removed the 

profit tax on sales in excess of the producer’s average sales in 

’01 and ’02, a situation was created where a new entrant to the 

Saskatchewan potash industry would not pay profit tax as it 

would not have had sales in ’01 and ’02. Of course there had 

been no new entrants up to that point in 40 years. Existing 

potash producers were concerned that new entrants were not 

subject to the same base level of tax as they were, would have a 

significant advantage in potash markets. 

 

The new system created a base minimum . . . The only changes 

made by our government were made in 2010 to rectify this 

untenable situation. And in 2010 the following changes were 

made to the PPT. For existing producers, base tonnes subject to 

profit tax or average sales in ’01 and ’02, the equivalent base 

tonnes of a new entrant are set equal to 75 per cent of its sales 

in the year until 75 per cent of sales exceeds 1 million K2O 

tonnes. In the year that this occurs, the base tonnes of new 

entrants are set permanently at 1 million K2O tonnes. When 

new producers enter the industry, the base tonnes of all 

producers will be adjusted downwards. The total industry 

adjustment is 65 per cent of new entrants’ base tonnes and is 

distributed among producers according to their proportionate 

share of total industry base tonnes. For both existing producers 

and new entrants, there’s now a floor on taxable tonnes equal to 

35 per cent of a producer’s total sales. So the only substantive 

change to the royalty structure introduced by this government 

was instituting a tax for new entrants equal to 35 per cent of a 

producer’s total production. 

 

Revisions have been made over time to improve 

Saskatchewan’s potash industry competitiveness. And full 

credit has to be given to the previous NDP government for 

taking measures that were necessary to keep the industry in 

Saskatchewan and enable further investment by the industry in 

the province. 

 

To put our royalties in context, Mr. Speaker, they are quite 

simply the highest in the world. To raise them risks killing the 

industry in the province, and certainly would cancel announced 

new investments by the industry in the province and eliminate 

the possibility of any new investment. This would translate into 

the loss of thousands of jobs in Saskatchewan, and probably in 

the neighbourhood of $1 billion in revenue to the province 

every single year over the long term. It would kill the goose that 

laid the golden egg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, potash resource royalty and tax payments to the 

province are made up of three charges: Crown base royalty on 

gross potash sales, 2 to 3 per cent; corporate capital tax 

resource surcharge on gross potash sales, 3 per cent; potash 

production tax on potash profits, three-year average ’08 to ’10, 

at 20 per cent. Add in corporate income tax — the total 

marginal tax rate for potash mining companies is about 45 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, not the 5 cents on the dollar that the NDP are 

bandying around union halls and coffee shops in this province, 

not even close, Mr. Speaker. When all taxes are considered, the 

potash mining companies are at four to five times the tax rate of 

any other jurisdiction in the world. 

 

I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a graph from the CRU 

Group, which is a well-respected United Kingdom-based 

mining industry research company, Mr. Speaker, and it points 

out the potash royalty and production taxes paid by, paid in the 

13 potash producing jurisdictions around the world. 

 

The jurisdictions charging 1 per cent or less include China, 

Russia, Spain, Germany, and Belarus. Jurisdictions under 5 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, include Israel, UK [United Kingdom], 

United States, Brazil, and Chile. In the jurisdictions that charge 

more than 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, we have a Canadian one, 

New Brunswick, at 6 per cent. We have Jordan, that engine of 

international economic growth, at 11 per cent, Mr. Speaker; and 

Saskatchewan, the highest in the world by more than double 

Jordan, the second place finisher, at 22 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan, in short, receives a much larger share of potash 

revenue than any other jurisdiction on this planet. 

 

The public policy has been successful. Significant investment in 

mine expansions are still to come. We are only now seeing the 

first greenfield mine built in Saskatchewan in 40 years. The 

industry estimates 12 billion in expansion expected from now 

through 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have before me three pages. It’s a list in fine 

print of potash projects around the world. And, you know, 

while Saskatchewan is home to 50 per cent of the world potash 

reserves, due to the size of overall world reserves, significant 

expansion potential exists elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP makes much of the point that we have 

half of the world’s reserves so we should be able to charge 

anything we darn well please, Mr. Speaker, in taxes and 

royalties, and get away with it. The serious flaw in that 

argument, Mr. Speaker, is that, because we have 50 per cent of 

the resource in the world, implies that 50 per cent exists 

elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. The NDP haven’t seen through that 

one yet. 

 

But I have, as I mentioned, three pages in very small print of 

potential potash expansion and greenfield projects in other 

jurisdictions in the world. Currently under the current royalty 

regime and for the next two to five years, significant capital 

investment writedowns will suppress, to some extent, 

government revenues. But there will be significant, Mr. 

Speaker, growth in revenue in the long term. And if any of 

those members opposite would undertake to study our royalties, 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7277 

which were developed under the NDP governments, they would 

know this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know the Leader of the Opposition understands how they 

work, but he continues to advance his pre-election rhetoric 

regardless of the facts and at the expense of our potash industry 

and our oil and gas industry and our uranium industry and 

mainly, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of thousands, it would be 

tens of thousands of jobs in the province, Mr. Speaker, if the 

NDP destroyed the royalty structure in all of those industries. 

 

In recent years, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Alberta raised 

oil royalty rates in the neighbourhood of 20 per cent in an effort 

to extract more government revenue from the oil industry. The 

net result was a loss of billions of dollars in oil industry 

investment in Alberta, the loss of billions of dollars in oil 

revenue for the people of Alberta, and the loss of thousands of 

jobs in that province. As well substantial investment moved 

from that province to Saskatchewan because our oil royalties 

here remained stable. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition recognizes that did great harm to 

the oil industry and the province of Alberta, but he now 

advocates doing the exact same thing in the potash, uranium, 

and oil and gas industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. He 

knows full well that action would devastate the economy of the 

province and put us back into have-not status for a very long 

time. He knows this action would leave no revenue for 

investment in health and education and social services and 

housing and roads or debt reduction. He knows these things 

from experience, and yet he advocates destroying 

Saskatchewan, for the foreseeable future, for short-term 

political gain as we approach an election, Mr. Speaker, in which 

it appears that he will be humiliated and his party devastated. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now would like to take the opportunity to read 

the motion into the record. The motion reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the opposition, especially its 

leadership, for attempting to drag Saskatchewan back to a 

have-not province with policies that raise uranium, potash, 

and oil and gas royalties. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the opposition, especially its 

leadership, for attempting to drag Saskatchewan back to a 

have-not province with policies that raise uranium, potash, 

oil and gas royalty rates. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to enter into this debate. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to start by stating that nothing could be further from the 

truth that the New Democratic Party would be prepared to 

become a have-not province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 

that we became a have province and we were very proud of 

becoming a have province because of the policies of the NDP 

Party in this province. And we’re proud of the fact that we 

brought this province from the state of bankruptcy that the 

former Conservative Party, their colleagues, Mr. Speaker, 

brought us to the point . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Unfortunately there’s too many people 

who want to get into the debate. There will be . . . You will 

have your opportunity. I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I stated 

earlier, we were very proud to put the foundation in place and 

make Saskatchewan a have province, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

very, very, a very proud moment for all of Saskatchewan in 

2005 when we became a have province, and we’re extremely 

proud of that record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a simple question of the 

members opposite and I guess to the people of Saskatchewan: 

why wouldn’t, why wouldn’t the people of Saskatchewan want 

a fair return for their resource, Mr. Speaker? Why wouldn’t the 

people of Saskatchewan want to see the benefit that a fair return 

for that resource would achieve for them, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many, many questions as to why the 

members opposite wouldn’t want to see a fair return from their 

resources for the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. Is it 

because, it is because if they got a fair return for the people of 

Saskatchewan for those resources, Mr. Speaker, they might get 

less in political contributions from those same companies to 

their political coffers, Mr. Speaker? Or could it be that maybe if 

they got a fair return for the people of Saskatchewan for that 

resource that they wouldn’t get, if they decided to leave 

politics, cushy jobs with those same resource companies, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Those are the questions I have to ask because, Mr. Speaker, 

why would any, why would any member of this Assembly 

elected to represent the people of Saskatchewan not want to 

maximize the return for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? That is the role of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

The role of the government is to get the very best, the absolute 

best that they can from our resources on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we’re not talking about going to a level that hurts resource 

companies to the point where they can’t operate, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what they’d like, that’s what they would like to portray. 

That’s what they’d like to make the people of Saskatchewan 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that if the resource companies paid a little 

bit more that they wouldn’t produce in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, or they would shut down, Mr. Speaker. 



7278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is what they would like you to believe, 

Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, they very much have forgot 

that, Mr. Speaker, their role is to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan, not the resource companies, Mr. Speaker. Their 

role is to get the very best deal for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, not represent the interest of the resource 

companies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame the resource companies. I 

don’t blame them at all for bargaining tough and getting the 

best deal they can, Mr. Speaker. I don’t blame Bill Doyle, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t blame any CEO [chief executive officer] of a 

company for doing his job well, Mr. Speaker, and getting the 

very best for the company. That’s what he’s paid to do. On the 

other hand, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

paid by the people of Saskatchewan to get the best deal for the 

people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 5 cents on the 

dollar, Mr. Speaker, isn’t good enough. It’s not good enough. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan expect their 

government to represent their interests, just like the 

shareholders of the corporations, Mr. Speaker, doing business 

in Saskatchewan expect the CEO to represent their interests. 

But they don’t expect, the people of Saskatchewan, that the 

Premier would put the interests of the large corporations ahead 

of their own interests, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame Bill Doyle. I don’t blame any 

corporation for trying to get the best deal they can. What I do 

though, Mr. Speaker, is blame a government who doesn’t try to 

get the best deal at any point in time for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan from their royalties. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a step back and look at 

what the people of Saskatchewan clearly understand but maybe 

the government doesn’t, and that is that the people of 

Saskatchewan own the resources, Mr. Speaker. Those resources 

are owned by the people of Saskatchewan, not by the 

government, not by the companies who pay to mine them, Mr. 

Speaker, but the people. And the people need to get a fair return 

for their resources. And why would any government argue 

against reviewing royalties, reviewing royalties to ensure that 

you maximize the benefit or potential of the people of the 

province in which you represent? 

 

Mr. Speaker, many professionals and economists have entered 

into this debate, Mr. Speaker. Jack Mintz from the University of 

Calgary describes the province’s current potash royalty system 

as just wrong. It’s not good for the people of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. Sylvain Charlebois, a former U of R [University of 

Regina] business professor, said a review of the province’s 

royalty structure is dearly needed. Mr. Speaker, what is wrong 

with reviewing royalties and maximizing the potential for the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, common sense has to apply in those royalty 

reviews as well. Mr. Speaker, we have vast minerals and 

resources in our province, Mr. Speaker. They’re not all the 

same. We don’t have the same strategic advantage in some that 

we have in others, Mr. Speaker, so you have to apply common 

sense. And you have to look at the royalty structure in a way 

that sees the benefit of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

industries in which they’re involved, and the marketplaces in 

which each industry is involved. They’re not the same, so you 

have to apply common sense. 

 

Members opposite want to create fear and say, well reviewing 

will shut the door and companies will leave, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just use a simple analogy. If the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, a leading company around the 

world and a great producer of potash in our province, a 

company we should all be proud of, and we all are . . . Mr. 

Speaker, we’re proud of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. It started as a Crown corporation. It started as 

being owned by the people, and today it’s a privately owned 

corporation, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of that corporation and 

the business it does here. 

 

But they made $1.8 billion last year, Mr. Speaker. And the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan made 76 million, $77 

million, Mr. Speaker, from their resource. Mr. Speaker, no. If 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made $1 billion last 

year instead of $1.8 billion, they’re not going to shut their 

doors. They’re not going to shut their doors because no 

profitable company making $1 billion is going to shut their 

doors. Anybody that tries to make you believe that is 

fearmongering, Mr. Speaker. They’re doing no more than trying 

to create a fear in you that, if some change occurs, that the 

world’s going to fall apart, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

hope always — always — beats fear, Mr. Speaker. Hope 

always triumphs over fear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all that we are saying is the people of 

Saskatchewan have a right to maximize the return for their 

resources, Mr. Speaker. To create a fear that if the Potash 

Corporation made less money that they would shut the doors 

and walk away — let’s say hypothetically if they only made $1 

billion profit — is ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. Because I can tell 

you there’s companies all over the world who would like to 

have a bottom line of $1 billion, companies all over the world. 

And the captains of industry over there, those who claim to be 

the captains of industry, fully understand that. They understand 

that. No company’s going to walk away that’s making $1 

billion profit, Mr. Speaker, so let’s not create a fear that doesn’t 

exist. 

 

What is wrong with reviewing royalties to maximize the 

potential in the province of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, when 

the Potash Corporation was privatized, the former leader of the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan said it was 

done to maximize the potential and profitability for the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that we need to review our 

royalties and we need to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan get the maximum benefit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, reviewing royalties, being accountable to the 

people of Saskatchewan, representing their best interest is 

something that’s in the interest of all the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, you need to do that if you’re 

a prudent leader, if you’re a prudent government, on a regular 

basis. There’s nothing wrong with that. And you know, lo and 

behold, Mr. Speaker, you might review one industry every few 

years and another one only every eight or nine or ten years, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’re not all the same. The profitability isn’t 

the same. The bottom line isn’t the same, Mr. Speaker. The 

marketplace isn’t the same. 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7279 

But, Mr. Speaker, the idea of reviewing your royalties to 

maximize the benefit for Saskatchewan people shouldn’t be 

something that anybody’s afraid of. It shouldn’t be something 

that you try to create a fear in the population over, Mr. Speaker. 

It should be something that a prudent, responsible government 

should do as a good business case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure 

to rise in this debate. And I will be enthusiastically supporting 

the basis laid down by the member from Thunder Creek, and I 

would thank him for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the Leader of the Opposition making 

numerous statements about our existing royalty structure. In 

fact he sounds like a big fan of our government when he 

honestly reflects on our existing royalty rates. At the Economy 

Committee estimates of April 20th, 2010, the Leader of the 

NDP said this, and I quote: 

 

. . . the stability in Saskatchewan under the Romanow 

leadership, and Lorne Calvert, and now our Premier 

leaving it in place has led to a stability regime that is 

really known across the country. And to give credit, and I 

do give credit to the minister for the fact that he didn’t 

change and hasn’t proposed changes to the royalties that 

were in place when this government was elected in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was his stance. That was his statement, 2010. 

Mr. Speaker, that was less, less than a year ago. 

 

On that same day he also said, “And I think there was a huge 

flow of investment into Saskatchewan after the Stelmach 

government made their ill-advised royalty changes.” Mr. 

Speaker, that again from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

That leader is fully aware of the negative impact of tinkering 

with complex royalty rates for political expedience. Mr. 

Speaker, this is political short-sightedness of the worst kind. In 

fact you might use that big word; you might say it is 

disingenuous. And it shows contempt for the intelligence of the 

people of this province. 

 

What does this NDP flip-flop on royalty rates mean for 

Saskatchewan? Mr. Ken Rasmussen of the Graduate School of 

Public Policy said on this, on CBC Radio March 9th of this 

year: 

 

If you want to collect more royalties you can, but you will 

be limited to the existing levels of production. You won’t 

see much new investment, and you won’t see the kind of 

growth that we’ve witnessed in the potash sector. So it 

really depends on what you want. 

 

This public policy analyst with expert experience in this 

province is essentially saying this province has a history of 

losing investments to other provinces and countries because our 

rates were too high. “Once a new mine is built here, it will 

mean more revenue to the province for decades.” 

 

Well how does Mr. Rasmussen’s quotation jive when the 

Leader of the NDP tells the Leader-Post, and I quote: 

 

To make it clear, the royalty increase I think in no way 

would jeopardize anything that was going on because the 

companies would be making more profit even with a 

royalty increase that they ever planned. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The answer, Mr. Speaker, is it doesn’t. The Leader of the NDP 

has flip-flopped ever since he returned to the Saskatchewan 

politics. He is desperate for support so he will say anything to 

anyone. Unfortunately his strategy of flip-flopping isn’t 

actually winning support. 

 

A letter from the Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association 

had this to say, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan’s healthy economy and the increased global 

demand for potash from 3 to 4 per cent per year have 

allowed current, ongoing, and future expansions of all 10 

mines. Growth is a priority for all our companies. 

Saskatchewan has the largest potash industry in the world 

and accounts for over 50 per cent of the global reserves. 

This gives us a competitive edge. 

 

After reaching a productive arrangement with the former NDP 

government, the industry went ahead with over $12 billion in 

investment over nine years. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Potash Producers 

Association ends their letter, addressed to the Leader of the 

Opposition, with a dire warning, a dire warning. The 

association warned that the dangers of pursuing a reckless 

policy for short-term gain, and I quote: 

 

Unfairly increasing the overall tax rate on potash, which 

significantly decreases the margins on expansion projects, 

could dramatically affect expansion already under way or 

still to be initiated. Those projects could be delayed or 

cancelled, which would result in severely impacting the 

GDP growth and provincial jobs. Changing the rules 

partway through the game would have an adverse effect 

on Saskatchewan as an investment jurisdiction. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the industry has very real and significant 

concerns about the NDP’s flip-flop on the issue of royalty rates. 

What is even more disconcerting is the NDP leader’s 

experience in the resource sector. He must know that when a 

company considers investing billions of dollars in a region, they 

need to know that taxes and royalty rates are stable. We don’t 

even know how much potential investment he scared off with 

his reckless flip-flop on royalty rates. We can only hope that no 

one in the industry takes him seriously since his flip-flops 

seriously undermine his credibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the industry that is alarmed by the 

NDP’s reckless flip-flopping attitude. Saskatchewanians 

continue to be concerned. The mayor of Humboldt, after 

carefully outlining the positive impact that the current royalty 

rate has on investment in the region, had this to say to the 

Leader of the NDP. I quote: 

 



7280 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

We believe there is a need for a period of stability to 

support the growth and development of the potash 

industry in our province and allow our communities to 

attract the interest and confidence of new residents and 

new business ventures. Discussions regarding changes in 

royalties and taxation policies should not be brought 

forward in the midst of this significant growth phase.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here we have a community that would be 

directly impacted by the NDP’s latest flip-flop, and the NDP 

just wants to plow ahead with reckless policy without 

consulting the industry and the public. These are the 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. They are united in their 

unambiguous dismissal of the NDP’s job-killing resource tax. 

 

So let’s look at the facts. We have two scenarios, and in both of 

them we know that the stakeholders are absolutely opposed to 

the NDP’s flip-flop on royalty rates. So, Mr. Speaker, in one 

scenario the NDP consulted with the public and industry, didn’t 

like what they heard but went ahead with their job-killing 

resource tax as they ignored the concerns of the people in this 

province. In the second scenario, the NDP did absolutely no 

consultations yet are proposing a reckless proposal that would 

dramatically reshape Saskatchewan’s socio-economic 

landscape for the worst. Mr. Speaker, either of these scenarios 

are unacceptable. And that’s why the NDP’s latest flip-flop 

with the stability will be ignored by our government and the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasise that the NDP’s 

flip-flop is not a new phenomenon. It is their continual practice, 

and that’s what they’re building on. And the one I really like is 

they keep saying we inherited $2 billion from them, and yet 

when you ask them why they didn’t build schools and hospitals 

they say, we had no money. We couldn’t do it — flip-flop. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the question today is about 

fundamental fairness for the people of Saskatchewan and for 

the people of Canada because both Saskatchewan people and 

Canadian citizens have an interest in the share that they receive 

from the resource in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start with a quote from a place 

that might be a little bit unusual. But in North Dakota, our 

neighbour to the south, the state senate is looking at the issue of 

potash taxes. And there’s a Republican state representative 

down there named Glen Froseth, and he said, “We have a 

resource that’s non-renewable and that’s becoming a scarce 

commodity. It took us 500 million years to get it. I don’t think 

we should just give it away.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this issue of fairness about our resource 

revenues is a fundamental one for Saskatchewan. We have 

many needs that are here to be met. And we need to make sure 

we get a fair share of the resource that’s there. 

 

We know that many prominent spokespeople have talked about 

the resource rent or resource allocation for the public system 

that we have in Saskatchewan and basically call it wrong. Jack 

Mintz who, when we were in government, we worked with him 

on a number of taxation issues, he says that the province’s 

current potash royalty system is just wrong. So, Mr. Speaker, 

we also have Sylvain Charlebois who studied this whole area 

quite carefully when he lived in Regina. And he now lives in 

Ontario, and he says that a review of this royalty structure is 

dearly needed. 

 

I think the problem that the people of Saskatchewan, whether 

they’re leaning towards the Sask Party or whether they’re New 

Democrats or Conservatives or wherever they fit, the 

fundamental question for everybody in the province is if many 

people who have looked at a complicated system say that 

there’s something not quite right with it, then when we have a 

government that says, we’re not going to look at it at all — 

we’re not going to touch that; we’re not going to do anything 

with it — a lot of questions are raised. And so, Mr. Speaker, the 

real, the question here today is why would this government end 

up being so definite in their sense that this is all the way it 

should be and not accept the fact that there should be a review. 

I’m not certain what the issue is. 

 

I know that I was recently looking at a book called Calculating 

Political Risk by Catherine Althaus. It’s a new book. It talks 

about how as politicians our job is to look at uncertainty in the 

world and try to sort out how we make a response to those 

uncertainties. And it’s very clear that resource revenues, the 

issues around the values of resources, was one of the most 

uncertain aspects of our political life because we rely on some 

source of . . . we rely on this source to provide revenue for us as 

we move forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you have a leader, whether it’s a Premier 

or a minister who’s in charge of this area who just say, well 

we’re not going to do anything — we’re not going to listen; 

we’re not going to look at the political risk, the risk that’s 

involved in this pricing then, Mr. Speaker — we know that we 

have a problem. Because the role of anybody who is in 

leadership is to continually assess the uncertainty and then the 

risk that comes with that uncertainty as you move forward. 

 

And we all know that there have been changes. Some of the 

risks are natural catastrophes like earthquakes or big storms or 

floods or things like that. But other risks relate to what role we 

play in the worldwide economy as a supplier of resources. And, 

Mr. Speaker, for the Premier and for the minister and others on 

that side of the House to just say, we’re going to put our heads 

in the sand — we’ve got these rules; we’re not going to do 

anything for the next number of years — that’s wrong. And the 

people of Saskatchewan know that it’s wrong because they 

have many needs that need to be met. And the ability of the 

individuals and the businesses, especially in this province, to 

fund the kinds of things that we need to make sure our 

community works is limited unless we have access to revenues 

from these resources. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other aspect of this whole situation 

relates to our long-term relationship with the federal 

government around the sharing of resources and of the 

appropriate share that we should be getting. We know that the 

Premier, when he was elected in 2007, took a calculated risk 

that his friendship with the Prime Minister would allow him to 

accomplish the same thing or something similar as the lawsuit 

that we started against the federal government as the NDP 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7281 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, three and a half years later, we have very 

little or nothing from that whole area of the Saskatchewan 

people getting an appropriate share of the resource revenue that 

should there for them. And using the information that was 

provided by a number of economists and scholars who have 

looked at this, there’s up to 20 years of revenue at — using Mr. 

Lukiwski’s numbers — 800, 900 million a year that are not, 

they haven’t been part of what’s gone on in Saskatchewan. We 

all know, whether it’s the present government or previous 

governments, with that kind of cash available to deal with many 

of the issues that we had in Saskatchewan, we’d be in quite a 

different spot on our education system, our health system, our 

roads — a whole number of areas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier and the government 

opposite make these decisions to back away from those 

resources that are rightfully Saskatchewan people’s resources, 

we have the definite right to point it out. We also have the right 

to say it’s wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, when they’re making 

decisions about that particular lawsuit and dealing with the 

federal government, they’ve been wrong. 

 

Now maybe we’ll have some change on May 2 which will 

assist in dealing with some of these issues. I’m not certain. But 

it’s quite clear that in Newfoundland, we have all the parties 

making the same kind of promises that were made to 

Saskatchewan in 2006 about dealing with these resource issues. 

Whether anything comes of that will be interesting. We also 

have the same kind of promises being made to the province of 

Quebec. 

 

And so where does Saskatchewan fit into this? Bringing all this 

back to our uncertainty about the future of the pricing of the 

resources that we do have in this province, I think that we need 

to make sure that the Premier gets off of this fixed position of 

not looking at how we share in the long-term depleting resource 

that we have in this province. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m going to quote again our friend 

from North Dakota. He says, “We have a resource that’s 

non-renewable and that’s becoming a scarce commodity. It took 

us 500 million years to get it. I don’t think we should give it 

away.” 

 

What’s he talking about? He’s talking about that extension of 

the potash that’s very abundant here that also extends into 

North Dakota. We know that in the Bakken oil field and all the 

things that have happened in Montana, North Dakota, 

Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, that that’s been a positive thing 

for all of these communities. 

 

We need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that we as the citizens of 

Saskatchewan are getting our fair share of the rents from these 

resources. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to be in a position where 

we have a Premier who shows leadership around looking at this 

on an ongoing basis. To get stuck and say that we’re not going 

to do anything for 16 years is just dead wrong. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan people believe that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m going to use my best radio voice today, and I’ll tell you 

why. Because when you talk about the review of the royalty 

rates, it’s very upsetting. It’s very upsetting to the people of 

Saskatchewan that we would consider jeopardizing where we 

are as a province and the fortunes we have right now. 

 

We’ve come a long way, Mr. Speaker, from being a have-not 

province. We are a have province now and we don’t want to go 

back. There’s a new generation in Saskatchewan, a new 

attitude. It’s a positive attitude. We’re ambitious, with foresight 

and accomplishment and pride. 

 

There’s a lot of optimism in this province. We pay less taxes. 

We’re higher weekly earnings, improving in health care, and 

upgrading our schools and building new schools. There’s more 

opportunities to grow and to invest in this stable economy. This 

is partly attributed to the revenue that we get from our gas and 

oil and uranium and potash, and we don’t want to jeopardize 

that in any way. 

 

This is the new Saskatchewan, and it wasn’t always so. For a 

long time we were sending our kids away because the people 

were oppressed in here. They were depressed. There was no 

optimism in here. That has changed around and it’s largely 

because of where our natural resources are from, are taking us 

to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Back in the old Saskatchewan, hospitals were closing, schools 

were closing, the College of Medicine was on probation, and 

the infrastructure was at a real deficit. We’ve changed that. 

We’re growing; we’re coming alive. This is now a have 

province and a lot of that comes from the royalties we receive 

from our province, from our resources. And messing with that 

kind of a royalty structure with a review or upgrading them will 

take that right back into a have-not status. We don’t want to go 

back there. 

 

That government did a lot of things that kept us in a have-not 

status. They had the oil, the Saskoil, the land bank. They even 

had a law that would take over the potash industry. We can’t do 

that. They lost over $200 million in investments that cost every 

man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan at least $200, so if you 

had a family of six there’s $1,800 right out of your pocket just 

because of bad investments they made. 

 

But now we’ve changed all that. We’re getting royalties to help 

reduce taxes. We’re letting business do business. Now 

Saskatchewan is leading the country in economic, most 

economic indicators. We’ve got more jobs. We have higher 

revenues from our resources. We have less taxes, lower 

unemployment, and we’ve just reached a new record in our 

population. This is a have province. We don’t want to be 

dragged back with raising royalties that would be detrimental to 

our growth. And yet there’s a group of people on that side of 

the House that would want to do this. They would raise 

royalties. 

 

We learned from Alberta that when you start messing around 

with those royalty reviews, you can deter a lot of investment. 



7282 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

And the member that was just speaking prior to me, from 

Regina Lakeview, mentioned something about a review, 

somebody from Alberta talking about a review that we’re 

giving it away. Well that’s easy for them to say because they 

lost a lot when they started messing with it. 

 

I’ve got friends that I just saw a week or so ago, about 10 days 

ago, that said that we should redo the review because they want 

to stimulate people to move away from Saskatchewan. That’s 

not what this party stands for. This is not what this province 

needs. We heard them talking about the resources we have that 

they do belong to the people of Saskatchewan. Absolutely they 

do. But they’re going to do no good to the people of 

Saskatchewan if they’re left in the ground and not developed, 

and this is what we want to do. That’s why we want to keep the 

royalties that are competitive and giving a good return to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek went over this very well and 

talked about the rates that are for potash. We have a 22 per cent 

royalty rate in Saskatchewan, not 5 per cent that those members 

would try and let us think that is current. It’s 22 per cent. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the highest royalty rate in the world. The 

next highest is 11 per cent. And in New Brunswick, it’s 6 per 

cent. So are we getting a fair return? I would think so. From a 

market standpoint, 22 per cent is very fair, and it’s more than 

competitive. The people of Saskatchewan appreciate the returns 

that the potash revenues are giving us. 

 

The investment in potash has been so well that there’s 

expansion in every potash company in Saskatchewan. There’s 

new companies wanting to come in. The whole potash industry 

is growing very strong. It looks very good. And the potash 

industry likes stability. That’s why they’re looking at 

Saskatchewan even though our royalty rates are double 

anywhere else in the world. They like that. Any kind of messing 

with that equation will . . . They won’t close what they’ve got, 

but they may not expand. They may not find the locations they 

want for in Saskatchewan. They may look for investment 

opportunities anywhere else in the world, and that’s where the 

money will go. And when that’s done, they will be there for a 

long time. There will be thousands of jobs and millions of 

investment dollars that this province will lose, and it won’t be 

regained. And the potash can stay in the ground, but it doesn’t 

do any return for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s what the opposition would want. That’s what the Leader 

of the Opposition would like. And the Leader of the Opposition 

will say a lot of things and flip-flop in a lot of ways. And I 

know my learned friend from Thunder Creek went over this a 

little bit. But in an interview in the Missinipi Broadcasting 

Corporation out of La Ronge, the Opposition Leader told a 

reporter he was not sure whether an increase in uranium 

royalties was needed; however — that’s what he said — and yet 

however, in a television commercial that they had stated and I 

quote, in this television commercial it says, “Here are some 

things government needs to do: charge more royalties on potash 

and uranium.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the leader is talking to the people in north 

Saskatchewan, he isn’t sure whether an increase in royalty rates 

is needed, but in his own television commercial, he promises to 

do just that. Yes, he does. And then the member from Regina 

Dewdney, even in his budget speech, stood up in this House 

and made this statement, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, so those who say that an NDP government 

would change the natural gas or oil royalty structure in 

Saskatchewan are absolutely wrong. And our leader does 

not say that. He does not say that. In fact, he has 

emphatically said that oil and natural gas would not be 

changed. 

 

And this from Hansard on page 6988. That was the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look very closely . . . And it didn’t 

us long to find a transcript of an interview with the Leader of 

the Opposition, the NDP leader, on CKRM on the 5 o’clock 

news in December 13th of last year. And here’s what he said, 

and I quote, “If I become premier in November of 2009, I will 

institute a review of all the royalties in the province with the 

industry, whether it’s potash, uranium, oil, gas.” 

 

Yet the member from Regina Dewdney stood in this House and 

denied that the Leader of the NDP ever called for a revenue, a 

review on oil royalties. In fact, that’s exactly what he was 

calling for. And now in this debate just a short while ago, he 

said, why wouldn’t people want higher royalties? Well yes they 

would, Mr. Speaker, but there’s one thing that he didn’t, he’s 

omitting, and he’s not doing good calculations. Higher royalties 

will jeopardize the investment. It’ll jeopardize the jobs and 

jeopardize the new mines and the expansions that we’re facing, 

and taking away thousands of jobs for generations. 

 

And he talked about a professor from Calgary said that that 

would be just wrong. Well of course they’re going to say that 

because they want some unrest in the province of Saskatchewan 

to regain what they lost when they messed with the royalty 

structure in Alberta. Can’t they figure this one out? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s so much you can say. They would mislead 

the public. They don’t know what they are talking about. And 

I’ll say that again, they don’t know what they’re talking about. 

 

They would take us back. Any fluctuation in the structure of 

royalty review and rates would lose us billions of dollars in 

investment. It would take away thousands of jobs, and it would 

put Saskatchewan back in have-not status. We’d have higher 

unemployment rates. Right now we’ve got the highest 

population. We’ve got the lowest unemployment rate. 

Saskatchewan is moving along. It’s doing very well. We never, 

never want to go back to an era that we are a have-not status. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate in listening 

to the member from Moose Jaw North who has . . . probably 

should check his own articles that he’s written in the Moose 

Jaw papers surrounding the children’s hospital before he starts 

talking about other quotes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to add to this debate is the 

issues around how important the potash is to the people of 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7283 

Saskatchewan. In terms of the potash debate that we had last 

fall, I took the opportunity to go door knocking in my 

community, in my constituency, and they . . . One of the things 

was, don’t sell our potash cheaply and don’t sell our company. 

Don’t give it away. And people were passionate about owning 

and believing in their potash resource. I’ve never seen anything 

like that, Mr. Speaker. Door to door everybody was passionate 

about their potash. 

 

And in amongst those members in my constituency are the 

miners who work in the potash mines surrounding Saskatoon. 

And to a person, when we talked about people and royalty 

reviews they said, don’t believe the nonsense that people will 

be saying about the companies leaving. They’re spending 

millions of dollars on expansion as a result of the royalty 

reviews that we brought in, and it’s nonsense that they would 

leave. There is money. These people who work in the mines 

told me that they believe in the royalty reviews, and that we 

should be going forward with those royalty reviews. 

 

So as the Moose Jaw North, some of the other previous 

members who spoke, and spoke of that, it’s as my colleague 

from Regina Dewdney said, nothing more than fearmongering 

and keeping this . . . They talk about keeping the province in a 

backward state. That’s the kind of thinking that’ll keep this 

province in a backward state, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other point I’d like to raise is the Minister of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan], the member from 

Lloydminster, said that they will not review royalties not only 

now, but up to four terms of government. That’s 16 years, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would not look at this. That’s, I believe if my 

math is right, that’s 2027. And, Mr. Speaker, that type of 

approach to having this province move forward is shameful, 

Mr. Speaker, because the kinds of things that I also heard 

people talk about on the doorstep was what they could use this 

potash royalty money for and that they could use it. 

 

And what could they do? Affordable housing. One of the 

biggest things that’s on the agenda for this province now is 

affordable housing. And this is what people want money to be 

used for. This is their potash. They understand the link between 

receiving the royalties and receiving the proper income from 

their resource. 

 

And they are saying to us each day, Mr. Speaker, whoever you 

might ask, yes it’s good to have a review. It’s good to have a 

review because we own this resource. And that they understand 

— and there’s no question about that — maybe more so here 

than anywhere else in the country where people understand 

that. 

 

The farmers, the rising input costs. Improved health care. All 

across rural Saskatchewan we hear of concerns of people 

having to put in, municipalities having to put in their own 

money to do that. Yet right next door are the mines, are the 

potash mines. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And they see members of their own communities going to work 

in the mines. And those people who work in there, Mr. Speaker 

— I’ll bring you back to that — that they are saying that yes, 

we need a review of those royalties to make sure that we 

receive, that we receive what’s appropriate. And they are not, 

they are not off because backed up by that, and we’ve had many 

people from universities weigh in on this argument, weigh in on 

the argument and say, yes, it is time for a review. 

 

Jack Mintz, who has been quoted in here, describes the 

province’s current potash royalty system as just wrong. Now 

there is somebody that has come out and has put his name 

forward and said, here’s what we think; here’s what should be 

done. 

 

Erin Weir, Saskatchewan native and senior economist with the 

International Trade Union Confederation, and he just simply 

put it straight forward. He says Saskatchewan is collecting far 

too little revenue from potash. 

 

With this type of debate going on in the community, and not 

only in the constituencies in our province and my constituents 

but in our universities, surely we should see, we should see 

beyond the blinders, the ideological blinders, and say it is time 

to review this. Review it for the province, review it for the 

people, and come to some arrangement and say, this is what is 

right for our province. This is what is good for our province. 

 

So what do we have? We have people from the Sask Party 

government saying, if you touch this everybody’s going to 

leave. And they’re going around the province and saying that. 

And I wonder who, who it is that they’re saying this to. Do they 

go to their own constituents? 

 

Because in terms of this, I believe the people of Saskatchewan 

are speaking loud and clear, they say we would like to see a 

review. And the government is saying no, we don’t want that. 

On whose side is the Saskatchewan Party government on? Are 

they on the side of the people of this province, or are they on 

the side of the potash corporations? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, anyway there’s nothing wrong with the 

potash corporations being here. There’s nothing wrong with 

them extracting the potash, and there’s nothing wrong with 

them making a profit. The problem, Mr. Speaker — as people 

who work in daily lives, as people who struggle in our 

economy, as people who are struggling with whether it’d be 

housing or child care or any of the other things that people do 

on a daily basis — they all see. And it doesn’t take not 

necessarily somebody who has done a lot of study, perhaps like 

Sylvain Charlebois in the universities or any of the other people 

who have entered into this debate, economists. They know. 

They know at a level in their daily lives that there is something 

wrong here, that this is our potash resource, that the potash has 

gone . . . that it’s different now than when originally it was 

brought in by the NDP, that those things are absolutely 

different, the situation. 

 

For example just recently in Israel, which just has point five per 

cent of the world’s potash, is not afraid to sue its former Crown 

corporations for unpaid royalties and to pursue a royalty 

review. And Saskatchewan has 100 per cent more potash than 

Israel does, but there is a government that’s standing up 

because they are doing what’s right for the people. 

 

And the people in Saskatchewan are saying loudly and clearly 



7284 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

that we should have a review. It is time. It’s time for a review. 

And to say, well what is it that we would want? What is it and 

how much would it be? Because I hear the members want us to 

go on record to say how much. Well that is why people ask for 

a review. They ask for a review because they know. They know 

that there is something out of balance, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

something out of balance when they hear and they see the kinds 

of money, when they hear and they see the kinds of money that 

are paid to CEO salaries. They see and they know that there’s 

something wrong when they hear records of the billions of 

dollars that are being made by potash because they also see, in 

the expansion, the miners that work in the mine, the expansions 

that are being done, and the millions of dollars that are going in 

whether it’s into new mine shafts, whether it’s into equipment. 

 

They have never seen anything like that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve never seen the amount of workers on the sites 

and the expansions that are being talked about, and they know 

that there is money that these companies . . . Anybody who 

believes that these companies are now going to say, we’re 

going to leave, and that’s going to be it is unbelievable. And it’s 

quite, quite perplexing in some ways that these members are 

saying that there should be no review because it’s a . . . To me, 

who exactly are they talking to and who are they getting the 

advice on this? And why are they doing that? When all around 

the world people are saying and saying to their governments, if 

we own that resource, it is our resource; we should have a fair 

return. And so, Mr. Speaker, it is that way, that it is in some 

way surprising that they would bring this motion forward. 

 

What they should be doing is work in getting ready for a 

review, seeing how they can do that, seeing how they can get a 

fair return on our resource for the people of this province. And 

that’s what this government should be doing instead of 

fearmongering. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has lapsed in 65 minutes. I recognize 

the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Potash Producers Association has responded to the NDP’s 

reckless call for a job-killing resource tax by saying, and I 

quote, “. . . [it] would result in severely impacting GDP growth 

and provincial jobs.” 

 

The Saskatchewan Potash Producers executive then offered to 

meet with the NDP leader. And to the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview: what was the outcome of that meeting with the 

Potash Producers Association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I’m certain that the potash producers would 

like more. That is their job. They are here to make a profit. 

 

The issue is, the issue is, is how much and who is standing up 

for the people of this province? Who is standing up for the 

people of this province so that we can get a fair return from 

that? And I think that’s what they should be concentrating on, 

Mr. Speaker, and not backing and not being in bed with the 

potash companies of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Thunder Creek. Mr. Speaker, 

the potash resource in the province of Saskatchewan belongs to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Is the member 

from Thunder Creek, when they’re arguing that there should be 

no review of royalties in potash, Mr. Speaker, is he saying that 

the people of Saskatchewan should never review what their 

share is? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. Now I’m pretty much on the same 

page as the Leader of the Opposition was a year ago — a year 

ago today roughly — when he said these words. He said: 

 

I was invited by John Lau and his wife Heather to come to 

the sod-turning of the new office building in Lloydminster 

a couple of weeks ago. [And he said] And while I was 

there, the president and CEO, John Lau said, I want to say 

one thing where I give the Premier credit — that he didn’t 

change the royalties that were put in place by the NDP 

government. That’s what he said. 

 

So on the issue of energy royalties, I think we have a 

pretty good track record . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve listened to the NDP 

during the course of this debate advocating in favour of raising 

royalties. I do find it interesting, though, that the NDP leader is 

on record as condemning the royalty review and the changes in 

Alberta. He actually called it ill-advised, what Alberta did, 

because I think he understood the problem that it had on the 

Alberta economy and investment. So I’m wondering if the 

member for Regina Dewdney could explain why the NDP 

believe that a royalty review and changes was wrong for 

Alberta but right for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I said in 

my speech, when you’re reviewing royalties, Mr. Speaker, you 

have to look at each industry and the marketplace in which 

you’re in, Mr. Speaker. And what happened in the province of 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker, is, they decided to review their royalties 

when the price of oil had dropped from $140 a barrel down to 

$45 a barrel, Mr. Speaker — not very good timing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So you have to look at each particular mineral or each resource, 

Mr. Speaker, its marketplace. You have to put it in context, Mr. 

Speaker. And the members opposite don’t want to put anything 

in context; they want to look at it black and white. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7285 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member from 

Batoche is a good businessman and he’s worked many years in 

his business. And I want to ask him specifically if he has ever, 

in his business career, set a price for 16 years and not looked at 

it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Saskatchewan 

Potash Producers Association, the current potash royalty system 

led to significant new investment and job creation in the 

Saskatchewan potash industry — new creation investment. So, 

Mr. Speaker, if we allow new investment, new mines, maybe 

even some day we might even see that mine in Kamsack. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know that 

consistent messaging is not a strong point for the members 

opposite. The member from Regina Dewdney’s budget address 

provides another example of NDP flip-flopping and I quote, 

“Those who say that an NDP government would change a 

natural gas and oil royalty structure in Saskatchewan are 

absolutely wrong, and our leader does not say that.” 

Unfortunately for that member, he did not stay tuned in to 

CKRM when his leader was on the radio saying, and I quote, 

“If I become premier in November 2011, I would institute a 

review of all royalties in the province with the industry, 

whether it is potash, uranium, oil or gas.” 

 

So my question is to the member from Regina Dewdney: when 

will your party show consistency in regarding your job-killing 

policy regarding royalty rate increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the question. I’m just wondering when the members 

of the government are going to start standing up for the people 

of Saskatchewan and not for the major corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The question that the people of this province want to know is 

when is the government going to maximize the return for the 

people of Saskatchewan rather than worrying about the profits 

of the corporations. Mr. Speaker, we don’t condemn the 

corporations for going out and trying to get the very best deal 

they can on behalf of their shareholders. But we do condemn 

the government when they don’t try to get the best for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To the member from Batoche, because I, in 

terms of defending the Potash Corporation, when in fact is he 

going to do this job and defend the hard-working people of this 

province and get a fair return and not say that he will not do 

anything for 16 years? When is that going to happen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to an 

independent survey, we already are the highest paid royalties in 

the world. So you want to go still higher? You’re not going to 

accomplish anything when another mine, also in Canada, is at 6 

per cent and we’re at 22. I think it’s time to wake up and smell 

the coffee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, the silence of the two 

members from northern Saskatchewan has been deafening on 

the issue of hiking royalty rates on uranium. This is very 

disappointing to the residents of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Fairview: do constituents from 

the North not deserve a strong voice that would help encourage 

economic development in the North instead of the members 

representing the North that are muzzled by the Leader of the 

Opposition and told to fall in line with poor NDP policies that 

will destroy the economy of northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this is a stuck record. This is a 

stuck record. It is unbelievable that you would come out — 

whether it’s the minister or those members who are now 

singing from the same song sheet — to say, for 16 years, we’re 

not going to do anything, that things don’t change in potash. 

 

When they changed, and we decided to expand them, the NDP 

did that. Now we’re reaping the benefits, and it’s the NDP that 

did that. We are telling them, because obviously they don’t 

know, to look at the royalty reviews because that’s what we 

would have done. And they are stuck in the same place. It’s like 

a stuck record, Mr. Speaker, that is skipping, and they can’t get 

off of that. And as business people, it is alarming that these 

people would say 16 years, no change. Sixteen years, no 

change. Amazing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 

from Moose Jaw North. My question is this: were all of these 

canned questions created in the Premier’s office or in the 

Minister of Energy? And why don’t they ask the questions that 

the people of Saskatchewan want, is when are we going to get a 

fair return on our resource? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I think in November of 2007 

the people of Saskatchewan did answer a lot of questions. They 

said that we were in the position. These questions come on 

behalf of the people that elected us and made us a government. 

We’re leading the government very well. 

 

And when we’re talking about return on investment, the 22 per 

cent that we get from our royalties is far more than any other 

place in the world. And if we should jeopardize that, we’ll leave 

it in the ground, and there will be no benefits, and we’ll go back 



7286 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

to the have-not status. Mr. Speaker, we need to continue 

Saskatchewan moving forward, and we will. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very disturbing 

to look at the history of the NDP and the present Leader of the 

Opposition because they say one thing in one part of the 

province and another in the other. The Leader of the Opposition 

has said in the North when he’s speaking to northerners that 

they won’t raise the royalty rates. And in the rest of the 

province, he’s talking about raising royalty rates right across 

the spectrum of the resource sector. And that’s leaving a very 

. . . I mean the people of Saskatchewan and the business 

community do listen to that, and they’re very disturbed by those 

types of comments, Mr. Speaker. They flip-flop constantly. 

And if we go back to when the Leader of the Opposition was in 

the private sector, there’s even more glaring examples of 

flip-flops, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll ask the member from Saskatoon Fairview again: what 

really is the NDP Party’s policy on resource royalties? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — What the policy isn’t is hugging Bill Doyle. 

That’s what our policy isn’t; I’ll tell you that because we are for 

the people. We’ve listened to them, and the people are saying 

they want a royalty review, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they 

want. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed in the 75-minute debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 624 — The Contracts, Lease Agreements and 

Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to be able to rise in the Assembly and address a 

number of issues that have come about in the past number of 

years actually, Mr. Speaker, and has really moved the 

opposition to table the private members’ Bill, The Contracts, 

Lease Agreements and Tenders Accountability and 

Transparency Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill is small, but it covers some fairly 

wide-ranging areas. And when we look at the Bill itself, we can 

see contractors also includes subcontractors because that’s very 

important, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll get into that in more detail 

later. In interpretation: 

 

“government” means all Government of Saskatchewan 

ministries, Crown corporations, all Saskatchewan regional 

health authorities, all Saskatchewan publicly-funded 

school districts and all third-party agencies that receive a 

portion of funding from the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that covers a wide swath across the province, but 

it is important to this Bill, and it is important to the 

transparency and accountability of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. It also defines: 

 

“public agreement” [which] means an agreement 

between the Government of Saskatchewan and any other 

party where a portion of the funding is from the 

Government of Saskatchewan or guaranteed by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, part of this . . . Something that I’ve carried 

around with me since the last election, actually, is a picture of 

the front cover of the Sask Party election platform. And, Mr. 

Speaker, on one of the pages in very bold letters it says, a more 

accountable government. And it goes on to say, and I quote, “A 

Saskatchewan Party government will provide Saskatchewan 

people with more transparency and accountability than any 

other previous government.” 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, we need to keep that in mind because the 

words are easy to say, but actually following through on that 

kind of a commitment takes some effort. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s effort we have not seen from this government; in 

fact we have seen exactly the opposite. 

 

And I guess many people may comment on, why is it 

important? Like why is it important that we are kept informed 

of what the government is doing? And I guess one of the most 

basic reasons is that, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the money of the 

Saskatchewan Party. It isn’t the money purely of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. It is the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, it’s their money. It’s reliant on that money, the 

services that are provided to taxpayers and how the province 

moves forward. So there is an interest. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it moves beyond that because when 

we look the issue of transparency and accountability, it really 

gathers in many other concerns and many other issues that we 

are worried about and concerned about and talk about, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to read a quote. I did a bit of research 

online and at other areas, looked at what other governments are 

doing when it comes to transparency and accountability, what 

initiatives have been put forward. And there was a quote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I want to read it to you: 

 

Government accountability means that public officials — 

elected and un-elected — have an obligation to explain 

their decisions and actions to citizens. Government 

accountability is achieved through the use of a variety of 

mechanisms — political, legal, administrative — and 

designed to prevent corruption and ensure that public 

officials remain answerable and accessible to the people 

they serve. In the absence of such mechanisms, corruption 

may thrive. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s important. And when you look at it 

and you think about it, in this day and age we worry about 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7287 

citizens being disconnected from the democracy that is here to 

serve them. And I’ve heard many people say that the style of 

government, the system of democracy that we may use may not 

be perfect, but it’s the best anywhere in the world. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I truly believe that. And we need to make sure as 

elected officials that we encourage people to be involved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in some of the research I found a number of 

comments, and the one really strikes home: 

 

. . . citizens [need] to know what their government is 

doing. A transparent and accessible government is 

essential to a successful free society, and fosters trust and 

confidence in government. 

 

A lack of government accountability and transparency 

undermines democracy and gives rise to cynicism and 

mistrust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we could lay this out any clearer than 

what those comments do. And I go back to this government’s 

commitment during the election campaign to be the most 

transparent and accountable government ever in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But we haven’t seen anything — 

any legislation, any policies, any regulations, any debate, any 

comments even — about how this government sees itself 

moving forward and being the most transparent and 

accountable government in the history of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can find numerous examples in other 

provinces. Newfoundland or Newfoundland-Labrador have 

gone and put in a number of transparency and accountability 

Acts proclaimed. It covers a number of areas, and I’ll just touch 

on a few of those, Mr. Speaker. I believe it was two Acts that 

were put in place in Newfoundland by the former premier, 

Danny Williams. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, this really speaks to 

the issue of why Mr. Williams was the most popular premier 

right across Canada. The accountability and transparency Act 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Kindersley 

says guess who is now? Well kind of like by default, Mr. 

Speaker, because the other ones all retired. So I guess if we 

keep weeding them out long enough . . . 

 

But anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, accountability and 

transparency Act touched on planning and annual reports; 

budgeting and forecasting; approval for borrowing, Mr. 

Speaker, which is an important part; incorporation of new 

entities, that would be novel for this government; and also 

performance contracts, Mr. Speaker. Also they made some 

significant changes to government purchasing agency, making 

it stand alone and answerable to a chief operating officer with 

all kinds of accountability, clarified the public tendering 

process and how that needed to be reported and be open to 

public scrutiny. And, Mr. Speaker, these are important. 

 

We see, so as I say, we see other governments across Canada 

that have made steps. There is also in Ontario there is a number 

of steps that have been made. But we haven’t seen anything 

from our provincial government here in Saskatchewan. And 

you really have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that that lack of a 

government accountability and transparency undermines 

democracy and gives rise to cynicism and mistrust. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what’s the issue? I know the government will 

say life is wonderful, things are moving along great, people 

don’t need to worry. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

things. 

 

And I know my colleague from Nutana brought up a number of 

issues about a new private, long-term care facility that is being 

built in Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, right from the very 

beginning, this facility raised a number of concerns. Were any 

of them answered? Not really, Mr. Speaker. And a majority of 

the information that was released was blacked out, and all in the 

name of confidentiality. But, Mr. Speaker, it is questionable 

when we look at the details of this whole agreement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Wall government really put taxpayers’ 

money at risk for what many . . . Oh, the Premier. Oh, the 

Saskatchewan Party. Apologies, Deputy Speaker. I used the 

Premier’s name. The Sask Party government really did put 

taxpayers’ money at risk on this deal that was really, really 

questionable and that many felt was an insiders’ deal that 

benefited a number of Saskatchewan Party donors and 

immediate family members. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for sure, why would you even want to put 

your government in that kind of a position when you’ve made 

the commitment to be transparent and accountable, but we’ve 

still seen this questionable deal move ahead? And I think all of 

us know that for many years, for decades, new health care 

facilities in our province have been built by community 

contributions. There has been a great deal of planning, 

community conversations on what’s needed, what should be 

done, and the community has been involved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But here what we seen in Saskatoon was, a building was 

already tendered out. We think it was tendered out, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve heard that, but I don’t think anyone has ever seen 

any documentation on it. And it was being built, a private 

long-term care facility that had some direct connections to the 

Premier’s office through his chief of staff and another family 

member that was involved in the Amicus Foundation or 

corporation that was putting forward this proposal. 

 

So when it’s being built, we start to look into details. We start 

to look at the issues. And here it turns out that the Government 

of Saskatchewan has in effect provided a $27 million loan 

guarantee for a private long-term care facility to be built in 

Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, this even more appalling when 

we see communities across the province, when the Minister of 

Health over two years ago announced 13 long-term care 

facilities to be built in rural communities. Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well hear, hear. We will hear, hear, 

Mr. Speaker, when they actually start construction because out 

of 13 of them, Mr. Speaker, one has started construction. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know the members are . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . A few catcalls. But you know what? Two years 

ago these were announced. The year after, they were set aside 

because the government had over-projected potash revenues in 

their budget and had gone ahead and decided this was the 

amount of money they were going to commit, and they had to 

start scrambling and cutting projects to actually get close to 

meeting their budget. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the projects that 

was set aside was these 13 long-term care facilities. 



7288 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

And, Mr. Speaker, so time goes on, and I believe this year, they 

were re-announced again, that these 13 long-term care facilities 

would go ahead. But I believe the other night in estimates, the 

Minister of Health finally admitted under questioning that they 

were unfunded. So people can look in Hansard. You don’t have 

to take my word for it, but the Hansard comments are there. 

The minister was not anxious to admit this, so how are they 

going to be funded, Mr. Speaker. That leaves many 

communities asking the question and wondering what’s going 

to happen down the road. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, so while communities across Saskatchewan 

that are waiting for long-term care facilities that were 

announced over two years ago, in the meantime this Amicus 

deal goes ahead in Saskatoon with a $27 million loan guarantee 

from the province of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

fine, but there was zero dollars had to be put in place and put up 

front by Amicus. 

 

So why they were treated differently than communities across 

Saskatchewan and taxpayers across Saskatchewan leaves a 

number of questions. When we asked questions, the minister 

avoided them. And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting part was this 

deal gets more and more tangled as you look at it. 

 

And the question is out there: did this deal come directly from 

the Premier’s office? Because, Mr. Speaker, the construction of 

the Amicus facility was started before the Saskatoon Health 

Region even gave approval for the project. So we have to ask, 

how does that happen, Mr. Speaker? How does it happen? 

Because that’s unusual across the province. As I said, the 

communities are always involved. There is consultations with 

the municipalities, with the cities, with the proponents that are 

behind the facility. Is it what matches the needs in that 

community? These are all important questions, but not with this 

facility, Mr. Speaker. It receives a loan guarantee from the 

province of Saskatchewan. And before the Saskatoon Health 

Region even gives approval for that project, it’s under 

construction, Mr. Speaker, and got a big sign up on it. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also other questionable areas when it has 

to do with the company that was awarded construction, Miners 

Construction. And that name comes up in a couple of other 

areas, Mr. Speaker. And also we look at the owner of Miners 

Construction sits on the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, 

Mr. Speaker, who would have accepted this project to move 

ahead. 

 

And then as we look farther, we also hear from the Minister of 

Health that the Amicus facility will be given special treatment 

— special treatment, again — over and above all other 

long-term care facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. They 

will be given a higher per-resident fee every year than any other 

long-term care facilities. So if there’s a long-term care facility 

in Moose Jaw, Amicus will receive higher per-resident funding 

from the Government of Saskatchewan than any other facility. 

Why is that? Why is that, Mr. Speaker? And Amicus had to put 

up zero cash to get into this deal. They didn’t have to put up the 

new 20 per cent. They didn’t have to put 30 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s always been between Regina and 

Saskatoon are considered provincial hospitals while Moose Jaw 

is regional, other communities are considered regional 

hospitals. We still, as a community, contribute our portion to a 

health care facility. I think the Minister of Health even said we 

appreciate them more when we have to kick in some money. So 

that’s, whatever, it’s a requirement that’s been there for a long 

time. But Saskatoon and Regina for hospitals don’t, because 

they are considered provincial hospitals that provide services to 

all of us across the province. And many of us have travelled to 

Regina or travelled to Saskatoon to receive some kind of 

service or medical procedure, so we understand that. 

 

But why does this long-term care facility, this private long-term 

care facility fit into this basket of provincial services? Because, 

Mr. Speaker, it isn’t. It isn’t. It’s a special deal that has some 

awful connections to the Saskatchewan Party government and, 

Mr. Speaker, it just leaves a bad taste in everyone’s mouth, and 

it leaves many questions outstanding. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I mean my question really is to the Premier: 

how do you see this deal with Amicus being open, accountable, 

transparent? It doesn’t. It absolutely doesn’t. And it does a 

disservice to Saskatchewan taxpayers who actually are looking 

at the processes through the Ministry of Health, are looking at 

the processes that have been in place for many years, and 

planning, long-term planning and building in their 

communities. They don’t get the same kind of special deals that 

seem to be coming out of the Premier’s office. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a big reason for this transparency and 

accountability Act that the opposition has put forward, Mr. 

Speaker, and it doesn’t end there. You know, if it was one item 

or two items, there might be a little bit of understanding. Well it 

could be unusual, could be difficult. But, Mr. Speaker, when 

you start getting to the amount of examples that we have seen 

over this first three and a half, almost four years of the 

Saskatchewan Party government, it raises numerous concerns 

and questions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the areas for sure that have raised 

concerns, and it kind of gets into Amicus some way . . . I’d 

better finish off the one first. But there is a number of areas. 

Amicus raised concerns, but also when we start to see another 

similar deal that come out of the 1980s, it was Parkridge in 

Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, after all these years, we finally 

found out that the Government of Saskatchewan has been 

paying to Parkridge, a private long-term care facility, 1.2 to 

$1.4 million in lease costs per year. And that’s been almost for 

24 years, Mr. Speaker, and then at the end of that 24 years, 

Government Services paid $8.1 million to buy out the facility. 

 

So $1.2 million for 24 years, then a lump sum of 8.1 million for 

the facility. And then after it was bought by Government 

Services for the 8.1 million, then the regional health authority 

bought the building from Government Services for $5 million. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we find out that this facility needs over $19 

million in renovations. So here we are. Over $50 million has 

been paid by the taxpayers of the province for what? For what, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And when we have lived through these long-term, 20-year 

agreements or longer, and we have seen how difficult they can 

be to deal with, we have seen how they are a drain on the public 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7289 

finances, Mr. Speaker, we have to question why we are entering 

into more of these agreements on . . . behind closed doors, Mr. 

Speaker, is a better term. Behind closed doors, we are entering 

into more of these long-term agreements. Amicus was probably 

one of the most noticeable right off the get-go, but it’s 

definitely not going to be the last, Mr. Speaker, from what 

we’re seeing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue for accountability and transparency 

has to be the privatization of health care. And we have seen 

time after time, this government believes that private is better. 

They have cancelled a number of projects that had been 

planned for and were in the works and the money was set aside, 

Mr. Speaker, to pay for them. But they believe that public . . . 

or private is better when it comes to health care. And I guess 

one of the basic arguments is that privatization will lower the 

cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite clearly when we looked at the 

announcements that the Minister of Health made about the 

government paying Omni Surgery Centre to perform certain 

types of day surgery, clearly they stated that it was cheaper than 

in-hospital costs. And when we look at specific instances, the 

government said it is paying Omni Surgery Centre about $1,500 

for knee surgery performed at the clinic, stating that it was 

cheaper than the in-hospital cost which the government 

estimates at $1,700. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, instead of just going ahead and doing this, 

why would you not have the discussion with the public of the 

province? Because according to interprovincial billing rates, 

Saskatchewan pays less than $1,000 for outpatient when they 

have the same surgical procedure done in a public facility in 

another province. So if the Government of Saskatchewan 

recognizes that $1,000 is what would be paid on interprovincial 

transfers, now they’re saying that it costs the Government of 

Saskatchewan $1,700, and gee, we’re only paying Omni Centre 

$1,500. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s these half-truths and these selective facts that 

are released that really have caused the concern amongst the 

population here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, when we 

have, we have questioned any of these arrangements, when we 

have talked about any of these arrangements with the 

government, they say, well that’s . . . it’s confidential, or they 

don’t do that in other provinces. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we also, in other provinces, don’t do drastic 

changes to the Human Rights Tribunal. We also, we don’t seem 

to embrace this whole change in human rights to move away 

from an open and accessible tribunal, and move towards 

Queen’s Bench. That’s unusual. That’s extremely unusual. But 

yet the argument used in other cases is, we don’t want to do 

what other provinces aren’t doing. We don’t want to be 

different than the other provinces. But, Mr. Speaker, what it 

turns out to be is that they don’t want to be different from other 

provinces when the change isn’t what they have mind. If it’s 

their idea, they seem to think it’s great and they will gladly 

walk away from what other provinces are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t impress enough the need for transparency 

and accountability. And when we got into the discussion this 

week and last week, I guess also, on the Hill family tower that 

is being built in downtown Regina, the answer first was policy. 

Well that’s policy of the Government of Saskatchewan and that, 

I — meaning the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow — 

followed the same policy. And, Mr. Speaker, I did. 

 

And when I went home over the weekend and I thought about 

some of the things we do as government members, we fall into 

the same processes that have been used without questioning 

them. We fall into the same answers. And I’m sure, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you have listened to many of the answers in question 

period, and I know we often think, my goodness, they’re using 

our same briefing books that we had before. Sounds like the 

same answers in many cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s incumbent upon us, it’s incumbent 

upon us as elected officials and elected representatives from our 

constituencies to question the processes and to make sure they 

are appropriate for the time that we are in, make sure they are 

updated and appropriate for what needs to be done and for what 

the taxpayers of this province and our constituents expect. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not good to just stand in this House and 

say, well that’s the way it’s always been done, or that’s what 

other provinces do. Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s time we 

didn’t do what other provinces did. Maybe we had . . . This 

government needs to sit down and look at what the taxpayers of 

this province want, and move ahead. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there have been too many questionable deals 

and long-term arrangements that this government is not being 

transparent or accountable on, that the taxpayers are asking 

questions on. And that is a dangerous path to be walking on, 

Mr. Speaker, because if questions are out there and there’s no 

information or discussion, and we as MLAs are not able to 

explain to our constituents what the process is, how the 

decisions have been made or what information was used to 

make the decisions, people start to discount the political 

process. They start to discount the democracy that our society 

depends on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone in this House — anyone — should be able 

to stand and explain a decision they have made. Is it always 

easy? No, it isn’t. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had various uncomfortable 

meetings over the years that have been difficult, where it is the 

responsibility as an elected official for me to explain to my 

constituents why our government or why our opposition have 

made decisions and put forward legislative changes, regulation 

changes, or policy changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not everyone in your constituency . . . They may 

not all agree with you. But people in the province of 

Saskatchewan are intelligent, they are concerned, and they 

demand information. They expect information from us and, no 

less, accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we make a decision in this legislature that 

impacts the province of Saskatchewan, we owe it to our 

constituents to be able to explain the decision, why it was made. 

People may not agree with you but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they 

understand why you made the decision that, if isn’t on a piece 

of paper blacked out with a black felt marker, that you aren’t 

hiding behind the whole issue of confidentiality when it’s your 

money they’re spending. And you explain it to them and make 



7290 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

them realize why the decision was made. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why this Bill is here because that’s 

sadly missing in this Legislative Assembly. It is sadly missing, 

Mr. Speaker, from this government. We have seen too many 

deals that have been clumped in that confidentiality agreement 

and tucked away. They are committing Saskatchewan taxpayers 

to long-term financial commitments that will have impact for 

years to come. And this government owes it to this Assembly 

and to all of us as elected officials and to taxpayers of this 

province to explain why the decisions were made and to justify 

why the decisions were made. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s what our job is. That’s what 

our job is as legislators. And, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing a 

government that is sadly, sadly lacking in any transparency and 

accountability. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to reread the quote 

into the record: 

 

Government accountability means that public officials — 

elected and un-elected — have an obligation to explain 

their decisions and actions to the citizens. Government 

accountability is achieved through the use of a variety of 

mechanisms — political, legal and administrative — 

designed to prevent corruption and ensure that public 

officials remain answerable and accessible to the people 

they serve. In the absence of such mechanisms, corruption 

may thrive. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] Citizens [need] to know what their 

government is doing. A transparent and accessible 

government is essential to a successful free society, and 

fosters trust and confidence in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it could not be any clearer than that. And when we 

see that other governments around the world — and especially 

in North America — talk quite at length about the issue of 

transparency and the issue of accountability, we know that it is 

growing in citizens right across North America and that we 

need to make sure that we are addressing it here in 

Saskatchewan because there are concerns and they are growing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that caused concern was the issue of 

the Northland Power agreement just outside of North 

Battleford. Mr. Speaker, while there was an all-party committee 

that was travelling the province talking about the future needs 

of the province of Saskatchewan, I’m told that Northland Power 

was in North Battleford preparing for the bid from the RFP 

[request for proposal] . . . their bid for the RFP that was 

released by SaskPower. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this raises a number of questions because 

here we have a Crown corporation owned, bought, and paid for, 

Mr. Speaker, by the people of this province, the people of this 

province who have a great deal of pride in Crown corporations 

and the service they have provided over the years. It’s over 100 

years that SaskTel has been in service in the province. But here 

we have SaskPower who has the expertise and the ability to 

build a natural-gas-fired electrical generation. I had to stop and 

think about this, Mr. Speaker. But so the question is, why are 

we contracting it out? Why are we contracting out the 

generation of electricity in the province of Saskatchewan to an 

Ontario private power company when here in Saskatchewan we 

have a Crown corporation bought and paid for by the people of 

this province that provides excellent service to the people of 

this province. Has been innovative and responsive to the needs 

of the people in this province, and they’re set on the shelf? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, lots of questions, but we know that here 

again the Saskatchewan Party government feels that private is 

better. It’s an ideological thing. And I know the minister has 

made comments previously. I have to say the member from 

Silver Springs, in this Assembly in 2008, he said, and I quote, 

“Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear for the member opposite that 

yes, we will impose our views on the Crown corporations.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this has nothing to do with good business. 

This has absolutely nothing to do with good business. This has 

absolutely nothing to do with service to the people of this 

province. This is ideological. That’s all it is, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

ideological. And do you know what? . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well that’s good. You know, the minister just 

says he admits it. Can we quit now? Well do you know what I 

said? You know what? No, you can’t give up because you 

know what? If you’re getting nervous sitting in your seat 

listening to two examples, I’ll tell you I’ve got lots more where 

that’s coming from. So I hope you sit and listen. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, here we have an RFP put out. We have an 

Ontario company that has put in a bid on this project which 

could have been done in-house. Well you know, sometime 

when the minister wants to get on his feet, maybe he could 

explain how does this fit in with the Sask First policy; that 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations were going to focus on the 

province of Saskatchewan and you bring in someone from 

Ontario to do all of this? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

you know, the minister says, sit down and I’ll tell you. Well do 

you know what? He won’t. And that’s why this Bill has been 

tabled because the transparency and accountability from this 

government is seriously, seriously lacking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is look at what’s happened. 

So okay, Northland Power gets the agreement. An Ontario 

company comes in, takes over an area where our own Crown 

corporation should be providing the service, has the capability 

of providing the service. And preference is given to an Ontario 

company, so we have to ask why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well guess what? Any questions are stonewalled. We don’t get 

any information. We don’t get any documents when there is any 

attempt to go through freedom of information as to what 

exactly this deal is and why preference for an Ontario company 

instead of the government’s own Sask First policy and focusing 

on Saskatchewan companies. Well Saskatchewan companies 

that provide good jobs, buy services, goods and services in 

communities right across this province, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t 

just a deal that we’re upset about. There is going to be small 

businesses and communities that are going to feel this impact 

too. 

 

So we ask questions. Well what do we get? That black felt 

marker’s back at it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker — Mr. Speaker, 

sorry — and it’s blacked out. No information. So, Mr. Speaker, 

what I have to do then is just tell you what I’ve heard. Now I’ve 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7291 

heard that Northland Power, this private power company based 

out of Ontario, will come into Saskatchewan. All the profits 

will go back to their home base of Ontario. And what we do 

know about the agreement is that it’s scheduled to open, the 

plant is scheduled to open in 2013. And once this private 

Ontario power company is up and running, it will produce 347 

megawatts of baseload power — baseload power.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the next part that we heard . . . Well this is, I 

guess you can do the calculations. It’s about 10 per cent of the 

total power requirements in the province of Saskatchewan. So 

according to the Northland Power news release — now this was 

no information from the government that is so transparent and 

accountable; I think they forgot that, Mr. Speaker — this 

agreement — and I quote, “. . . provides protection against 

changes in the market price of natural gas, as fuel costs are 

passed through SaskPower.” 

 

Well don’t we love the private sector, Mr. Speaker, as long as 

they’re backstopped by the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. The government won’t say it. Northland Power 

lets out a bit of it. They’re free and clear, Mr. Speaker, on any 

of the increased costs because it’ll be covered by SaskPower. It 

will be covered by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

as we will see our utility rates continue to increase. Where is 

the transparency and accountability from this government, Mr. 

Speaker? It’s not there. 

 

No information is available for Northland Power. No 

information on Amicus. Distorted and sketchy information on 

the privatization of health care in this province and the costs 

that are associated. Mr. Speaker, we are being sold down the 

river by a government that is not living up to its own 

commitments in its election platform. Nice words, Mr. Speaker, 

but there’s been no attempt to live up to them, in the three and a 

half, almost four years that this government’s been in power. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll carry on now. Here’s Northland 

Power, guaranteed price of gas for 20 years. And I’m told, Mr. 

Speaker, that they are also given priority access to the grid, 

preferential treatment to the gird so that when power 

requirements may reduce at off-peak periods, it won’t be 

Northland’s power that scales back. It will be SaskPower. So 

Northland’s power, their full 347 megawatts of baseload power 

will be continuous for the people of Saskatchewan to use, 

which means continuous subsidization of the gas rates is a 

possibility to generate that electricity, and an increase to the 

people of Saskatchewan whose tax dollars and the profits from 

this operation will go back to Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of activity this government has 

been carrying on, and it’s ideologically driven. It has nothing to 

do with business. It has nothing to do with benefit to the 

taxpayers of this province. It has to do with purely ideological 

views of this government that are creeping in to the public 

service, to the Crown corporations, and government 

organizations across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at more information, there was 

some discussion also in the piece that I’ve seen about utility 

rate hikes are a fact of life in Saskatchewan. I think this is a 

comment from one of the ministers in Hansard. And when we 

look at the rate of inflation during this time was at 1 per cent, 

but the rate of increase of power, increase of cost of power was 

over 15 per cent over this very same period. So is this the type 

of increases we’re to be expecting when we see a continual 

movement away from our Crown corporations and also a 

movement to private power generation? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower annual report was just 

released the other day. And when we look at page 98, there’s a 

number of commitments and contingencies that are listed that 

talk about generating capacity, three power purchase 

agreements: Red Lily wind power; Spy Hill power, it’s also 

natural gas; the North Battleford power limited natural gas 

generating facility. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the interesting part is this: SaskPower has 

committed to electricity sales of 16 million — in 2009 that 

figure was zero — and electricity and transmission purchases of 

51 million, which in 2009 was $3 million. Now, Mr. Speaker, it 

goes on to say that these contracts are considered derivative 

financial instruments and changes in their fair value has been 

included in the net income. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what caused these changes? A purchase of 51 

million? I guess when I sit and think of, where is SaskPower 

purchasing $51 million, they talk about sales then they talk 

about purchases — 51 million. I guess I wonder if it’s the P.A. 

pulp mill and if some type of arrangement has been made, and 

at what level has that arrangement been made, Mr. Speaker. I 

know from past experiences, business is business. But often 

when these companies are generating electricity and want 

SaskPower to buy it, they want retail rates. They always look 

for bulk rates when it’s coming in their door and they’re using 

it, but when it’s going out they want retail rates. 

 

That’s fine, Mr. Speaker. It’s business. You need to negotiate, 

and you need to provide the best deal. But the government has 

to remember, they are looking for, or they are supposed to be 

looking for the best deal for Saskatchewan taxpayers. They’re 

not supposed to be standing in the House defending PCS 

[Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] and Bill Doyle. 

They’re here to represent their constituents, and as government 

they represent the people of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, questions, lots of questions and very little 

information. And there was another piece in here, Mr. Speaker, 

and I didn’t highlight it and I should have. But it shows . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . We’re getting to that. Mr. Speaker, I 

was just trying to figure out how much time I have left because 

I’ve just got a pile of other topics to touch on. 

 

[12:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is also another area here in the 

SaskPower annual report, and I apologize that I didn’t highlight 

it and mark it off, which I should have because there is a 

number of areas that are questionable. And one of those dealt 

with the purchase . . . Oh, here it is, Mr. Speaker. It deals again 

with the purchase power agreements for the Red Lily Wind 

Power, Spy Hill, and the North Battleford power. 

 

And when we look at these operations are expected to become 

operational in 2011 with generating capacities of 27 megawatts, 

86 megawatts respectively. And 261-megawatt North Battleford 



7292 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2011 

facility will become operational in 2013. Now the total cost of 

all power purchase agreements is expected to be 11.692 billion. 

And in 2009 that figure, the expectations, the power purchase 

agreements, was 7.502 billion. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking 

about a 4, over a $4 billion increase since the estimates and 

since the actual 2009 annual report came out. 

 

So why the change? Is it increases? Is it changes to the rates, 

Mr. Speaker? These are questions that the people of 

Saskatchewan are asking us, and we have no way to answer. 

We can give them the bits and pieces, kind of the 

unsubstantiated information that we received. But, Mr. Speaker, 

taxpayers deserve more than that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are questions when it comes to 

SaskPower and the Northland Power that are unanswered. 

There are questions that come out of I guess our concern over 

the whole circumstance around Parkland in Saskatoon and now 

the reincarnation of Parkland. We seem to have Amicus, which 

has many close connections to this government and to a variety 

of family members attached to this government. Mr. Speaker, 

untendered contracts, contracts that went out the door before 

there was any scrutiny or any discussion. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s where the concerns rise. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, the member across the way, the 

member from Wood River, he’s yakking about different things. 

Well you know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You know, Mr. 

Speaker, he wants to talk about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

would say to the minister, he needs to pay a little closer 

attention to business as to the issues that are ongoing in the 

Government of Saskatchewan today. 

 

He can live in the past all he likes, but there are so many things 

that are passing over his head and being put in place. Either he 

is turning a blind eye or he is part of it. And, Mr. Speaker, he 

needs to be part of the solution and look at being more 

transparent and accountable, Mr. Speaker — a commitment that 

his government made in the last election campaign and couldn’t 

be falling farther and farther away from. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just to remind the members across. The lack 

of government accountability and transparency undermines 

democracy and gives rise to cynicism and mistrust. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s a problem. That’s a problem. 

 

And, you know, the minister takes this rather lighthearted view 

of it all and is too busy looking at the past. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he needs to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

asked for leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce a guest we have in the east . . . or west gallery — 

pardon me, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Jason Small who is a recent 

addition to our caucus office, Mr. Speaker, joined us just at the 

start of this session. He hasn’t had the opportunity to be 

introduced in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Small is from Moose Jaw, has spent considerable time over 

his life working in the newspaper industry, Mr. Speaker. And 

he’s a vital, vital contributor and addition to our caucus office. 

And I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce him to you 

and to the other members of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 624 — The Contracts, Lease Agreements and 

Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to carry on with my 

comments about Bill No. 624, The Contracts, Lease 

Agreements and Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another area that is a little maybe closer to 

home for us here in this legislature, and it really speaks to this 

government’s lack of accountability and lack of commitment to 

their previous election campaign where they did talk about 

becoming the most transparent and accountable government in 

Saskatchewan ever. Mr. Speaker, we know it’s not happening. 

We know with frustration in opposition that it’s about as far as 

it can get from being accurate or even close. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things we’re dealing with now on 

a weekly basis is the whole issue of estimates. Mr. Speaker, 

estimates is a time for opposition to be able to sit with the 

minister and officials to scrutinize the ministries’ budgets and 

to ask questions, questions that we have an interest in, questions 

that our constituents have an interest in, and questions that are 

in the bigger interest of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we get back to this same issue. People demand 

accountability. They are demanding transparency, but yet even 

amongst the Legislative Assembly when we are trying to 

arrange time we would like to be able to ask questions, we are 

stonewalled, Mr. Speaker. The government, for the last number 

of years, has gone with . . . There is a minimum number of 

hours that are allowable of scrutiny on the budget. This 

government has never allowed anything above the minimum. 

So, Mr. Speaker, where is the Premier’s commitment to 

transparency and accountability? 

 

An. Hon. Member: — Where is the leadership? 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Where is the leadership? Exactly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ask for time to ask questions or if you hit on a 



April 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7293 

certain area where there is more information that’s needed, well 

your time’s up. That’s it. And we’re not allowed to be able to 

fully ask the questions that are needed to be asked. What is this 

government hiding? What is this government hiding, Mr. 

Speaker? This Assembly has always been transparent. Could it 

be better? It could, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I’m on my feet 

today because we need to address the times that are changing, 

when people across the country and in Saskatchewan have 

access to so much information at their fingertips, and they 

expect the same from the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even as legislators, it’s very hard to get 

information on the basic numbers in the budget and basic 

information. I can’t tell you the amount of times we have gone 

to estimates when the departments and the ministries are to be 

there with information of the activities in the ministry over the 

year, and you will ask a question, and they’ll say, well we don’t 

have that information with us. We’ll see if we can get it for you. 

Mr. Speaker, estimates are to discuss the estimates of that 

department and the ministries and department people should be 

here ready to answer those questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government restricts the time that we as 

opposition have to even ask questions. That’s a problem. And 

how does that speak, as my colleague said, to the leadership or 

this commitment to transparency and accountability? Well it 

doesn’t speak well, Mr. Speaker, and it is frustrating and it is 

not helpful to be able to try and answer questions that our 

constituents put forward and do the job that we are here to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I still have to tell you, I was at a meeting in 

Saskatoon on the weekend and we talked about a number of 

issues. And then at the end of the meeting, someone made the 

comment about how much money was coming into this 

province of Saskatchewan and the province’s coffers. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was interesting because I said to this group, this 

provincial government is seeing the highest revenues in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan. It will reach $11 

billion this year. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, $11 billion, and the Premier stands on his 

feet and he talks about the new Saskatchewan and the 

Saskatchewan advantage, but I said to this group, well what 

have you felt? We have seen housing prices climbing out of the 

reach of most young families. Rent increasing, I mean hugely, 

for people to be able to remain in adequate accommodation, if 

they can find accommodation. The price of groceries is going 

up. The price of gas is going through the roof, which just leads 

into higher costs for transportation all the way around. We’re 

seeing municipalities downloaded on by this government. And 

many communities across the province had an increase in 

property tax last year, and we’ll see another increase in property 

tax this year. 

 

Meanwhile this government sits on the highest revenues they 

have ever seen, and the Premier talks about the new 

Saskatchewan. And I said to these folks, higher housing, higher 

transportation, higher groceries, increased utility rates, 

privatized health care, privatizing the Crown corporations and 

selling off bits and pieces of them — how are you liking the 

boom so far? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Excellent. 

Ms. Higgins: — Well that’s good, because I can tell you many 

people who aren’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the Saskatchewan advantage, 

the Saskatchewan advantage has always been a affordable 

quality life where our children could afford to live in this 

province and have a good life and raise our grandchildren. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when we see the costs, the basic costs of living 

skyrocketing and this government not making any attempt to 

actually address them, never mind talk about them in a 

transparent and accountable way, Mr. Speaker, they’re living 

the high life, but I’ll tell you many of our constituents aren’t.  

 

And that’s a problem because it gets back to the issue that 

democracy is what our society believes in. It’s what we have 

used and we need to make sure that we are transparent and 

accountable to maintain the trust and the support of the citizens 

of this province. It’s a responsibility we have. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this government really needs to sit down and reread a 

number of the information that they put out during the last 

election campaign because I believe they forgot a lot of it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have multiple topics to be able to talk on 

on this issue. Mr. Speaker, I haven’t even talked on or spoken 

to the issue of the downtown office tower, which this 

government has signed on to . . . Here we go. Another 20 years. 

I don’t know why they like this 20 years, Mr. Speaker — 20 

years on the power agreement, 20 years on leases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there needs to be some accountability. And there 

needs to be some action by this government to actually live up 

to the commitments that they have made. You know, and the 

minister can sit there, and he can chuckle along all he likes, but 

he has to be one of the worst offenders, Mr. Speaker. And this 

old, attack-dog stance that he takes, please, please, Mr. 

Minister, just stand up and give us some straight answers and 

some honest-to-goodness responses to questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move second reading of Bill 

No. 624, The Contracts, Lease Agreements and Tenders 

Accountability and Transparency Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved second reading of Bill 624, The Contracts, Lease 

Agreements and Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act. 

 

It now being past the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

stands adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. Enjoy 

your weekend. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7267 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7267 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7267 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7292 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7267 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7267 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remembering Lisa Rendall 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7268 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7268 

 Beauval Resident Works Around the World 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7268 

 Carrot River Hosts Drama Festival 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7269 

 Miss Teen Saskatchewan 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7269 

 Consistent Support 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7269 

 Saskatoon Council on Aging 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7269 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Out-of-Province Medical Coverage 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7270 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7270 

 Access to Grazing Land 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7271 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7271 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7272 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7272 

 Arrangements for Office Space 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7274 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7274 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Royalty Rates 

  Stewart ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7275, 7284 

  Yates ............................................................................................................................................................................... 7277, 7284 

  Kirsch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7279, 7285 

  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7280, 7285 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7281, 7285 

  Iwanchuk ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7282, 7284 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7284, 7286 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7284 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7285 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7285 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 624 — The Contracts, Lease Agreements and Tenders Accountability and Transparency Act 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7286 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


