




















































Hansard: March 28, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 38B  MONDAY, MARCH 28, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6943 

 March 28, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House now resumes. Debate will 

continue on the budget. I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Like when 

you’re reading a good book and you’re interrupted and you 

have to put it down, when you pick it up you back up a little bit 

just to make sure you get where you were at. So I’m going to 

back up just a little bit because I was into a lovely story that I’d 

like you all to hear. 

 

Saskatchewan’s birth came in 1905, but Saskatchewan’s rebirth 

comes with this budget. After 60 years of dormancy, 

Saskatchewan has come out of its cocoon. We have shed the 

cocoon-like blanket that has been smothering us and dragging 

us backwards since the dirty thirties. Just like that cocoon, 

Saskatchewan was hanging in a dark, upside-down world with 

no hopes, dreams, or expectations of a brighter day, just eternal 

darkness, failure, and continued decline as we begged for more 

equalization payments. 

 

These were the barriers surrounding us on all sides, letting no 

one in, driving away investment, and sending our children to 

seek their futures elsewhere. Everyone said, woe is poor 

Saskatchewan, the poor little have-not province. Now 

Saskatchewan is like an emerging butterfly spreading its wings 

for the first time. Now we can finally believe in ourselves and 

take our destiny into our own hands. We are shedding the 

blanket of fear, loathing, and insignificance that has been 

dragging us backward and destroying us as our young people 

left and our population fell. 

 

As we take flight, we can see on the horizon sights that just 

three and a half short years ago seemed unattainable. We see 

Saskatchewan as an economic powerhouse, not just in Canada 

but as a global juggernaut. As we spread our wings, the world is 

watching. We have what the world needs, and as the world’s 

population grows, the need for potash grows. Today, as in the 

future, world food supplies will depend on Saskatchewan 

potash. In order to supply the food needs for the growing 

population of this planet, maximum food production will be 

critical. This means an ever larger role for our potash. The NDP 

[New Democratic Party] would like to raise the amount of 

royalties charged to the potash companies. The present royalty 

agreement that we are under with the potash companies was 

signed and negotiated by the former NDP government. Their 

present leader was deputy leader at that time. Now the NDP 

says, let’s push the royalties higher. Think this through: we 

have 50 per cent of the world’s potash. That means 50 per cent 

of the potash is elsewhere. Let’s not get greedy. 

 

I understand that the new mine at Jansen would employ 

800-plus employees if it goes forward. We would really hate to 

lose those jobs. We have the highest royalties in the world 

already. And the NDP says go higher. Let’s not get greedy. 

Have the NDP not heard of the fairy tale of the goose that laid 

the golden potash egg? The goose had to be fed or it dies. The 

NDP not only plan to quit feeding the goose that laid the golden 

potash egg, they intend to strangle her and butcher her. Again I 

say, let’s not get greedy. 

 

World supplies of oil are always greatly affected by conflict. As 

we can see by what is happening with the world situation and 

oil prices today, Middle Eastern oil is often conflict oil and is 

very expensive, not only in dollars but in human lives. 

Saskatchewan oil is conflict-free. More and more, this is being 

realized by global consumers. Once again Saskatchewan moves 

up as a more and more credible player in that market. 

 

Uranium is also a large part of our future. There is less and less 

opposition to uranium because the alternatives are unable to 

stand alone in supplying the world energy hunger. When you 

look at wind or solar or various other sources, they’re a great 

supplement, a great supplement to the energy picture, but they 

do not stand alone. They should be developed and expanded, 

but at present they cannot stand alone. 

 

No one is ready to have less energy. With the world population 

growing, the demand for energy is always increasing. This 

leaves nuclear as the only viable alternative and Saskatchewan 

is taking a leading role in research and development. We are the 

world leader in uranium mining. Therefore it’s only right that 

we play a lead role in development and research. It will be 

another big win for Saskatchewan when the first medical 

isotope is mined, manufactured, and used here in 

Saskatchewan. With medical isotopes so critical to the 

treatment of cancer and medical procedures, this Saskatchewan 

Party government is committed to reaching that goal. 

 

The leader of the NDP is proposing rent control in our 

province. This is very strange considering his government were 

the ones to cancel rent control. They discovered that in spite of 

their best efforts rent control did not work. In fact it was the 

cause of fewer rental spaces available. They had every 

opportunity to rework the concept, but they found that rent 

control didn’t work. Now the NDP think they can make it an 

election issue, and they’re yelling rent control even though they 

know it will not work. This is just another example of the 

regular NDP flip-flop. Which way is the wind blowing today? 

 

Big news from the budget for Prince Albert. Prince Albert is 

getting a new gym for P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton High 

School. Carlton is the largest high school in this province, and 

the new gym has been on order for some time. The old gym 

was highly inadequate, and the new gym is a perfect fit at this 

time. Congratulations to Prince Albert, to Prince Albert Carlton 

High School and its many students. 

 



6944 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

One of the greatest impacts this budget will have on the people 

of this province is the lowering of taxes. The tax burden was so 

large it was smothering us. When taxes are lowered, everyone 

gains. 

 

Batoche constituency is mainly a rural constituency, so I must 

address agriculture. The Saskatchewan Party has cut the 

education portion of property tax by 80 per cent. This takes the 

burden imposed by the NDP off the backs of rural 

Saskatchewan. For years they have suffered under this unfair 

tax. This government will also fully fund the cost of farm 

stabilization programs along with record crop insurance 

coverage. 

 

Small business is the backbone of Saskatchewan, and the 

Saskatchewan Party recognizes that. Therefore we are taking 

steps to help this cornerstone of our economy to grow their 

businesses and in turn grow our province. We are cutting 

small-business tax by more than 50 per cent. 

 

The province’s share of education property tax was at 40 per 

cent under the NDP. Now, thanks to the hard work of the 

Saskatchewan Party, the government now pays 65 per cent. The 

property owner’s share has fallen from a high of 60 per cent 

down to 35. This is a quantum leap for all the people of 

Saskatchewan, not just the farmers. Finally, tax relief. 

 

We’ve also raised the entry level on personal income tax. These 

measures are unique in all of Canada. In most other provinces, 

the tax bill is still going up. Truly this is a Saskatchewan 

advantage. 

 

We have also paid $325 million to lower the province’s debt. 

This brings the provincial debt to $3.8 billion, its lowest level 

since 1987. These are giant steps for our province. The 

so-called wee province is paying off debt when all other 

provinces’ debts are increasing. Considering the global 

recession, this is indeed a giant step on the road to our success. 

 

Our government has shown tremendous growth in the 

management of health care by increasing the number of seats in 

the College of Medicine, increasing the number of residency 

seats, increasing the number of nursing training seats, training 

and facilitating the use of more nurse practitioners, broadening 

the scope of pharmacists by allowing them to write certain 

prescriptions — this will free up a lot of doctor time — 

shortening surgical wait times, and of course the children’s 

hospital. 

 

No one gets everything they want from a provincial budget, but 

in this budget everyone gets something. Everyone in 

Saskatchewan benefits from this budget. It is an all-inclusive 

budget. The budget shows direction and leadership. The budget 

sets up the framework for the future of this great province. We 

are now setting records in this province, and our population is 

at the highest level it has ever been, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

highest that it has ever been. This is phenomenal. The NDP 

laughed when the former leader of the Saskatchewan Party, 

Elwin Hermanson, predicted a growth rate of 1 per cent. We 

have exceeded that. Who’s laughing now? We are living the 

dreams — and beyond — of our ancestors. 

 

The great visionary, the Hon. Walter Scott, the first premier of 

Saskatchewan, had dreams for our Saskatchewan. What would 

he say if he could see us now? He would probably say, what 

took you so long? What have you been doing for the last 60 

years? I gave you a good start. Why have you been going 

backwards? I can’t tolerate that backsliding, but I see that you 

have finally turned this province around and are once again 

headed in the right direction. It is good to see this beautiful and 

resource-rich province finally getting on its feet and not just 

going somewhere but leading the pack. I always said there is 

tremendous potential in this province. Stay away from those 

socialist ideas and stay the course. The time has come to build, 

to dream, and to move this province into its rightful place. Keep 

up the good work. You have a province to build. 

 

My final remark will be from a noted broadcaster columnist and 

now author, and I quote, “This year’s budget was Saskatchewan 

at its finest.” Mr. Speaker, for all the above reasons, I will be 

wholeheartedly and enthusiastically supporting this year’s 

budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to get up and speak on the 

budget tonight, which I thought was probably one of the best 

budgets this province has ever seen. The Minister of Finance 

spent many hours on this, as many of us did, and presented 

probably one of the most exciting budgets, I believe, for my 

constituents in the Melville-Saltcoats constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was something for pretty well everybody in 

this province in that budget. And I think we see that, Mr. 

Speaker, by question period following the budget where we’ve 

normally had budgets and then the opposition — whether we 

were there and now the NDP are over there — for days would 

ask questions on the budget. They’d find something they felt 

was wrong with it. We had the Finance critic from the NDP 

side, what did he get up on the day after the budget? Was it two 

days later? Two questions, and that’s all we’ve had. Now there 

can’t be much wrong with the budget when the NDP, within all 

their pessimism they’re trying to spread across the province, 

can’t find any more than two questions to ask on the budget. 

And that’s really a slap on the back for our Finance minister, 

the member for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he’s brought in a balanced budget, I think been 

recognized by everyone in the province this time. Even the 

NDP are agreeing that the budget is balanced. There’s a 

surplus. We lowered taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I often think, I have three kids, Mr. Speaker, and six 

grandkids out there. But I think of my kids — two are teachers 

and one is an accountant, Mr. Speaker — and when we lower 

taxes out there, it’s like giving each of my kids a raise because 

their take-home dollars are there. They’re going to be taking 

home more money than they were before. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, if it was good for my kids out 

there, it’s good for everybody else’s kids right across this 

province. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that’s why a lot of the 

young people are coming back to the province of 

Saskatchewan, because of the opportunity, the jobs and that that 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6945 

they have here in Saskatchewan, and just probably the greatest 

place to raise a family that you could find anywhere in this 

country or, for that matter, around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also should credit the Health minister with 

improved health care. And we see in this budget a number of 

issues addressed again, but I think more importantly than any of 

the others is the shortening of the waiting lists. Mr. Speaker, we 

all know we inherited some of the longest waiting lists in this 

country from the previous NDP government. And really it 

tracks back, Mr. Speaker, back to probably into the ’90s when 

hospitals were closed and there was — what? — 52 hospitals 

closed, 53 hospitals closed, doctors chased out of the province, 

nurses chased out of the province. And then under the former 

administration, of course, they wouldn’t set any goals to try and 

replace that complement of nurses or doctors, whatever it was, 

because they knew they couldn’t meet that commitment. I think 

the member for North Battleford spoke about that one day 

where he said, we don’t want to set goals because we know we 

can’t achieve those goals. 

 

Well I go back to the Health minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because he did meet those goals. He made the commitment we 

would hire 800 nurses in this province, and he’s exceeded that 

mark. And I think it’s showing up right across the province in 

all of our regional hospitals and in the larger centres and in the 

nursing care that we’re receiving out there. And at the same 

time he’s also working on addressing the doctor issue. And we 

know that issue is right across this country; it’s not just here in 

Saskatchewan. But he’s working very hard to find a new 

complement of doctors and add to what we already have in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Better roads and highways. And I’d be remiss if I didn’t 

mention the Minister of Highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

improvement that we see to our highways out there. And 

spring, this is the time of year where we see highways are in 

their, probably their worst condition of the year, where highway 

crews are about to go out there and start repairing and 

resurfacing. And I think we’re going to see that again this year. 

And I think the people across the province realize the situation 

with our highways and the improvement. Just all right across, 

improved services, I think, in many of the areas that we provide 

services and that we should provide as government. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Another thing I want to talk about, the good job the Finance 

minister has done is paying the debt down. And I was at a 

couple of functions on the weekend. And one of the 

compliments I think we got more often than not was, it’s so 

good to see you paying the debt down. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think we’ve come from — what? — in excess of $7 

billion just three and a half years ago to where the Finance 

minister announced the other day I think we’re down to about 

3.8 billion, almost cut the debt in half in three and a half years, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think all of us, all of us on this side of the 

House hope within the next four years — and we hope to be 

government, and I think we will be — that that debt can be 

totally eliminated. And boy will that ever be a load off the back 

of taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think a budget like this, and I think this is 

another message I got at home, it’s just something in this 

budget for everybody in the province, every taxpayer, 

everybody out there, improving the quality of life. And, Mr. 

Speaker, of course as you know, I’m a little bit biased, but 

when it comes to our farmers and our ranchers right across the 

province, that’s a priority. And I think this budget has helped 

deal with that. 

 

I found it interesting today, Mr. Speaker, and I know it’s 

frustrating for the members opposite when they see a budget 

like that was presented here. It’s frustrating because, as I said, 

the critic for Finance couldn’t find anything to really ask about. 

And the frustration comes from a budget that deals with 

something for everybody out there. But I think their biggest 

frustration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is doom and gloom is not 

selling in the province of Saskatchewan any more. People of 

this province have heard the fearmongering for far too long, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think right across this province 

everybody is busy working. They have jobs; they are making 

money; they are raising their families. And I think really they 

are leaving the NDP behind. Or the NDP is leaving themselves 

behind because if you watch the polling, it just continually, 

slowly to erode. And I think probably for the province of 

Saskatchewan that is probably one of the most positive signs I 

have seen in my 16 years in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have sat through many budgets as an opposition 

member, and I have to admit in some of them I actually almost 

fell asleep because most times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would 

see rural Saskatchewan totally ignored, budget after budget. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have changed that. In the first 

three budgets that we have had and now into the fourth, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, agriculture is a priority again in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget when the 

Finance minister presented it the other day, $418 million for the 

agriculture budget, Mr. Speaker, that is the second highest 

budget day announcement ever announced for agriculture, and 

that was only upped by the 2009 budget. So this is the second 

highest within the first four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, $380 million for business risk 

management programs. And the other day I noticed the Leader 

of the Opposition was out and criticizing higher crop insurance 

premiums, Mr. Speaker. Well I think he better check with 

producers across this province because, as I have said, the 

reason for higher crop insurance premiums is because grain 

prices have gone up. And that is probably one of the best signs 

we have seen for a long time, along with livestock prices 

improving. And it’s great to see both of them going up at the 

same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, within the crop insurance also, the 

program that we have presented this year and put out there for 

producers to take a good look at is $161 million from the 

provincial government. And, Mr. Speaker, as we know, that’s 

cost shared between producers, provincial and federal 

governments, but that is the largest amount a provincial 

government has ever put into a crop insurance program in the 

province’s history. Mr. Speaker, the coverage per acre on 

average has gone up to $173. That’s in excess of $40 an acre on 

average that that’s gone up due to higher prices. And I think 

that has been welcomed from producers right across the 

province because that’s one of the things that they have asked 



6946 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

for many, many years. They had wished they could have higher 

coverage to cover more of the risk that they have out there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the other changes that we made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the unseeded acreage benefits. And as we all know last year 

was a trying year for every producer across this province due to 

the flooding and unseeded acres. So this year, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve included where, or we’ve changed from where it was $50 

for unseeded acres last year, we’ve raised that to $70 an acre. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be the first to say that won’t solve 

all the problems across the province, but it certainly will help 

cover a little more of the risk that producers take out there and a 

little more of their input costs that they have. 

 

Another area that was announced just lately, Mr. Speaker, is 

seven new satellite offices. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will 

remember as I do and I know many of the people on this side of 

the House, under the former NDP government one budget alone 

I remember they cut, closed, 22 rural service centres across the 

province of Saskatchewan. In total I think it was 31 agriculture 

offices were closed across the province. What we were finding, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there’s pockets in the province where 

there’s gaps of many hundred kilometres between offices. And 

we’ve worked to change that, with opening seven new satellite 

offices in Shaunavon, Estevan, Moosomin, Lloydminster, 

Meadow Lake, Assiniboia, and Wadena. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I said, this is a two-year pilot. We’ll see how the 

uptake is at these offices where we put our specialists in there, 

whether it’s livestock or crop or forage specialists, a day or two 

days a week. And if the uptake is good, we’ll look at it down 

the road to making this a long-term commitment to those 

communities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, also research, and we all know how 

important research is, especially in the agriculture industry. 

And we’ve increased that 30 per cent since forming government 

in 2007 — $18.2 million for research in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

rat control program, we’ve added $150,000 for that program. 

 

The SPCA [Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals], I 

just want to talk a minute on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who have 

. . . The SSPCA [Saskatchewan Society for the Prevention of 

Cruelty to Animals] have done some tremendous work in this 

province where they from time to time have to deal with neglect 

or abuse for animals across the province, and we’ve increased 

the funding for that program $380,000 in ’11 and ’12. So, Mr. 

Speaker, since we came to power, their funding has increased 

about 111 per cent. And they do very good work for us. They 

do very good work for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we’ll continue funding programs like FRWIP [farm and 

ranch water infrastructure program], Crown land incentive 

program. And as I said, the gopher program, Mr. Speaker, we 

will continue to pay that 50 per cent rebate on that program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think one of the tremendous parts of this 

budget and I think the member for Canora-Pelly has also . . . 

This has been one of the things that he’s wanted to work on for 

many, many years out there, is the education tax on ag land. 

Mr. Speaker, there’s about an 80 per cent reduction since 2007 

on the education tax rebate. And I know, along with an awful 

lot of my colleagues over here, I have been to SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 

after SARM convention where previous NDP premiers would 

get up to the mike and say, status quo is not on; we’ll be 

addressing the education tax on farm land. And did it happen, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

It never, never happened. They did a few little band-aid 

solutions, and then back up it would go. And I think if I 

remember right, it was about 65 per cent that the ag producers 

in this province, farmers and ranchers, were paying towards the 

cost of education and the government had dropped their share 

down to about 35 per cent. Do you know what we’ve done? 

And you do know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we’ve reversed 

that trend. Now the province of Saskatchewan is paying the 65 

per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, had more than probably one member been at 

the SARM convention over there . . . The Ag critic should have 

took five minutes out from his boxing lessons and probably 

took a little time off and gone to SARM convention because 

he’d have heard some very positive things about what’s 

happening in the province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there 

wasn’t a ratepayer at the SARM convention that wasn’t pleased 

with what’s happened to the education tax relief on property. 

 

And I know the member from Moose Jaw, who was at the 

SARM convention, saw how well received the municipal 

revenue sharing was, where now we’ve committed to 1 per cent 

of the PST [provincial sales tax]. And of course the way this 

province and the economy of this province is growing, that 

funding is going to increase as the PST increases in the 

province. And I know I saw Dave Marit’s comments, and I’ve 

saw a number of the reeves and councillors out there and 

mayors right across this city, whether they’re from the cities or 

small towns, look forward to that stable revenue sharing for 

their communities because in their communities of course they 

have infrastructure dollars they need to put in there, and this 

additional revenue sharing will certainly help with that. 

 

I want to commend the Minister for Enterprise on the 

renewable diesel mandate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 2 per cent 

mandate by July of 2012. And he’s come out with a five-year 

incentive program from 2011 to 2016, $26 million for that 

program. And I notice Milligan Bio-Tech were very positive on 

this announcement, and I think that bodes well for Milligan 

Bio-Tech and other companies out there that might be thinking 

of getting into this industry and possibly even expanding what 

they have now. Milligan Bio-Tech, by the way, is just a very 

important business out there for the ag sector, where they can 

utilize canola products out there that have either been frozen or 

maybe they’ve had grain spoil in a bin or something like that. 

Milligan can utilize, and they pay good dollars for those 

products out there where normally we may not even be able to 

move them. 

 

As I spoke before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, debt reduction was 

very important when I went out to functions this weekend out 

there. Lower taxes: the personal basic exemption has rose for 

adults $1,000 and for children $500. That’s certainly going to 

help. Two hundred and fifty more for regional health authorities 

across the province. And I know my home area, the Yorkton 

area, we’re certainly, with a growing population out there, need 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6947 

extra dollars to provide the service and health care that people 

need out there. I think that’s going to be a very positive thing. 

Another the other communities were pleased to see was more 

money for policing, as I talked about with the Minister of 

Highways before, more money for Highways. 

 

The one program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take a 

minute or two and talk about is under the leadership of the 

member from Melfort, is the STARS [shock trauma air rescue 

service] program. And I had a number of mayors already, the 

mayor of Churchbridge the other day I believe it was, the 

mayor of Langenburg, were talking about the STARS program. 

And Esterhazy, I had a function there the other day where they 

were even commenting on it saying, we have a number of 

mines out there in the Esterhazy area, a number of potash mines 

and a lot of exploration going on out there. And they think the 

STARS program is going to be one of the best things we’ve 

seen in rural Saskatchewan to address . . . And we hope we 

never need it out there. I guess the best scenarios would be if 

we never saw one of these helicopters come into our area. But 

should the need arise . . . I think Mosaic is a good example 

where we have two mines there. I know that Mr. Speaker has a 

mine at Rocanville. 

 

Sometimes, from time to time, we have need of something like 

the STARS program to come out, and it can save lives. And it 

doesn’t have to be an accident. It could be a heart attack; it 

could be a stroke. But it could be something that someone in 

rural Saskatchewan did not have the opportunity before and, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know we don’t see much criticism from 

the other side on this program because it’s something that they 

probably, probably, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would dream about 

but waited for a Sask Party government to get into power to 

actually deal with something like this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many good things happening in the 

province. The children’s hospital, I get comments at home 

about that. Because it doesn’t matter where you live in this 

province, whether you are a father or a mother, have kids, or 

you are a grandpa or a grandma. I know in my case, I know I 

look young for this but I do have some grandkids. And that 

children’s hospital, that children’s hospital any day could be a 

life-saving thing for one of my grandkids or anyone in this 

House, and I know it’s going to be welcomed by everybody in 

this province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think as you can surmise by the 

comments that I have made, I certainly will be supporting this 

budget. I really appreciate what the Finance minister in this 

province has done and, Mr. Speaker, I guess, you know, what I 

would say to the people of this province is, let’s not return and 

go back to where we were in the past where we wanted to be a 

have-not province. We wanted equalization from the federal 

government to survive. Let’s just sit back and enjoy the ride 

and enjoy what’s happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And I certainly will be supporting this budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise this evening and offer my comments about 

the provincial budget. 

 

First off I would like to thank the constituents of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow for supporting me over the years. It’s a great 

community to represent and I do so proudly, and it is a privilege 

indeed to represent Moose Jaw Wakamow. I also want to thank 

my family for the support that we get because this is a difficult 

job, but it’s one that we have stepped into with the support of 

our families, and that’s always appreciated. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you to the staff in my office in 

Moose Jaw because I know that they are holding down the fort 

and paying attention to the needs of constituents that may 

phone or come to the office. It’s something that they put a great 

deal of dedication and do a very good job at, and I think they’re 

an asset not only to me but to the constituency of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past week when we saw the 

government table their final budget before this fall’s provincial 

election, with record revenues flowing into the provincial 

coffers, this budget included quite a bit of spending in a variety 

of areas, and was without a doubt a pre-election budget. 

 

And while listening to the speech by the Minister of Finance — 

I guess it’s what I’ve always done — I always listen for 

initiatives that’ll impact my community. And more specifically, 

I was looking for a commitment to funding to the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital project. Now this is the very same project that 

the now Premier said was a top priority for the Saskatchewan 

Party government in 2007. This is the same project that was 

mentioned by the former minister of Finance on a budget day 

address three years ago. It’s also the same project that was 

mentioned at the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

convention this fall by the Premier — this spring, pardon me — 

by the Premier and the Minister of Health. But it was 

conspicuously absent from mention in this budget, with no 

money committed towards capital. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So it seems that this government can develop detailed planning 

for a domed stadium with a retractable roof in a matter of 

months, but they’re having difficulty with the expansion to the 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital, which I have to say would serve 

more people than a domed stadium here in the city of Regina. 

And yes, I will agree, hospitals are quite a bit more complicated 

than domed stadiums. But this project has been in the works for 

six years, and there’s been absolutely no shortage of provincial 

money to be able to move this project along. And I guess what 

it gets down to is that the people in Moose Jaw are really 

beginning to wonder if the Moose Jaw Union Hospital project 

truly is a priority for this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other areas that I was listening for, and 

it’s an issue in Moose Jaw and in just about every other 

community around the province, and that’s the issue of housing. 

And with such concern right across the province, it was really a 

disappointment to hear that $1.7 million was committed to a 

so-called housing strategy. And actually it was two programs 

that were announced. 1.5 million was to provide, will be 

provided to develop up to 300 rental units by assisting 

municipalities in their efforts to increase the supply of 



6948 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

affordable renting units, and another $200,000 will go to help 

municipalities stimulate home ownership opportunities by 

reimbursing participating municipalities for the education 

portion of the property tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, both programs are sadly 

underfunded and lacking anything that vaguely resembles a 

housing strategy. And obviously the Sask Party’s version of a 

housing strategy is just to leave it up to the municipalities with 

some really token contributions by the provincial government. 

 

But it really adds insult to Saskatchewan families and 

individuals that are struggling to find affordable housing, and 

the Saskatchewan . . . especially, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

when the Saskatchewan Party felt it was more appropriate to 

put $5.1 million into beer discounts for off-sale retailers. So 

when you get a beer discount that receives more funding than 

an affordable housing strategy, we need to question the 

priorities of this government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with all the money that’s being spent in this 

pre-election budget, I do want to say there was a couple of good 

initiatives that were in the budget. The Minister of Agriculture 

just talked about ag stability. I have a fair area of agricultural 

land in my constituency, south from Moose Jaw to just past 

Spring Valley. It covers ranchland, some crop land, pasture 

land, lots of cattle out there. But, Mr. Speaker, it looks like it 

could be another . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, it looks like it could 

be another unusual and unpredictable year, so I am pleased that 

the AgriStability programs are fully funded and there if 

producers need them. 

 

One of the other areas where there was good news was that 

finally municipalities will receive the full share of the 

municipal operating grant. That has been delayed because of 

the government’s poor financial planning over the past couple 

of years. Now this new funding was expected and it has already 

been built in to municipal budgets. So if anyone is expecting 

this new money to somehow offset the property tax increases 

that are showing up across the province in many communities, I 

don’t believe this will offset those increases because in many 

cases or in most cases it has been already built into budgets. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do have to comment. The member from 

Wood River in his comments, I believe, last night . . . And I 

guess this is good news too. And he said in his comments, well 

for one thing it’s a real balanced budget. So it’s nice to see that 

even the members in the government benches realize that other 

budgets have not been real balanced budgets. They have had 

savings that have been used and debt that has been used to 

really move those budgets into the black. So I’m glad to see that 

even the government members realize that there is a difference 

between a real balanced budget and one that is made real or 

made balanced by using up some of your savings. So it was just 

a comment. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, the budget has left many in our province 

exactly in the same position that they were before budget day 

with no real support for issues of affordability that are affecting 

many Saskatchewan families: high rental rate for 

accommodation, no real support for affordable housing, food 

prices that are expected to start to climb shortly, increasing 

transportation and utility costs. Mr. Speaker, it goes on and on. 

And with historic revenue in provincial coffers, the government 

is doing very well, but the question remains, are you feeling any 

of this prosperity? 

 

Now the member from Yorkton made the comments earlier this 

evening that everyone felt the benefits of this budget, but I 

would ask him . . . Last week there was questions that were 

asked before the budget. The Minister of Finance stood and said 

92,000 people didn’t pay income tax. And I would ask him, 

what is in this budget for those? What is in this budget for 

people who don’t pay tax, who are struggling to make ends 

meet? And, Mr. Speaker, the answer is nothing. And that’s the 

disagreeable part, and the part that is very hard to be able to sell 

to our constituents and make them feel any comfort with the 

budget. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, when we listen to the . . . When I 

commented on the member from Wood River’s comments 

about it being a real balanced budget, all you have to do is look 

at the government’s own documents, and we see, even if it is 

balanced, we’re seeing debt continuing to climb. And I will 

quote from the budget summary documents, page 60, and it 

says, “Public debt is forecast to increase by $375.9 million 

during 2010-11 and increase by an additional $485.3 million in 

2011-12.” 

 

And also, “Government business enterprise specific public debt 

is forecast to increase by $507 million during 2010-11 and 

increase by an additional $755.2 million during 2011-12.” And 

it says that “The increases in both years are almost entirely 

attributable to higher long-term debt for the utility Crown 

corporations.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is part of the shell game. When you look 

at some of this stuff, how’s the debt being portrayed? Of course 

they’re using it as not being portrayed. What the government is 

saying, well we’re not in debt. Everything’s balanced; life is 

wonderful. And they’re ignoring a chunk of the population in 

the province of Saskatchewan that have worked hard through 

good years and bad years. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s frustrating. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even though we talk about housing, we’ve 

seen very little. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there are members 

on the government side where they in their communities have 

seen senior citizens who are being forced out of their 

accommodation because of increased rent. They are seeing 

low-income families or working families who are struggling to 

find a decent place to live. And you can’t tell me that all of 

them can stand and say, oh it’s not happening in my 

constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, but they’re not doing anything 

about it. And SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] at their conference called the housing shortage a 

crisis. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a problem. 

 

And when we see health care continuing to struggle with 

underfunding and a Sask Party government that is solid in their 

view that private care is better than public, when we see doctor 

shortages increasing, and we see bidding wars between 

communities to see who can offer the best incentives to recruit 

doctors, all you have to do is look at Wakaw, Carlyle, 

Coronach, Moose Jaw, Rosetown, Leader — all communities 

with shortages of doctors, and there’s many, many more. 

 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6949 

And when the Minister of Health got up and talked about the 

doctor recruitment committee, sounds good. But what was the 

first thing that this doctor recruitment committee did? Well they 

spent $200,000 for new furniture and to move their office from 

Saskatoon to Regina. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The other way around. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well from Regina to Saskatoon, but still 

200,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine what Wakaw 

could have done with $200,000? Two hundred thousand dollars 

would have paid to keep the beds open in Wawota. But the 

minister feels there’s a higher priority here. 

 

Now some organizations such as PAIRS [Professional 

Association of Internes and Residents in Saskatchewan] have 

actually withdrawn from this doctor recruitment committee 

because they didn’t feel that it was worthwhile. And when we 

see all these problems, Mr. Speaker . . . Now we have the 

government looking at air ambulance helicopters and the 

program is not even up and running yet, but the price has gone 

up by millions already. And, Mr. Speaker, we are still waiting 

to see the 13 communities move ahead with long-term care 

facilities that were announced over two years ago. 

 

And then we see, Mr. Speaker, municipalities trying to cope 

with roads, sidewalks, sewers, and water mains that are 

crumbling, but the government says there will be no help in this 

budget, no infrastructure funding at all. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not about a shortage of revenue, it is about priorities. And this 

government has money for pet projects and friends but not for 

Saskatchewan citizens. And it gets to the question, Mr. Speaker, 

that this government is doing well, but are you? Your utility 

bills are up. Citizens are struggling with private long-term care. 

Municipal taxes are up, and they are going up again this year 

with the downloading of services to municipalities. Ambulance 

costs have increased to citizens while government pursues 

helicopters. And health services are being privatized, Mr. 

Speaker, and it goes on and on. And Saskatchewan residents are 

still dealing with some of the highest housing costs anywhere in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing the highest provincial revenues in 

the history of the province, but the Sask Party government is 

running up provincial debt, and average Saskatchewan residents 

are feeling squeezed. It’s not about the lack of revenues; it’s 

about the priorities of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan is well financed — $41 

million this year, but can anyone please name anything they 

have accomplished? We’ve seen flashy announcements and 

press conferences talking about clean coal and carbon 

sequestration, doomed domed stadiums, and today’s housing 

announcement may just end up in that pile, waiting to see if 

anything ever becomes of it. 

 

There’s no shortage of dollars, and where’s the money coming 

from? So among some huge increases in resource revenues, 

there’s been a fair bit of money that’s been taken out of the 

Crown corporations. So for two years — that’s two years, Mr. 

Speaker — the Crown corporations have had all profits and 

retained earnings stripped and moved to the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund]. The government spends the money while the 

Crowns have to borrow to maintain services and improve 

business. So now the Minister of Finance is grumbling, and I 

have to say I’m sure this sounds familiar to him. And for us 

taxpayers, it means that our utility rates will be going up to 

cover the costs. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture was just talking about the 

children’s hospital. Good project, a very good project, Mr. 

Speaker, but paid for entirely by the Crown corporations of 

Saskatchewan; no credit to these members here. It’s money that 

the Crown corporations have raised through business case and 

for providing good service to the people of Saskatchewan. So 

please, you need to be, you need to be serious about this . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Now the Minister of Advanced Ed 

all of a sudden has his voice. He doesn’t seem to have an 

answer during question period, doesn’t want to talk about those 

issues, but all of a sudden he’s found his voice. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Yorkton was also talking 

about business case and how the previous government hadn’t 

dealt with these issues on a business basis. Well I’d have to say 

to him, and what business case does it fit under the Sask-first 

policy, where SaskPower business is contracted out to 

Northlands Power? 

 

[19:45] 

 

It is not dealing with Sask-first. It is not allowing the companies 

to operate in a business fashion. It’s imposing their ideological 

viewpoint. And, Mr. Speaker, those of us as taxpayers — and 

I’m sure many taxpayers don’t realize this — but we’ve signed 

a 20-year agreement with Northlands Power to guarantee a 

price of natural gas, to guarantee the profits to Northlands 

Power, which is an Ontario company. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

just one of the examples where this government has shown a 

clear disregard for the people of this province and what’s been 

built in this province over an outside company. And that’s good 

business to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did you also know that taxpayers have paid for the 

infrastructure to run high-speed Internet into rural 

Saskatchewan through SaskTel, but this government has issued 

a stop-sell notice to SaskTel so that they can’t sell products at 

the end of that infrastructure? It’s contracted out. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we pay for the infrastructure, and someone else makes 

the profit. And these people figure that’s good business, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s kind of taking us all for a ride. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did you also know that SaskTel has contracted out 

a number of services? Teleconferencing operator services, and 

they’ve also sold off many profitable arms of business — 

Hospitality Network, DirectWest Canada, Ag Dealer — and 

that Corrections’ phone service now comes through a Texas 

company. Mr. Speaker, I would guess that many Saskatchewan 

residents don’t realize this, that our Crown corporations are 

being dismantled in front of us. 

 

And it’s similar to other ministries, Mr. Speaker. Highways 

depots are being shut down in small towns in rural 

Saskatchewan, Lucky Lake for one. There are others, Mr. 

Speaker. SaskPower offices are closed in rural communities. 

But yet these folks stand, these government members stand and 

talk about being huge supporters of rural Saskatchewan, and 



6950 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

like they have the vote wrapped up. But they know that they 

have ignored rural Saskatchewan — SaskPower offices, 

Highways depots, and there are others, Mr. Speaker, and other 

examples. So, Mr. Speaker, while we may look at this budget 

and say, lots of money going lots of places, there are many 

questions that are remaining. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues raised the issue of 

how the money is being spent and how the money is being 

accounted for. And when we were talking about the whole 

debate about potash revenue and the review of potash revenue, 

Mr. Speaker, I went into the budget books to find out what the 

actual price of potash had been in a variety of different years. 

But, Mr. Speaker, because this government uses kind of a 

sliding scale in many of its charts, there is no information in 

budget books for the actual price in 2007 of potash. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it makes me start to wonder, where else is this being 

used? 

 

And we see it over and over again where the prime years are 

used in the calculations, when the prime years are . . . There is 

no actual price for potash in 2007 in any of the budget 

documents. And, Mr. Speaker, but scales are changing as we 

move, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can argue with the Minister of Finance after but, Mr. 

Speaker, I have to say we had the whole discussion about 

potash royalties, and this has come up over and over again. And 

if this government truly believes they are so knowledgeable on 

the business side, I say, baloney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was involved in the discussions for the changes 

to the potash revenue royalties in 2003 and 2005. Mr. Speaker, 

a great deal of work went into that and a great deal of 

discussion. And part of it was based on the price of potash at 

the time, the option of expansion or greenfield mines, and also 

the length of time it would take the potash companies to recoup 

their investment into expansions or greenfield mines. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was a fair bit of discussion. And at that 

time, potash was below $200 a tonne. And, Mr. Speaker, part of 

this debate about whether potash royalties need to be reviewed 

is that potash prices have changed. The industry has changed. 

In fact members of the industry itself had said, this is the new 

norm. But this government is quite content to sit back on their 

laurels. What business . . . Now is this what the member from 

Yorkton would do with his family business? Oh well, things are 

fine. We’ll just leave it as it is. I don’t need to review. Costs 

have changed; the industry has changed, but he would just sit 

back. Well maybe his dad runs the business, and he would 

actually have better sense to review it and look at the actual 

costs. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s irresponsible for this government not to 

review for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, for a number of 

reasons, Mr. Speaker. If they’re right, it would prove they’re 

right, Mr. Speaker. But if they are incorrect, if they are wrong 

in their assumptions, it would also show clearly to the people of 

Saskatchewan which needs to be done. A review is a review. It 

is not a guarantee of things going one way or another. It is a 

review of the circumstance and the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now they’re all hooting and hollering. You know, 

look back to your business sense. Maybe step back, get some 

advice from someone who is more familiar with business. It is 

something that would be reviewed on an ongoing basis. It 

would be normal due diligence in any situation, and it’s 

something that this government needs to do. And, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s something that the people of this province believe needs to 

be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many questions in this budget, many 

people that are left outside in the cold in this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, lots of money being spent but not a lot of thought or 

vision when it was being spent. So I will not be supporting the 

budget. I’ll be supporting the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud and 

honoured to stand in the Assembly today in support of the 

budget, The Saskatchewan Advantage. I was always proud of 

the fact that I lived in Saskatchewan where my grandparents 

immigrated to, but even more so now, as our government 

makes great strides to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, 

creating a better quality of life and more opportunities for all 

citizens in Saskatchewan. 

 

Firstly I would like to thank the Finance minister and our 

government for all the thought and work put into the process of 

fulfilling commitments and reducing debt in one budget. I’d 

also like to take this opportunity to discuss the positive stories 

we’re hearing in my wonderful constituency and the 

communities of Saskatchewan Rivers. Also thank you for the 

continued support of my family and staff at my constituency 

office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I discuss the budget in my speech, the citizens 

of Saskatchewan will see their concerns addressed and how 

Saskatchewan is proving itself as an economic leader in 

comparison to the rest of the country. How this budget 

addresses the health care demands of Saskatchewan’s growing 

population to improve their quality of life, I will also 

demonstrate. The health budget includes a 250 million increase 

to regional health authority base funding for compensation of 

drugs, medical supplies, operating costs. And our government 

recognizes that access to physicians and health services, it’s a 

top priority for all the people of Saskatchewan. And I am also 

very excited that patients in rural and remote areas of the 

province will soon have the helicopter air medical services, 

thanks to the work of the good MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is blessed with an impressive array 

of natural resources. And one of the most diverse in Canada and 

the world is right here in Saskatchewan Rivers, the constituency 

that I represent. Now if you will bear with me, I did some 

research. In January of 1943, potash was discovered near 

Radville when Imperial Oil was drilling for oil. The boundaries 

were unknown, but the researchers concluded that the salt basin 

on the prairies was vast. Then in the 1940s, the main suppliers 

of potash salts had been Germany and France. During World 

War II, supplies were cut off and Canada turned to the United 

States. But by 1955, thoughts were turning inward to Canada 

with the idea if potash consumption continued to increase, the 

vast resources and reserves in Saskatchewan would be of great 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6951 

strategic value to North America. 

 

Today under our government, the mining industry commands a 

large role in Canada’s economic theatre, and Saskatchewan has 

taken centre stage. We have the globe’s highest grain uranium 

deposits and 53 per cent of the world’s potash resources. 

Saskatchewan is the largest potash producer in the world, with 

more than 12.2 billion worth of expansions to existing mines. 

These have been announced, with the projects scheduled for the 

completion of 2020. I believe our government’s budget will 

help facilitate and continue this climb upward with more than 

400 million of much-needed infrastructure investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan also produces a great array of 

minerals including salt, coal, silica sand, and gold. 

Saskatchewan has one of the world’s largest kimberlite fields, 

and this kimberlite field is in Saskatchewan Rivers constituency 

in the Fort à la Corne area . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. 

 

Shore Gold has announced a positive pre-feasibility study for 

the Star-Orion South Diamond project located right in 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. Anticipated diamond 

production of 35 million carats with a 20-year mine life 

strongly supports the prospect of a world-class diamond mine 

in Saskatchewan. Close proximity to railroads, electrical power 

supplies, paved highways, and a skilled labour force contributes 

to the robust economy of this large-scale diamond project, and 

this budget will foster a culture of entrepreneurism and growth. 

 

Mining is Saskatchewan’s third largest industry after oil and 

natural gas, and it contributes over 3 billion annually in wages, 

goods, and taxes, supporting more than 30,500 direct jobs. And 

some of these are in the North; I think 2,000 of these jobs are in 

northern Saskatchewan. For every $1 spent directly on mining 

creates a positive impact on every sector of Saskatchewan’s 

economy. 

 

There is a two point million increase in capital expansion for 

the benefit of this industry and research institutions that our 

government has committed to. And that’s the Saskatchewan 

advantage, which I’m very proud to say.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this past year was very challenging for many 

Saskatchewan producers dealing with excess moisture. Our 

government worked very hard to address the flooding issues 

facing farmers across Saskatchewan, and this government’s 

budget — thank you to the Agriculture minister — will help 

protect Saskatchewan producers against the risk of this year’s 

excess moisture. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan increased its agriculture 

budget by 32 million to 418 million for the 2011-12 budget. So 

producers can be assured that in the upcoming growing season, 

the government will stand behind them. And by implementing 

phase 2 of its education property tax reduction plan, the 

education tax rate will be reduced by 81 per cent on agricultural 

land. This is the largest education tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

The provincial government also introduced the Saskatchewan 

renewable diesel program, which includes a five-year incentive 

providing 13 cents per litre for renewable diesel produced and 

sold in Saskatchewan. This government’s budget will also 

include 1.2 million in funding for the comprehensive pest 

control program which is so important to rural communities 

such as Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. Livestock producers 

and towns and villages have told me that they’re very pleased 

that this program is there. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, another positive thing that has happened in the 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers is the sale of the Prince 

Albert pulp mill by Domtar to Paper Excellence, and this was 

really great news to the people of Prince Albert and area. It was 

warmly embraced by Saskatchewan Rivers constituents. And 

thank you to the government for providing a positive business 

climate to enable businesses to enjoy, work, and live in our 

growing province. 

 

I had the opportunity to speak to the CEO [chief executive 

officer] of Paper Excellence, and he appeared very eager to get 

the mill up and running and to work with our government and 

the people of the area. So thank you to the Minister of Energy. I 

applaud him for all the input he put in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with a 4.2 per cent real GDP [gross domestic 

product] growth forecast in 2011 and a 2.8 per cent in 2012, 

this budget fosters job creation and economic growth in 

Saskatchewan. I believe Saskatchewan is coming into its own 

as an economic leader, and providing more opportunities in the 

future for our families. My two grandsons, Casey and Reid, will 

enjoy a great quality of life and educational opportunity. 

 

When I was growing up there were some opportunities, but my 

son had to leave. And I think all the coyotes left at the same 

time because now all the children are coming back and the 

coyotes are coming back, too. And I have been told that that 

coyote program was good for all the agriculture producers, so 

thank you again to the Agriculture minister for that past 

program. 

 

This budget shows increased investments in health care and 

education — 36.4 million for a 2.3 per cent increase in school 

operating funding. This budget also shows 2.1 million to 

develop 500 new child care spaces in 2011-12, and this will 

increase licensed spaces by 4.1 per cent to a total of 12,700. 

 

I was also very impressed with the Education budget, 6.1 

million for planning of nine new school projects across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tourism is a very important element of 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. I see a lot of folks from the 

south come north, flow north to our beautiful parks and lakes, 

and my own family for generations has been involved in the 

tourism industry. In fact, as a little girl, I remember cleaning the 

litter in the parking lot after a busy weekend at our family 

business at Candle Lake. And therefore I’m very proud to 

announce our government initiatives to strengthen and enhance 

the tourism industry. Saskatchewan is blessed with many 

beautiful lakes and an abundance of pristine areas to enjoy our 

environment, and we are indeed fortunate to be living here in 

Saskatchewan. In order to protect these areas as well as 

homeowners and their property, 57.5 million has been budgeted 

for wildlife management; 11 million from Tourism and Parks 



6952 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

for parks capital projects; 1 million for regional parks — a 

500,000 increase; and 2.2 million for tourism initiatives. 

 

As I represent the lake areas of Waskesiu, Anglin Lake, 

Christopher and Emma, Big River, Morin Lake, and Candle 

Lake just to name a few, I’m extremely proud of our 

government’s initiatives in the budget. There’s also 10 million 

for a new program to upgrade community and tourism access 

roads. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers constituency remains a 

very pleasant and wonderful place to live, thanks to my 

gracious friends and neighbours who are generous and 

community orientated. They have great capacity to give, to 

volunteer, and to commit to their workplaces. Local community 

members have responded very positively to our government’s 

budget, and our list of positive accomplishments and 

opportunities presented in our communities have made a 

difference in their lives. I look forward in working with all 

members present in securing a better future for our province. 

And people are also telling me it brings a welcome tax relief to 

rural communities and especially in Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency where there are eight RMs [rural municipality]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, this budget is about building on our 

Saskatchewan advantage. It’s about our abundant natural 

resources, our sense of community, and our unique lifestyle. 

This budget is about making life more affordable for all and the 

opportunities that our economic growth will create for all 

Saskatchewan citizens — newcomers, First Nation 

communities, rural and urban areas, farmers, young families, 

and seniors and business owners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I support, that’s why I’m in favour of 

The Saskatchewan Advantage budget, and I will not be 

supporting the opposition amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to begin my 

comments on this budget tonight by recognizing and thanking 

my family for their support over many years that I’ve been in 

here now and it seems like . . . My colleagues are helping me 

along with this. They think it’s been a long time too, that I’ve 

been here and certainly my family does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to thank my parents, Charlie and Verna. I hope they’re 

watching tonight, and I bet they are. My wife, Linda, always 

supportive; my daughters Stephanie and Alison living in 

Ottawa. They made their sacrifices to the political life some 

years ago and now they have successful careers of their own, 

and Stephanie has my grandson, Stewart, who’s nearly five. My 

son, Lee, and his new wife, Jessica, and their baby daughter, 

my beautiful little granddaughter, Josie Claire. Josie can’t talk 

yet. She’s only one but I know that she wants to see more of 

grandpa, too. I can tell. Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I 

didn’t thank my constituents, the hard-working people of 

Thunder Creek, for trusting me to represent them in this great 

institution. And it’s a responsibility that I take very seriously, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP members opposite, they’re opposition members, Mr. 

Speaker, and they feel like they have to oppose things. This is a 

budget that I am very proud of. I’ve been a political junkie 

since I was a teenager, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve watched these 

sorts of things. I’ve been involved in elections since I was 20 

years old. I pay attention to these things. This is absolutely the 

best budget I have ever seen federally or provincially, Mr. 

Speaker. I know that they as opposition members, they feel it’s 

their duty and responsibility to oppose and that’s what they’re 

doing to the very best of their ability, Mr. Speaker, and I get 

that. But here are some things that other provincial leaders have 

been saying about this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan is projecting a $383 

million surplus in the General Revenue Fund in fiscal year 

2011-12, a rare achievement in a year that will see most 

provinces digging their way out of deficit. Excluding fund 

transfers, the surplus sits at $115 million or about point 

two per cent of GDP, still a tall accomplishment in this 

challenging fiscal environment. 

 

And this from Robert Kavcic, economist with the Bank of 

Montreal. 

 

“This is a real balanced budget. Even the auditor would agree 

with that.” Stefani Langenegger, CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] radio. 

 

You’re paying down debt. You really are, to the tune of 

$325 million. You’re basically giving 200 million in tax 

cuts that’s going directly to go to the poorest of the poor 

and to everybody, of course the working poor anyway. 

And you’re basically also having a balanced and a real 

balanced budget, not a pretend balance, but where you 

actually are taking in more money than you’re spending. 

So there’s actually a really good solid bottom line to this 

[Murray Mandryk]. 

 

“I’m a very happy man. I think this is a decent budget.” This 

from Steve McLellan, Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Brian Martynook, executive director, Moose Jaw & District 

Chamber, said this. Martynook told the Times Herald the 

provincial budget which Finance minister Ken Krawetz 

released in the legislature on Wednesday has something for 

everybody. For business, he said, tax cuts would definitely be 

beneficial. 

 

“That kind of gives tax competitiveness for small 

business,” Martynook said, adding such tax reduction 

should encourage entrepreneurs and risk takers to come to 

Moose Jaw for their business ventures. 

 

The budget stays on course by building on our competitive 

business advantages while recognizing the need to make 

strategic investment in our most valuable resource — our 

people. A good balance for the future. I like it [says Tim 

LeClair, CEO, Saskatoon Regional Economic 

Development]. 

 

Dr. Stewart McMillan said the budget was good news for 

cancer patients. The infusion of cash will pay for more bone 

marrow transplants, colorectal screening, and cancer treatments. 

 

“This government has put its money where its mouth is,” 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6953 

said Guy Lonechild, chief of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. “This is an opportunity for 

us to start doing much-needed work, to roll up our sleeves 

and start improving educational outcomes for First 

Nations people including early childhood development, K 

to 12 post-secondary education.” 

 

Chief Guy Lonechild goes on to say this is an important first 

step forward: 

 

This budget allows for this work to come in within the 

next 12 months. So we are actually quite happy with it. 

The government is providing money so universities and 

colleges don’t have to raise tuition just to balance the 

books. 

 

“Across the country we see other universities are suffering, but 

in Saskatchewan there are still positive investments”, says Brett 

Fairbairn, U of S [University of Saskatchewan] provost and 

vice-president of academics. “We are fortunate to be in a 

province that is still investing in post-secondary education.” 

 

“The support is important for producers and the non-producing 

public as well,” said Greg Marshall, APAS [Agricultural 

Producers Association of Saskatchewan] president. And he 

goes on to say, “I’m glad to see the initiative to increase 

funding to research agricultural research. It’s been hurting for a 

lot of years.” 

 

Keri McFadden, CEO, Institute of Chartered Accountants said, 

“No matter who the government is, we want to see a summary 

financial statements report. The GRF is important too, but 

showing the surplus in both areas is a huge step. It’s great to see 

that we have a true surplus.” 

 

“Small-business owners like this budget on a number of fronts,” 

said Marilyn Braun-Pollon. Saskatchewan vice-president of the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business. “One, that it’s 

balanced; the fact that we are paying down debt and their tax 

cut priority is beginning to be addressed with the retention in 

the small-business tax — a reduction in the small business tax 

rate from 4.5 per cent to 2 per cent.” 

 

Deb Davies, Foster Families Association, said, “The children 

and youth agenda tells me that the government is prioritizing 

our families, and that is where we need to be focusing our 

efforts — on strengthening families.” 

 

I’m not reading all of these — there are so many — but I’m 

trying to hit the high spots, Mr. Speaker. “Raising a family is 

not a cheap thing, and so by having those increases to resources 

for foster children and foster parents, I think it’s a good day.” 

 

“Being a former foster child myself, growing up in the system, I 

know it’s really important to have those resources to ensure that 

Métis children are given the best opportunity to succeed.” This 

from Robert Doucette, Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Colin Craig of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation said: 

 

When you increase the basic personal exemption, 

virtually all taxpayers save money, so that’s good news. 

We’re pleased to see that there’s significant tax relief in 

there for individuals in terms of personal income taxes. 

There’s a small-business tax reduction, there’s property 

tax reductions. I mean those are very good signs. What’s 

also good to see is that the debt is going down. 

 

Dave Marit from SARM said: 

 

The big one we saw of course was the education property 

tax reduction. It’s huge to our organization and to farmers 

and ranchers in rural Saskatchewan, so that’s significant. 

The revenue-sharing piece that we saw going to a full 1 

per cent by the province is very, very huge for rural 

municipalities. 

 

Certainly from a health care system point of view, it’s a 

good budget. There are significant new resources going 

into the budget. We’ve got an increase over 9 per cent for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, so that not only lets 

us keep doing what we’re doing, the services and 

programs we’ve got already, it actually also allows us to 

expand in some areas too [this from Dwight Nelson, 

president and CEO, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region]. 

 

[20:15] 

 

“There were 30 new protection workers added. Again, that will 

I think help to try to make sure there is better casework and 

help, hopefully, to find ways to support parents to have the 

opportunity to keep the children in their own homes,” according 

to Bob Pringle, Children’s Advocate. 

 

John Hopkins, Regina Chamber of Commerce, said: 

 

There’s a lot of things for a lot of different people, 

whether it’s corporate tax breaks or income tax breaks or 

property tax changes. There’s a lot of different things that 

business people like as well as other people will like. I 

think that in any previous year, any budget that I’ve been 

involved in, if you had all of these different types of 

changes in one budget, it would really be something. So 

this is a pretty historic budget that way. 

 

John Hopkins, Regina Chamber of Commerce. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker. We have many, many more 

endorsements. My point is that leaders around this province 

agree that this is a great budget. Only the NDP have to try to 

attempt to cast a dark cloud over it for their own political gain 

and perhaps their own political survival, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is our fourth budget, Mr. Speaker, and the economic 

indicators show that we’re on the right track. Mr. Speaker, these 

economic indicators would not be as positive as they are if our 

spending priorities were wrong. So I want to deal a little bit 

with the economic indicators, Mr. Speaker, and again I’ll just 

hit the high spots with them, but they are a direct result of the 

priority spending of a government. And ours are very positive 

indeed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Among the economic indicators, Mr. Speaker, our population is 

now at an all-time high, over 1.05 million people. It’s grown by 

nearly 16,000 people in the past year, making Saskatchewan the 

fastest growing province in Canada. 



6954 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

New employment numbers show that 515,700 people were 

employed in February, the second highest level of employment 

on record for the month of February. Full-time jobs were up by 

2,400. Private sector jobs overall increased by 5,200, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate, seasonally 

unadjusted, now stands at 6.1 per cent, the third lowest rate in 

Canada and well below the national rate of 8 per cent. The 

seasonally adjusted rate is 5.7 per cent, the second lowest in 

Canada, tied with Alberta and well above the national rate of 

7.8 per cent. Well below, I should say. 

 

The value of building permits issued in Saskatchewan increased 

in January 2011 by 95.6 per cent compared to January 2010, the 

highest percentage increase among the provinces. Nationally, 

building permits were down 3.5 per cent. Residential building 

permits in Saskatchewan were up by 76.7 per cent between 

January 2010 and January 2011, ranked first among the 

provinces, while non-residential permits were up an astonishing 

110.6 per cent during the same period. In February 2011, 

housing starts in Saskatchewan’s urban centres were up by 115 

per cent compared to February 2010. There were decreases in 

eight provinces in this period, and the national average was 

down 7 per cent. 

 

RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] estimates Saskatchewan’s 

economy grew by 4.5 per cent in 2010, the second highest rate 

of economic growth in the country in that year. RBC is also 

forecasting growth rates of 4.9 per cent and 5.3 per cent for 

2011 and 2012 respectively, the highest rates of economic 

growth among the provinces in both years. RBC expects 

employment to grow by more than 2 per cent each year on 

average or by about 10,000 jobs in 2011 and 12,000 in 2012. 

The Conference Board is forecasting that Saskatchewan will 

lead the country with growth rates of 3.9 per cent and 4.5 per 

cent in 2011 and 2012 respectively. TD [Toronto Dominion] 

Bank forecasts Saskatchewan’s economy to grow by 4.3 per 

cent and 3 per cent in 2011 and 2012 respectively. 

 

In January 2011 compared to January 2010, manufacturing 

shipments in Saskatchewan increased by 6.3 per cent. In 

January 2011, new motor vehicle sales in Saskatchewan 

increased by 4 per cent, 4.6 per cent compared to January 2010, 

the fourth highest percentage increase in Canada. In 2010, sales 

were up 6 per cent to 47,601 vehicles compared to ’09. 

Wholesale trade in Saskatchewan increased by 22.5 per cent 

between January 2010 and January 2011. In January 2011 

compared to January 2010, retail sales were up 5.7 per cent. 

Saskatchewan ranked first in percentage growth among the 

provinces. In 2010, retail trade increased by 2.7 per cent 

compared to ’09. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are numerous other economic indicators that 

support our spending priorities over the first three and a half 

years of our government, Mr. Speaker. But running government 

in a way that results in a successful economy isn’t the goal in 

itself, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of our province’s economic 

success simply because that creates the revenue for government 

that can be used to build roads, schools, hospitals, provide 

long-term care to those who need it, and much more money for 

social programs, education, and health care. Because of 

Saskatchewan’s economic success in the last four years, we’ve 

been able to, in all of those areas . . . to a much greater extent in 

our first four years than the NDP ever did in the last 16 years 

that they were in government. 

 

Some of the key areas that this government goes to improve the 

lives of Saskatchewan people are: the budget helps to define the 

Saskatchewan advantage. It builds on the quality of life and the 

sense of community that the province has always had by 

creating the conditions for further economic growth and more 

opportunities in the future. It does this through further tax 

reductions, enhanced programs in health, education, social 

services, along with debt reduction and balanced budgets. 

 

The budget strengthens the foundations for the future by 

reducing debt by another $325 million, Mr. Speaker. While 

other jurisdictions see debt rising with deficit budgets, 

Saskatchewan’s debt and interest payments are falling. The 

budget keeps government promises by fulfilling commitments 

on education property tax reductions and municipal revenue 

sharing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it fulfills commitments on 

property tax reductions made by premiers as far back as 

Tommy Douglas in 1945. It fosters job creation and economic 

growth by cutting the small-business tax by more than half, 

from 4.5 per cent to 2 per cent. It makes life easier for families 

by increasing the total tax exemption to a family of four by 

$3,000 through raising the basic personal exemption by $1,000 

and the deductions for dependent children by $500. 

 

The budget furthers the innovation agenda with the new 

investments in nuclear research, by investing in agricultural 

research and development, and by supporting both the Canadian 

Light Source and the Saskatchewan Research Council and 

promoting a nuclear research agenda. 

 

The budget also innovates on social policy with a new approach 

to tackling child welfare issues, introducing a cross-ministry 

approach to provide a clearer focus on the child. Saskatchewan 

is coming into its own as an economic leader in comparison 

with other Canadian jurisdictions. We are no longer next year 

country. We will become this year country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . .There are many areas that I could 

talk about specifically with regards to this budget, but I’d like 

. . . Agriculture is my first economic love, if you can say it that 

way, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to talk a little bit about our 

budget’s record in agriculture and congratulate the Minister of 

Finance and the Minister of Agriculture on the measures that 

this budget takes for agriculture. 

 

Record crop insurance coverage, Mr. Speaker, and funding in 

the 2011-12 ag budget will help protect Saskatchewan 

producers against risks such as excess moisture. The 

government has increased its agricultural budget by $32 million 

to $418 million in 2011-2012. This is the second highest budget 

ever announced in the province’s history, next only to our own 

budgets of 2009-2010. More than three-quarters of this year’s 

budget will fully fund business risk management programs 

including crop insurance, AgriStability, and AgriInvest. 

 

Our government will be leaving more money in the hands of 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers by implementing phase 2 

of its education property tax reduction plan which will reduce 

education property tax rates by 80 per cent on agricultural land 

compared to 2007. This is the largest education tax reduction in 

the province’s history. This year the mill rate will be reduced 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6955 

from 7.08 to 3.91 on agricultural land. 

 

The 2011-12 agricultural budget also includes expanded 

agricultural extension services with the opening of seven new 

satellite offices in Meadow Lake, Lloydminster, Assiniboia, 

Moosomin, Estevan, Shaunavon, and Wadena. This is a 

two-year pilot project to replace I think it was 22 such facilities 

closed by the previous NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our government will continue to provide funding for the Crown 

land sale program, the wildlife damage compensation program, 

the gopher control rebate program, irrigation infrastructure, the 

farm and ranch water infrastructure program, the farm business 

development initiative, and other programs that benefit 

producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about highways and health and 

social services and education, but my time is drawing to a close. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I’ll proudly, I’ll very proudly support this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, and I will not be supporting the 

opposition amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased tonight to 

rise and add some of my own thoughts to the budget debate. I 

want to thank my family first for allowing me to be here for 

almost 13 years now. And I certainly want to thank the people 

of Eastview for also doing me that honour of putting me here 

for 13 years. And I’m hoping to have several more, courtesy of 

those constituents. 

 

I also want to thank my constituency assistant, April Anderson, 

who does such wonderful work in the constituency office and 

serves both myself and the people of Eastview and actually the 

people of the province in an exemplary manner. I also want to 

thank the executive of Saskatoon Eastview for helping me do 

all the things that I do and stay here too. 

 

I have some general comments on the budget. I really would 

like to . . . I’ve listened to several of my colleagues speak and 

several of the opposition speak, and there are some things that 

jump out at me. I know people have focused on basically their, 

really, areas of interest. 

 

And I did hear a lot of backslapping congratulations going on 

from the Sask Party members who spoke, but I don’t see 

anybody congratulating the Finance minister for the things and 

the people who did not get anything from this budget. And 

those are, from top of my mind, there’s seniors. There’s not a 

single mention of seniors, nothing for any of their issues. 

 

I know there’s been a very strong lobby over the years to have 

seniors’ centres open in rural Saskatchewan. It’s a very small 

price to pay to keep recreational centres open so that seniors 

have someplace to gather and someplace to have even some 

health programs delivered. It keeps them independent, keeps 

them out and about, and does a lot of things for their mental 

health and physical health and keeps them out of long-term care 

and hospitals. A small price to pay, and that’s been denied 

every single year. And still nothing in this budget for seniors — 

nothing for seniors’ housing, nothing for seniors in the drug 

plan, nothing for seniors, period. I don’t see any mention of the 

word seniors, so I think that the seniors of this province — and 

there are many — will certainly be looking at this budget 

wondering what happened to their interests. 

 

There is nothing in this budget to talk about renters, the 

difficulties they are facing over the last several years with the 

market-driven economy that sees their rent, or has seen their 

rents increase astronomically compared to what their 

paycheques have increased, which brings me to also another 

group of people who had nothing in this budget, and that’s 

minimum wage earners. And they are certainly suffering, with 

food costs going up, gas costs going up, utility costs going up, 

and certainly not their wages. 

 

[20:30] 

 

There’s no real incentives for new home buyers, new 

homeowners, people trying to get into the market. I know 

they’re all excited about some announcement that the minister 

made today — that obviously was a rehash of the 

announcement from last year, so I don’t think there’s going to 

be a lot of excitement out in the community with this. 

 

I think there’s certainly a lot of people interested in recruitment 

and retention of doctors, and the medical students that were 

here today were really interested in hearing about the contract 

negotiations for PAIRS, the Professional Association of 

Internes and Residents, who have brought their issues to the 

legislature and to the minister’s attention, to the Premier’s 

attention, and frankly can’t figure out why anybody would want 

to milk every single last iota of bad feeling from these 

negotiations with these doctors before a settlement. I mean you 

have to reach a settlement at some point, but make sure you get 

every single bad feeling that you can possibly get from these 

prospective doctors that you seem to say you want to stay here 

in Saskatchewan but do nothing to actually demonstrate that 

you do. 

 

And this isn’t me talking. These are the residents and interns 

who have spoken to me and have spoken to the minister. He’s 

heard it. He’s seen it in writing. It’s not news to him. But I 

don’t understand it, and neither do they. What’s the stall, and 

what is to be gained by keeping these professionals without a 

contract and showing them such disrespect that they continue to 

think that Saskatchewan doesn’t want them? 

 

So whatever the minister says when he stands in his place . . . 

And the people in the gallery and the people watching, the 

doctors watching, they certainly understand the arrogance and 

the disrespect from the minister and have said so. I’ve seen the 

emails going back and forth. So I don’t think the minister has 

actually . . . I don’t think he’s heard it. I think he’s paying as 

much attention to his emails as the minister for Post-Secondary 

Education does. 

 

There’s also 3,000 health sciences professionals who have a 

wide variety of occupations in the health system. They too are 

without a contract. And SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations], the government’s bargaining agent, is 

putting advertisements on the radio and on TV and out in the 

community in their workplaces about the bargaining that . . . 

It’s unheard of. I’ve never heard of this being allowed. 



6956 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

This is what Bill 6 gave the employer the right to do, which is 

basically intimidate the employees. And I think . . . I don’t 

know how a government thinks they’re going to run a health 

system when they have angered every single person who works 

in it, every single person who works in it. The CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees], the SEIU [Service Employees 

International Union], the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 

and General Employees’ Union] contracts . . . Just because they 

were settled for 9 per cent doesn’t mean those 25,000 people 

are happy. They are not happy. The 3,000 health sciences are 

not happy. The doctors are not happy. 

 

So I think there’s every single health worker in . . . I’ve been in 

so many workplaces since last summer that these people are 

talking about how unhappy they are in their workplaces, how 

unhappy they are with the way the government has treated 

them. And certainly they settled the contracts because they 

were tired of toxic bargaining. They were tired of the toxic 

bargaining, the conditions that they were in. So they’ve settled, 

but there’s another date coming in all of their minds and that’s 

November 7th. And every one of them is watching. 

 

And when I talked about being out in rural Saskatchewan on a 

health tour — I know I’ve mentioned this before that my 

colleague from Fairview and I went out in a fairly extensive 

tour of rural Saskatchewan, 55 communities, and we’re still 

going to more — we saw probably 75 or more health facilities 

since we saw two, three, and four, sometimes that many in one 

community. We mostly targeted going to visit long-term care 

facilities and certainly health centres and small hospitals in 

communities. 

 

We visited many communities who are really, really unhappy 

with this government who has done nothing to help them with 

their doctor recruitment. None of them have seen any benefit 

from the physician recruitment agency. The physician 

recruitment CEO was in Wakaw at the public meeting, sat on 

his hands. There was nothing to offer the community of Wakaw 

which now sees their hospital closed for acute emergency 

services. 

 

And Wakaw’s not the only one. There’s Neilburg has lost their 

ambulance service. They only have it on just a month-to-month 

basis. Lestock, Cudworth, Kindersley . . . Kindersley’s just on 

the brink of losing their services as well. Spiritwood hospital 

closed. Leader Hospital closed. Big River hospital closed. And 

the Sask Party, including the minister, talk a lot about the 51 

hospitals that were impacted, 51 in the early ’90s. I visited 

many of those communities. Those hospitals are now special 

care homes, many of them with attached health centres. 

 

But my question would be to those people on the Sask Party 

side who talk about this: you haven’t reopened a single one of 

them, so what on earth is your plan for those 52 places or 51 

places? You’ve done nothing to, nothing to change any of those 

circumstances, and you’re adding to the total now with Wakaw 

and Spiritwood and Big River and Leader, and not doing 

anything to continue to keep communities like Kindersley and 

Shaunavon with their services open. I’m getting emails talking 

about Shaunavon, having people turned away from emergency 

services in Shaunavon. And it just goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In our tour, my colleague from Fairview and I found 

communities telling us that they feel rural people are paying for 

health care twice. They pay with the PST and then they pay 

with health levies or using their municipal tax base to fund 

doctor clinics and incentives for doctors including homes and 

cars and bonuses and guarantees of wages. They understand 

that they’re paying twice. That’s what they told us. And they 

don’t like that. They don’t see any reason why they have to pay 

for something that the rest of the province takes out of the 

General Revenue Fund and is funded by the PST. 

 

There’s more in rural Saskatchewan. There’s more unhappiness 

than I think the members opposite realize, because most places 

we went to told us that none of them return the phone calls or 

meet with people that we were talking to . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . They do not. They do not. They said without a 

doubt and without an exception, Mr. Speaker, that they cannot 

talk to their MLAs. I shouldn’t say . . . There’s one exception. 

They did say that the member from Shellbrook met with them, 

and look what happened to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly a lack of equity in the budget for 

the Catholic school system. We’ve met with the Catholic school 

system, with parents. There is a funding gap in the school 

system that is really disadvantaging separate school children as 

compared to their public school counterparts. And even the 

comments after the budget from education, from the school 

boards, talked about this budget being a status quo budget from 

two years ago. 

 

So it does nothing to address the increased enrolment, the 

enrolment of immigrant children. It does nothing to, nothing to 

address the capital issues. How are our education systems, how 

are our systems supposed to, our school districts supposed to 

fund capital? How are they supposed to build schools? They 

used to have an ability to tax, and now they have nothing, so 

they have to rely on the provincial government. We heard 

nothing about changing the split there for funding. It’s still 

65/35 I don’t know how they’re expected to raise their 35 per 

cent. 

 

And while I’m talking about the split in infrastructure, I think 

we should talk again about Amicus, because most communities 

that we visited this summer that were scheduled or waiting to 

see construction on long-term care facilities didn’t have a clue 

that this new funding formula was out there. They weren’t 

being offered it, and they were quite angry that they weren’t 

being offered it. So the Minister now goes to 80/20 and thinks 

that that should make these communities feel better. I really 

don’t think that they’re going to buy that when Saskatoon got 

100 per cent funding. 

 

So I don’t think that these communities . . . They understand it 

now and they’re certainly getting the information. I know one 

of the members from the Sask Party thought we were out there 

scaring people, but we were scaring people with the truth. And 

that’s certainly, that’s certainly not something that they thought 

was scary. They actually really appreciated hearing the real 

story. 

 

And it’s interesting also I think when my colleague from . . . 

The Finance critic talked about, “boom for whom?” All these 

people that I’ve mentioned that did not get anything in the 

budget. What about mental health? I mean there was a whole 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6957 

group of people here talking about mental health and the lack of 

services. The minister talked about his commitment. The 

budget came down; nothing in the budget. Nothing for mental 

health services and nothing for the construction of the hospital 

in North Battleford that has been long awaited. Many, many 

people are extremely disappointed in that. There is no money 

for any construction there. 

 

In fact, there’s no money actually, Mr. Speaker, anywhere in 

the budget for any health infrastructure, which I find 

interesting. There’s no money for capital in the health budget. 

There’s promises made for long-term care facilities — 13 that 

we all remember — and that money’s been in and out, as many 

other things have been. But I don’t see it now in the budget, so I 

don’t know what those communities are being told, where 

they’re supposed to find that money from. 

 

I don’t see any money to increase health research, and that’s 

right in the health estimates budget on page 88. Health research 

is status quo. Health Quality Council is status quo. Which begs 

the question: where’s the MS [multiple sclerosis] funding 

coming from? The Health Quality Council is leading the 

request for proposals for the MS research project that the 

Premier announced ad hoc on John Gormley, and now there’s 

nothing in the budget. So the people . . . the multiple sclerosis 

community is looking for, where is that money going to come 

from and what is the commitment to that research project when 

and if it comes? So that is certainly missing in the budget. I 

think long-term care obviously is missing when we’re talking 

about no money for capital. 

 

When I was talking about debunking the myth, I do want to 

mention in my remarks about debunking the myth of the debt 

decreasing. Because on page 60 of the Sask Party’s own budget 

document it says, “Public debt is forecast to increase by $375.9 

million during 2010-11 and increase by an additional $485.3 

million in 2011-12.” I don’t know how anybody can think that 

that debt is decreasing when that’s almost a billion dollars of an 

increase, as admitted to in the budget summary, Sask Party 

budget summary. 

 

So I’m not exactly sure what the public is thinking when 

they’re getting this message. They’re hearing about the debt 

being decreased and then they can read in the budget book that 

it’s increasing, quite blatantly saying so. And yet to go on radio, 

TV, any other kind of messaging and give a message out that 

isn’t the same as that, I think that’s just unethical. I don’t 

understand how you can do that to people in the province and 

then keep your credibility. 

 

I think there is a real — and I’ve said this before and I think it 

probably was my response to the Throne Speech — a real 

contempt for democracy. I think people in the Sask Party 

believe that the public doesn’t need to know, doesn’t have to 

know, and certainly they don’t think they should be told 

everything. They think that everything should go as they predict 

or want. It’s like the Premier is Harper light or mini-Harper. I 

know Mr. Harper, the Prime Minister, doesn’t like to talk to 

people, doesn’t like to tell people things. I don’t think that this 

government does either. 

 

And I just look back at the electoral officer fiasco, and here we 

are in another one with Bill 160. We’re in another one with ID 

[identification], photo ID for elections. It just is a pattern that, I 

think, people really will get quite soon. I mean, it is only three 

and a half years and I think people are already seeing the cracks 

in this government and the things that they really don’t like. 

And I know that they’re riding high . . . The Sask Party 

members are riding high on polls, and I like to see them up on 

their high horse because it’s a long fall down and we’re all 

looking forward to that. 

 

I think that when the member from Cannington talked to the 

community in Wawota about highways or health, I think that’s 

a community, Wawota is a community that’s really indicative 

of how people are really angry about a decision. And again, my 

comment about the minister just milking every single ounce of 

bad feeling they possibly could get out of a community of 

Wawota — $110,000 to keep those beds open. And yet all these 

expenditures we hear, frivolous expenditures in the regional 

college, in other places that we see, it doesn’t really matter. 

That money can be spent. But in Wawota $110,000 could not 

be found to keep five beds open in long-term care. There were 

sad stories at the community meetings I’ve been at about 

seniors who had to leave their family and their communities, 

very sad stories, and it was over $110,000. 

 

And the Sun Country Health District has been shown to be 

extremely inept, and yet the minister keeps them, and nobody 

can understand why they’re still there. The Provincial Auditor 

has pointed out problems. The chief financial officer had to be 

fired. The CEO had to be fired, but the board remains. And the 

minister has the authority to take that board out. They were 

appointed by the minister in order in council. They serve at the 

pleasure of the minister, and the minister has the authority to 

dissolve the board. 

 

And certainly there has been every indication that this board 

needs to be dissolved. It has lost the confidence of the 

community. Every meeting I’ve been to, and now it’s been over 

1,000 people in town hall meetings that just continue, continue 

to say that. They have lost their confidence in the board. 

They’re certainly saying now they’ve lost their confidence in 

the minister. They’ve said publicly they’ve lost their confidence 

in their MLAs. And I think that they understand now that the 

final decision is the minister’s and the Premier’s. They’re not 

blaming the health board, but the health board has proven to be 

inept. They’re not competent to deal with the problems that 

they have, and the minister needs to step in and fix that. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Other communities are watching the Wawota issue and are 

saying, you know, we don’t care for some of the decisions that 

are made in our area too. And Wawota, I think, is empowering 

people which I think the minister . . . I don’t think the minister 

really intended that to happen. But it’s an example of how 

people in communities can determine their own fate and how 

they really do not tolerate being used this way, spoken to this 

way — not listened to, not paid attention to, and basically their 

health needs, with five long-term care beds, totally disregarded. 

 

I know the last town hall meeting I was at, a doctor from 

Moosomin was speaking, and he talked about the impact on the 

Moosomin Hospital with the closure of the five beds in 

Wawota. He also talked about the impact in Broadview which 



6958 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

is another health district. So there are consequences to decisions 

that are taken, and those consequences are not . . . I mean, I 

don’t see how the minister or this government ever looks at 

cause and effect. And Wawota is a really good example of 

totally ignoring what will happen if you do certain things and 

then digging your heels in and absolutely refusing to admit a 

mistake was made and to make amends in the community. 

 

And that’s the same attitude that is at the bargaining table. It’s 

the same attitude that’s there with the doctors and Health 

Sciences and all these . . . And people do not like to be treated 

that way. It does remind me of the federal government and Mr. 

Harper. And I think it’s, well it’s a pretty sad . . . It’s a very, 

very sad substitute for that sort of strength. But the Premier’s 

trying and his ministers are trying too. But I don’t think people 

really like being treated that way. 

 

And I don’t understand why the government would want to see 

that for such a small amount of money to fix some of these 

things. We’re a big . . . I mean $5.1 million for beer and nothing 

for Wawota? I think people are . . . they can connect the dots. 

And there’s nothing for housing. Five-point something for beer 

and less for housing. I don’t think people really like that. And I 

think the Sask Party has misjudged this something for 

everybody. Because there’s a long list that I’ve mentioned, that 

there’s people that aren’t getting the boom in this, people who 

do understand there’s nothing in this budget. 

 

I haven’t even talked about . . . I heard somebody talking about 

the STARS and the helicopter. We have not got our road 

ambulance system up and running properly. The government, 

under the NDP, commissioned a study. Then the Sask Party 

commissioned a study. All those recommendations, none of 

them have been funded and implemented. And that’s the Sask 

Party’s own study. Neither one of those studies recommended a 

helicopter. So I can only think that the helicopter is to put some 

glitzy photo op out there because the $5 million isn’t even 

going to get you a helicopter. And by all accounts, it’s $17 

million to run a helicopter every year. And we don’t have road 

ambulance, and road ambulance is a connector to if you do 

have a helicopter. So I’m telling people, don’t be lulled into 

thinking that a helicopter’s going to save your services in rural 

Saskatchewan. You need a road ambulance system, and two 

reports have said so. So I can only imagine that the STARS 

announcement is basically to get a good photo op.  

 

And it’s interesting when you talk about the STAR system in 

Alberta, the money that they raise to run that, the public or the 

foundation part that isn’t funded by the government is raised in 

fundraisers like our hospital foundations do. So the hospital 

foundations in Saskatchewan are quite upset that there is going 

to be another ask for public money or corporation money, and 

they have not been consulted. And they have actually talked to 

me. Nobody has spoken to them about what this means to their 

ability to raise money in their hospital foundations. So that has 

certainly not been mentioned at all in any STARS talk.  

 

And I do think that people do understand that this is just an 

announcement to make it look good in rural Saskatchewan and 

make some sort of feel-good band-aid go on there. Because if 

you don’t have the road ambulance fixed, it isn’t going to help 

to put a helicopter in. And both reports that were commissioned 

by both governments, ours and now theirs, say exactly the same 

thing. So I don’t think people in rural Saskatchewan are going 

to buy that either. They understand they need an ambulance in 

Neilburg. They need an ambulance in Cudworth. They need an 

ambulance in Lestock. They need one around Wakaw. They 

need their hospitals open. They need them open in Leader and 

Wakaw and Big River and Spiritwood. They understand that. 

And I don’t think telling people that they’re going to get a 

helicopter for $17 million a year is going to do it. It certainly 

wasn’t the talk around town when we were out and about last 

summer and fall. 

 

And I know that there are so many other things in the budget. I 

mean, I focused on health because health is sort of my focus. 

But there are so many other things that are missing in the 

budget — talk about a potash review, a royalty review, those 

sorts of things that are scoffed at by the Sask Party. People in 

Saskatchewan think that that’s fair, a royalty review. One penny 

more, and people think, okay, you know, we should look at this. 

We haven’t looked at it for 10 years. What’s wrong with that?  

 

And to have their ideas categorized by the Premier as crazy, 

they don’t like that either. I think people want to be able to talk 

about things, and talk about them free from being labelled 

crazy. There’s lots of things people in this province came up 

with that came into the policy review of the New Democratic 

Party that weren’t from party members, that were from the 

general public, from organizations representing special interests 

of various parts of society that don’t have a tie to the party. And 

they wanted to think that their ideas would make a difference. 

They didn’t think that they were crazy at all. But they certainly 

don’t like to see the Premier or hear the Premier call them 

crazy. 

 

And I know that when we were out in many of the places that 

we visited, people were certainly not happy. They were really 

excited about us coming. They thought that they had . . . They 

were telling us that they don’t get a lot of attention. So it made 

me wonder about . . . Most of the places we visited were 

represented by Sask Party MLAs. And it was pretty much taken 

for granted, I think, that the vote out there is theirs.  

 

Because there are these irritants going on out there that this 

budget is not going to address because . . . I listed a whole 

bunch of people that the boom is not for and that there isn’t a 

congratulatory pat on the back for the Minister of Finance for. 

Those people — and there’s a lot of them; this covers a lot of 

people that are not being affected positively by this budget — 

those people get to vote in November, and those people are 

watching. And they understand this is an election budget, but it 

didn’t buy their vote. It might have bought somebody’s, but it 

isn’t going to buy theirs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly, I could have talked about many 

other things. My focus was pretty narrow talking about health, 

but we will have lots of other opportunity to talk about 

especially things in the health budget in estimates, which I look 

forward to. And I will not be voting for the main motion. I will 

be supporting the amendment of the minister, the critic for 

Finance. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6959 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to stand today this evening and speak 

on the budget. And that was a fun budget, Mr. Speaker. Last 

Wednesday was a fun day to be able to hear all the good things 

that came through. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, first thing I would like to do is, is I would be 

in remiss if I didn’t take time to mention my wife, Terry. You 

know she has to manage our household affairs without me 

being around for most of the time, especially, especially, Mr. 

Speaker, this past month as we’ve seen a large amount of snow. 

Now Terry refuses to use a snow blower. Instead she uses a 

shovel. But on the bright side, Mr. Speaker, she’s staying in 

pretty good shape. Of course I have cautioned her not to 

overexert herself, dress properly, and don’t go longer than 20 

minutes, etc, and I’m sure she’s grateful for my helpful advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my CAs [constituency 

assistant] for their diligent work. Shelley, Cindy and Charlene 

do an excellent job of running the office. Although, Mr. 

Speaker, I have to say our office is being rather quiet as of late. 

I take that to mean that most of our constituents agrees with or 

feels that this government is moving in the right direction. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, I think our constituency . . . the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 

thank my constituents for giving me the responsibility and 

opportunity to represent them for the past three and a half years. 

It has indeed been a privilege, and I hope to renew my contract 

on November the 7th. 

 

And speaking of November the 7th, Mr. Speaker, we all know 

that there’s going to be an election at that time. We also know 

that the Saskatchewan Party will come out with a platform with 

what we intend to do if the people of Saskatchewan will extend 

our mandate. But we’ll be campaigning differently this time. 

We’re going to go on our record. If you like the new 

Saskatchewan, if you like prosperity and growth, if you like 

your children and grandchildren working in their home 

province, if you like better roads, if you like lower taxes, if you 

like more doctors, nurses, and shorter wait times, if you like to 

live in a have province that you can go elsewhere and brag 

about, then I think the Saskatchewan Party is the choice. 

 

You know, if you kind of like the old way, if you really don’t 

like to manage your affairs, want Big Brother to tell what’s best 

for you, if you don’t care about the roads because you don’t 

travel too far and your kids live too far away to come and visit 

very often, if you don’t care about health care because you’re 

going to die sometime anyway, if you feel in your heart 

capitalism and profit are the root of all evil, well then I think 

you might want to consider voting for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this indeed has been a great budget for the 

people of Saskatchewan. It basically covers all people in the 

province, and I commend the Finance minister for doing an 

outstanding job on his first kick at the cat. I’m sorry for any 

feline lovers out in the audience, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few of the items from the budget. Fulfilling 

commitments on education property tax reductions. Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers of Carrot River Valley are elated. This 

was talked about for years by the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] and the NDP. But you know 

something? They just never got around to it. This government 

did. 

 

Also the municipal revenue sharing. This gives our towns, 

cities, and RMs a stable income and takes away the uncertainty 

and ad hoc payments of the previous administration. This, Mr. 

Speaker, is a Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also is about lowering taxes. Just this 

weekend, I had a glowing response from a smal-business 

owner. This tax is being cut from four and a half per cent to 2 

per cent — more than half, Mr. Speaker. As my constituent and 

former, and former NDP supporter said, this is huge. He sees 

the Saskatchewan advantage, and I know which party he will 

support next time. 

 

Another one is the personal income tax. Just think, Mr. 

Speaker, we went from being one of the highest taxed 

jurisdictions in the country to being the lowest. A family of four 

will pay no income tax on the first $45,550. The highest income 

threshold in Canada. Another Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that really stick out is the money 

spent on our roads. We promised in 2007 to invest up to $1.8 

billion in our roads and highways. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have 

surpassed that to the tune, with this budget, of $2.2 billion. This 

is not just noticed by our own residents, Mr. Speaker, but by the 

people coming here from other jurisdictions. Saskatchewan 

highways used to be the laughingstock of Canada. Now the 

people from Alberta that are moving back here are saying these 

highways are better than the ones over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Carrot River Valley alone, rebuilds are on Highway No. 35 

south of Tisdale, Highway 55 to P.A., plus between Nipawin 

and Carrot River, Highway 23 south of Carrot River, Highway 

3 to Hudson Bay. This can only be achieved with a strong 

budget and a strong government with a strong vision and a 

forward-thinking government. The Saskatchewan advantage, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, how does this happen? How does 

the Saskatchewan Party keep moving forward? Prudency. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Now I would like to talk a little bit about forestry because it’s 

rather important up in our constituency. We have various 

different Bills up there. And on November 4th the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote said, and I quote, “The Premier 

had no plan for forestry; it went in the tank.” Now, Mr. 

Speaker, under whose watch did the forestry go into the tank? It 

wasn’t under ours. It happened previous to the Saskatchewan 

Party being in power. Maybe it was those high taxes that drove 

that forest industry out of Saskatchewan, although let’s face it, 

the forest economy was not in the world’s greatest shape at that 

time. 

 

But when you go back and you think of it, how do we manage 

to run a good budget? We didn’t go out there handing out 

taxpayers’ money to the forestry operations, we let them make 

their decisions on what should be done. A very good example 

of this is the recent announcement with Paper Excellence in 

Prince Albert. Now Paper Excellence is going to buy that mill 

in Prince Albert and get it running again. And this is a great 

thing for Prince Albert, but it’s also a great thing for all of 



6960 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

Saskatchewan because the people there and the company there 

will be working and paying taxes. We also said we would let 

them in on cogeneration. This is a good thing. This is 

something the previous administration wouldn’t do. 

 

Now let’s go back over into Carrot River Valley constituency 

and see how this is going to help them. Now the first mill to 

start up was the strand board plant owned by Weyerhaeuser in 

Hudson Bay. Now that plant has already started and it is 

moving as we speak. On July the 4th, Edgewood lumber is 

starting up the stud mill in Carrot River. Now that plant will be 

sending chips over to that mill in Hudson Bay . . . or excuse me, 

in Prince Albert. Before that, they would have had to send their 

chips either to Meadow Lake or up to Tolko. We didn’t put any 

money into that. Prudent budgeting. 

 

They also plan on, Edgewood also plans on starting their 

plywood mill in Hudson Bay on November the 1st. These are 

all planned start-up dates and they say that they are firm dates. 

 

We didn’t put any money into there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

let those companies make their decisions on their own so that 

they could put money in and run and operate as they saw fit. 

 

This is a new Saskatchewan budget. This is a Saskatchewan 

that’s leading the country in economic growth, the 

Saskatchewan that is in either first or second place in every 

category — be it housing starts, employment, tax reduction, 

in-migration — you name it. This is the new Saskatchewan, not 

the old Saskatchewan under the NDP. This is a progressive, 

energetic, invigorating Saskatchewan led by the most popular 

premier in the country. That’s our new Saskatchewan. 

 

Now with our new budget, Saskatchewan now has the lowest 

personal income tax in all of Canada. And not only that, this 

budget lowered property tax for homeowners, farmers, 

businesses. How do we do that, Mr. Speaker? The 

Saskatchewan Party is different than the NDP, a lot different. 

Believe it or not, we actually embrace profit. We like to see 

people and their businesses, their farms, and the labourers move 

ahead, have a vision for the future, Mr. Speaker. When this 

happens, you have a self-sustaining economic stimulus plan that 

keeps on giving. 

 

The Saskatchewan motto is “from many peoples, strength”. 

And this administration, contrary to the previous one, believes 

in that model. When we have more people in businesses, we 

have a larger tax base to fix our roads; to maintain our 

hospitals; to improve our education; and let us never forget, to 

assist and help the vulnerable, needy, and disadvantaged. 

 

There is a lot of money in this budget put into health care. Our 

health care is being drastically improved within this province. 

And I’ll talk about Carrot River Valley again, Mr. Speaker: two 

more beds for dialysis in Tisdale; a 54 per cent increase in 

physicians in Nipawin, including a paediatrician; increasing the 

training for physicians and residencies at the U of S, which was 

just about shut down under the previous administration; 

increasing nurse training; the recruitment of 850 nurses since 

the last election — something that that side of the House said 

never could be done. They never did want to try it because they 

said, why would you ever set a goal if you didn’t think you 

could achieve it? This government believes in achieving. 

Mind you, there was a lot of things they said that this province 

could never do. We could never sustain more than a million 

people. Well now what are we at — 1,052,000 and climbing? 

The largest population in this province, or the largest 

population this province has ever had. 

 

Even the student population has gone up, Mr. Speaker, for the 

first time in 17 years. And this is really great because my 

daughter is just finishing off her education degree this spring. 

That means that my daughter, contrary to what it used to be 

when they had to move to other provinces, will actually be 

working, actually be working in this province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great thing to be a have 

province. I never want to go back to being a have-not province. 

You know this is a new Saskatchewan. It’s not the old 

Saskatchewan under the NDP. It’s a progressive, energetic, 

invigorating Saskatchewan. I guess I’ve already said that one 

before, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll continue on. Yes, it actually sounds 

pretty good. We could say that again. Like I mean, the most 

popular Premier. Our Premier has a popularity count that is far 

above the Leader of the Opposition. The fact is the Leader of 

the Opposition I don’t even think gets up as high as his, as his 

other side there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the NDP will try as hard as they 

can to spin this as a poor budget. I said it before, and I’ll say it 

again: they need a new washing machine. The one that they 

have is unbalanced. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s either the machine 

or them or perhaps both. Since we’ve been in government, the 

debt has been lowered $3 billion — $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

How do you spin that as bad? Mr. Speaker, they’re out of 

balance so badly that they’re bouncing across the laundry room 

floor, so out of balance that they think the way to go is to make 

us be a have-not province. At least that’s the way I take it, if 

you want to go back to equalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is a testament to the strong, steady, 

cautious movement forward of the Saskatchewan Party 

government. I think, I think I can relate the differences to a 

tragic event way back in 1912. Mr. Speaker, everyone here 

knows the story of the Titanic and its demise. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, there are similarities, there are similarities with this 

event and the NDP and also with the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

As the captain of the NDP moves full steam ahead with reckless 

abandon on his job-killing royalty reassessment of both potash, 

uranium, oil, so did Captain Smith steam full speed ahead into a 

known ice field. Now, Mr. Speaker, neither of these captains 

gave much thought to what their actions might be, what 

devastating results could occur. Well, Mr. Speaker, we know 

what happened to the Titanic. It ran into an iceberg, split in two, 

and sank into the abyss with a tremendous loss of life and 

opportunity, never to rise again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what is happening to the NDP with 

their dear leader. He moves forward without thinking of the 

consequences of his actions, without thinking of the people of 

Saskatchewan, never wanting to see job growth, population 

increases, or prosperity. Their leader has but one agenda, and 

that is due to fail because not only do the good people of 

Saskatchewan see through him, but even some of his own party 

also. Remember, the Titanic split in two before sinking.  



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6961 

This, Mr. Speaker, is not the end of the story. We know that the 

good ship . . . [inaudible] . . . came to the rescue of the Titanic. 

Now the . . . Excuse me, I said that wrong, it’s the Carpathia. 

 

Now the Carpathia is similar to the Saskatchewan Party. 

Captain Rostron was a brave but cautious man, similar to our 

Premier. He heeded the ice warnings. He knew what the 

consequences could be. But when it came time for rescue, the 

good captain came through with valiant effort, saved a number 

of the Titanic passengers. This relates to the Saskatchewan 

Party. We have a captain and crew that is cautious but steady 

and strong. This is a party that will deliver the Saskatchewan 

people safely to port no matter the consequences. Mr. Speaker, 

this is a Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about some of the other 

things that . . . As we all know, the NDP had their meeting this 

past weekend, their grandiose meeting, and they had 

somewhere around 300 promises in their policy document. We 

don’t know what all of them were but, you know, adding them 

up, adding them up — and this was something that was never 

done while they were there — when you add it up, it comes to 

about $1.5 billion a year. 

 

Now really the only way you’re going to do it, see . . . And I 

can see the member of the opposition shaking his head, shaking 

his head over there. Well the reason was he didn’t add it up, so 

he doesn’t know. The only way that they can get that money is 

by raising taxes just like the Leader of the Opposition did 17 

times back when he was in government. You know, they want 

to go out there and review all the royalty structure. They want 

to review it on potash. They want to review it on uranium. They 

want to review it on oil. 

 

You want to talk about a job-killing monster, and I say 

uranium, you know, and they don’t even have uranium in 

Mississippi. But I just thought I’d throw that in. 

 

But, you know, what is said in Missinipi to the Missinipi 

Broadcasting Corporation and what is actually said to the other 

people down south is a little different. There they say, well no, 

no, no, we won’t we won’t touch the uranium royalties. But 

down here, right on their own television ads it says, yes, we 

will go after the uranium royalties — a job-killing monster. But 

if you start adding some of this up . . . 

 

I’ve got one more thing to say, Mr. Speaker. They, you know, 

they talk about not raising taxes. The former Finance minister 

Harry Van Mulligen said after the 2003 election, the NDP 

doesn’t like to talk about tax hikes, doesn’t like to talk about tax 

hikes at election time. Then their very next budget, what did 

they do? They raised the PST. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

talking out of both sides of your mouth. 

 

[21:15] 

 

You’re going to come out and you’re going to have all these 

different policies, and I think what we can do is we can just add 

some of them up. Now these are just kind of figuring out a few 

costs of what it would come to per year. Now to reinstate 

chiropractic care, the annual cost, 10.5 million; allow autism to 

be covered under individualized funding program, that would 

cost approximately 63 million; universal free tuition, Mr. 

Speaker, another 200 million. Adopting the NDP greenhouse 

gas immersion targets, cost per year to SaskPower to phase out 

the coal fire plants, the power plants, unless CCS [carbon 

capture and storage] technology is used, that’s another $70 

million a year. Two plants that would need a retrofit on the 

power end of it total $2.5 billion over five years — that’s $500 

million a year. Universal child care, $93 million per year; 

providing CVA [central vehicle agency] vehicles to CBOs 

[community-based organization], $16.5 million a year plus 

initial capital costs of 36 million not included in the annual 

total; lowest cost utility bundle, $94 million per year; resource 

revenue sharing with First Nations, 1 per cent of PST, $246 

billion per year; spot loss hail coverage, $70 million per year; 

the housing program, $100 million per year annual cost. And 

this is just a partial cost only — $1.463 billion per year. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, this has gotten to the 

stage of almost being ridiculous. And you’re going to do that 

without raising any taxes? No. What you’re going to do is 

you’re going to go back on the resource taxes. You’re going to 

kill the population of Saskatchewan. You’re going to start 

sending people back over to Alberta, back over . . . out to BC 

[British Columbia], heaven forbid, Ontario, or maybe even 

worse, Quebec. Like, Mr. Speaker, this is not the way to go. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, this budget that we had was a great 

budget. It was a strong budget. It was a steady budget. Best in 

Canada. Probably, probably, Mr. Speaker, the best in North 

America. And there is that strong possibility, Mr. Speaker, it 

could be the best in the whole world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to speak to this budget. It’s 

been a pleasure to work with the people on this side, to work 

with the Finance minister, our second Finance minister who has 

done an absolutely admiral job of running this province, putting 

money where the money should be, putting money into the 

hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the amendment and I definitely 

will be supporting the budget. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

you know, we’re certainly fortunate to live in a country like 

Canada and especially in the province of Saskatchewan, 

especially when you see some of the devastation that’s going 

around in the world. Our hearts and our prayers go out to the 

people of Japan for the devastation they’re facing, besides the 

unrest throughout the Middle East, the uprising in Yemen, the 

war in Afghanistan, and the war for freedom in Libya. So 

Saskatchewan’s a pretty nice place to be in, and Canada in 

particular. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about good things, and that’s 

really where the budget comes from, comes into, in 

Saskatchewan. It is a good budget — a budget for growth, a 

budget for the future, a budget for the people. We’re talking 

about a Saskatchewan Party government, and I’d like to 

congratulate the Minister of Finance for presenting that last 

week and all the staff and the hours that go into that. 

 



6962 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

And my friend from, my colleague from Thunder Creek went 

over some of the quotations, the endorsements from the budget 

presentation. I’d like to go through . . . I’ve picked out three 

that I thought were very, very good. Close to my heart is the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. And Steve McLellan 

from the Saskatchewan said: 

 

I like the fact that they have reduced some of the 

education property tax. I like the fact that small-business 

tax is going down. I like the fact that they have reduced 

the provincial debt somewhat and making sure that tuition 

isn’t going up much higher. I think those are all good 

news stories for Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s one from Marilyn Braun-Pollon of the CFIB [Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business]: 

 

Small-business owners like this budget on a number of 

fronts. One, that it’s balanced. The fact that we’re paying 

down debt and their cutting tax priorities is beginning to 

be addressed with the reduction of the small-business tax 

rates from 4.5 per cent to 2 per cent. 

 

And one that really sums it up just in a single sentence from 

Brett Fairbairn at the University of Saskatchewan says, “It’s a 

reminder how lucky we are to live in Saskatchewan.” 

 

This budget is really the best, no doubt about it, and the best in 

the last few decades. It’s a budget for the people to keep the 

progress of the province moving forward and growing. 

 

The budget is about being balanced. It’s tax cuts. It’s improving 

services, continuing to build on the brighter future of this 

province and for the people of this province. It’s about families. 

It’s about small business, health care, education, housing, child 

care, and agriculture. This is about growing the province, 

respecting the people, and, Mr. Speaker, doing what is right. It 

is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

This budget builds on the strength of Saskatchewan resources to 

the benefit of all the people — better quality of life, lower 

taxes, reduced debt, and a balanced budget. It is a 

Saskatchewan advantage. This is a very popular, a very positive 

budget and demonstrates how well Saskatchewan is doing 

compared with other provinces and other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason that I wanted to get into politics and be 

part of the government was on the belief that Saskatchewan 

could perform much better than it had been in past years. The 

oil, the gas, the potash — these resources have been 

Saskatchewan assets even before Saskatchewan was a province. 

And these last few decades while Alberta thrived on their 

resource development, Saskatchewan sat stagnated, sending a 

lot of our young people out of the province. But, Mr. Speaker, 

now is our time. Now is Saskatchewan time and this budget 

reflects it. 

 

Now, Saskatchewan encourages investment. We welcome 

people back. We welcome immigrants from all other parts of 

Canada and from corners of the world. Come and invest in 

Saskatchewan. There’s a proper return for residents with all 

these investments, and we want to make sure that those people 

that take the risk to invest are looked after as well. But we are 

building a province, creating more opportunities and less 

regulated restrictions. 

 

This budget takes us one more step to being a competitive 

advantage to live, to work, and to create wealth, to raise a 

family right here in the province. It’s a good, balanced budget, 

the fourth balanced budget of this Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

There’s even a surplus forecast, and by our own legislation half 

of that surplus goes to paying down debt. And paying down 

debt is good. When we took over government, the opposition 

claimed that there were $2 billion in the treasury. One has to 

ask, why didn’t they use it? What did they do with it? The 

infrastructure was run down. There was a huge provincial debt. 

There was no plan to improve, but they did nothing. They had 

no plan. They had no understanding of managing success. 

There was a huge debt in Saskatchewan — a financial debt, a 

human resources debt, and an infrastructure debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we increased, in fact we substantially increased 

funding to CBOs. We doubled the seniors supplement. We 

invested in highways and schools, health care facilities and 

personnel, with hiring 800 nurses to address the huge nursing 

shortage. And we paid down debt. This budget calls for a 

further $325 million to pay down debt. That’s almost 40 per 

cent, or over 40 per cent, in just four years. And of course by 

reducing debt you save on interest and those interest savings 

can be turned back into social programs and economic 

programs — a real Saskatchewan advantage. Less debt is a 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

With that, we also help cities and rural municipalities with 

substantial increases in their revenue sharing. During the first 

three years of the Saskatchewan Party government, there’s been 

more money provided to cities and rural municipalities. And in 

this budget this will increase to one full percentage point of the 

PST, an increase of $49.5 million from last year. That 

represents a 70 per cent increase over total revenue sharings 

from ’07 and ’08. And it’s important to realize the significance 

of the revenue sharing, that Saskatchewan residents understand 

that this major increase has helped every municipality in the 

province. 

 

In Moose Jaw we’ve seen a small mill rate increase this year. 

However that increase would have been in multiples if the 

revenue sharing had not been increased by our government. The 

mayor said Wednesday’s budget announcement brought with it 

much anticipated and appreciated increases — a total of $6 

million, Moose Jaw’s share of the provincial revenue sharing 

for the ’11-12 budget, which is a 29.5 per cent increase from 

last year. Revenue sharing to the city of Moose Jaw has more 

than doubled under our government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another significant tax reduction is the education 

property reduction that was started early in our government’s 

mandate. This Saskatchewan Advantage budget will further 

reduce property taxes, completing this government’s 

commitment to education property tax reform. Education is 

important and, without decreasing funding to education, we 

lifted the burden off property owners. Saskatchewan residents 

who own property, whether it’s a home in town, a farm, a 

ranch, a business, the education portion has been greatly 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6963 

reduced, putting more money back in the pocket of property 

owners. That’s the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Reducing the education property tax means that from 2008, 

residents in Moose Jaw, for example, saw average tax 

reductions before reassessment calculations of approximately 

$1,900 on a home assessed at $200,000 or $2,800 on a home 

assessed at $300,000. Lower taxes is another reason for people 

to consider making Saskatchewan their home. It’s another 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

And while changing the education property tax, education 

funding has still seen increases with our government. And this 

year an increase of 2.3 per cent will be designated to education. 

This budget also includes almost $20 million for capital 

projects including school capital, school-based child care, and 

pre-kindergarten capital funding. There is also, will also be an 

increase of 500 additional child care spaces. 

 

Saskatchewan people put in great effort to work to build their 

future and look after their families. This year the budget will 

increase the personal exemption level so they can keep more of 

that money themselves. Most Saskatchewan families with 

dependent children will earn more tax-free income here than if 

they lived anywhere else in Canada. And over 110,000 

residents will pay no provincial income tax at all, another 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

This budget continues to focusing on housing. The government 

will continue to support Saskatchewan people in need with 

significant investments in affordable housing. And this was 

announced earlier by the Social Services minister — a 

five-point action plan to add at least 4,600 new housing units 

over the next five years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Headstart on a Home, designed to stimulate construction of 

new, affordable homes. The affordable home ownership 

program, affordable home ownership program will see the 

provincial government match municipal tax incentives. The rent 

construction incentive, government will partner with 

municipalities to increase the supply of new rental housing 

construction. And 34 million investment in rental housing to 

develop more affordable rental housing and to rejuvenate 

government-funded housing across Saskatchewan, as well as 

partnership with the Habitat for Humanity partnerships 

throughout this province. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, housing is important, and we want to look after it. 

And the opposition is talking about rent controls, but what we 

don’t need is rent controls. What we do need is more housing, 

and this government is looking after the housing needs. Rent 

controls will inhibit construction for housing and property, 

rental property. But they don’t understand it. They don’t get it. 

It takes away the incentive to invest in housing, in construction. 

What we need is more housing, and that’s what this government 

is doing. 

 

And while we’re talking about policies that are coming from 

the opposite side, the review of royalties . . . And I want to 

quote. I want to quote a quote from a premier, a former premier 

of BC, Premier Bennett. It said, be careful what you say 

because the world is listening. He was talking to some union 

negotiations at the time and he said, be careful what you say 

because the world is listening. And this is so true in 

Saskatchewan here where millions of dollars are being invested 

in plans for Saskatchewan potash to expand mines, for new 

mines, hundreds of jobs to carry us long into the future with 

economic prosperity. 

 

With the rhetoric from the opposite side that says they want to 

review the royalties, this sets for an uneasiness with investors. 

Industry likes stability. They like to know the rules aren’t going 

to change halfway through the game. And Alberta found this 

out with their royalty reviews, where investment picked up and 

left, whereas we welcomed that. It wasn’t good for their 

economy, and we don’t want to get caught in that trap. Britain 

changed their royalties last week and already petroleum 

companies are planning significant investment changes. 

 

When we talk about royalties, Saskatchewan potash has the 

highest royalty rates in the world at 22 per cent. The rhetoric we 

get from the other side says 5 per cent on a dollar. That’s not 

true, Mr. Speaker. Our royalties for Saskatchewan potash are 22 

per cent. The next closest is Jordan at 11 per cent and New 

Brunswick is six and a half per cent. So you see, Mr. Speaker, 

we are more than competitive in this province, and we’re a 

stable market for investors in potash. Be careful what you say 

because the world is listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about Ethiopia a little bit. Ethiopia 

is a small country, and it has significant amount of potash. In 

fact from the Ethiopian Review there’s a quote that says, 

“China’s $300 billion sovereign wealth fund may finance China 

Mining United Fund’s plan to develop a potash project in 

Ethiopia . . .” The thing about Ethiopia potash, that it is close to 

the surface. It’s almost to a point that it could be strip-mined 

rather than solution-mined. It would be much less cost to 

produce it. And if you look at a map and find out where 

Ethiopia is, it’s a lot closer to China and to India, which is some 

of the major buyers of potash. Should we fool around with the 

royalties here, the investment could go to places like Ethiopia, 

and that would be devastating. 

 

This is serious stuff. Any change to royalties at this time would 

only lead to economic disaster. It would result in less revenue 

to drive our economy and to drive our programs, to increase our 

investment in infrastructure, to assist social programs, and it 

would lead this province back into a have-not status. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is expected to lead the country in 

economic growth. Our population continues to grow and our 

employment picture is very bright. Both the national economy 

and the global markets of our commodities are creating greater 

prosperity for all of our citizens. It means more money 

available to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people — building 

hospitals and building schools and highways and other 

infrastructure. 

 

Saskatchewan is blessed with so many advantages: our 

abundant natural resources, our pristine environment, our sense 

of community, and our quality of life. And our greatest 

advantage is of course our people. All of these are part of our 

great Saskatchewan advantage. 

 



6964 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

This budget is built on that advantage to create a better quality 

of life and more opportunities for all our citizens, improving 

public service for the people of Saskatchewan. It cuts taxes, 

both personal income tax and small business tax, as well as 

property tax. It pays down debt — $325 million for a $3 billion 

paydown in our debt since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health continues to be a priority of this 

government. The regional health authorities have an increase of 

9.7 per cent in funding this year. We continue to work on wait 

lists.  

 

And I want to tell you about a constituent of mine that stopped 

me just last week. And he said, I want to tell you a story about a 

heart valve that he had to have replaced. And his doctor says, 

it’s not urgent, but we should have it looked at. He sent him to 

the specialist. The specialist said, yes it’s not urgent, but we 

should do it probably sooner rather than later. When are you 

available? And Mike Barton was the constituent’s name, and he 

says, well I’m available any time. He says, well can you be here 

tomorrow morning? And he says, well no, I can’t be here that 

quick. Can we do it next week? But it just goes to show you the 

work on the waiting lists and especially in the cardiac area. 

 

The STARS program, the helicopter air ambulance is another 

health advancement that we’ve made in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I should while I’m on my feet, I want to talk 

a little bit about the biggest project in Moose Jaw, the Moose 

Jaw Hospital. The 80/20 ratio of funding change was a 

significant benefit for Moose Jaw residents. We only have to 

come up with 20 per cent of the local money. The $450 capital 

planning from last year’s budget has been put well to use by the 

Five Hills Health Region. They’ve done their due diligence and 

have done a series of studies and have compiled a report on 

what the capital planning should be. That report is in its 

finishing stages and will be advanced to the ministry in the next 

short while. At that point, the ministry can and will make a 

decision on what the best plan for the Moose Jaw Union 

Hospital would be. 

 

Already this government has put $5 million toward the next 

plan, the design of what that addition will be to the Moose Jaw 

Hospital. So I appreciate the work that is being done by the 

Five Hills Health Region in moving this forward. The last 

major renovation to the Moose Jaw Hospital was in the ’70s, so 

that’s almost 50 years ago. And we want to take our time. We 

want to do it right because we only do this once. And I 

appreciate the efforts that are going to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province is strong. Saskatchewan continues to 

grow and our time has come. The budget day was a great day in 

Saskatchewan, yet it was quite noticeable that the members 

opposite sat with their heads down. And according to one of my 

guests that sat up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, he noticed the 

Leader of the Opposition sitting there with his head down. In 

fact his quote was, “Ninety per cent of the time he was playing 

on his BlackBerry.” They weren’t really interested in the doings 

of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a great budget. It’s for all of Saskatchewan 

citizens. It will keep Saskatchewan moving forward. It is our 

time. It’s a Saskatchewan advantage. Mr. Speaker, I support 

this budget fully, and I will not support the amendment. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it is truly a pleasure and an honour for me to have the 

privilege of entering into this particular debate, the debate on 

the budget speech on behalf of the fine folks of Regina 

Northeast who, Mr. Speaker, it has been my honour to represent 

them for a while here now in the legislature and going on nearly 

a dozen years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you are aware and I think perhaps all my 

colleagues and everyone in the constituency certainly are aware 

that I have indicated that I would not be standing for re-election 

in the upcoming election. And that, Mr. Speaker, you know, 

carries its own circumstances with it. And I’ll certainly deal 

with that to a much greater length and in much greater detail at 

some point in time in the future before we leave this great 

Assembly at the end of this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do though want to just briefly say thank you to 

my constituents who are honouring me the privilege of having 

the ability to represent them in this great Assembly on an 

ongoing basis. We all pay a certain price I suppose to get here, 

in one way or the other, and certainly nobody’s paid a bigger 

price in my involvement in politics and my time spent in this 

Assembly then has my family. So I want to say a very special 

thank you to my wife Carol and our daughters and our 

son-in-law for their support and their ongoing encouragement 

through the years and through the help that they gave me 

through the, you know, the low times as well as the high times. 

 

I also want to say a special thank you to my granddaughter 

Emma who has . . . I’ve had the privilege of introducing her in 

this Assembly, and I hope to once again before I’m no longer 

officially an MLA here. It’s something about becoming a 

grandparent and having grandchildren that sort of completes the 

cycle or the circle of life, and that’s certainly, Emma has done 

that for us in our family. 

 

I also want to say a special thank you to my constituency 

assistant Sylvia who has been with me virtually all of the time 

that I’ve been a member in this Assembly representing Regina 

Northeast. And for those who have had the stamina to stay with 

me that long, it takes a special kind of person to put up with me 

that long. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, it’s not easy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it truly is a pleasure and an honour and a 

privilege to be able to enter into this debate, the debate on the 

budget speech and to do so, like I said, on behalf of the good 

folks of Regina Northeast. 

 

And after the budget came down last Wednesday, I decided that 

what I’d like to do is to talk to some people in my constituency 

as well as to some people across this province as to the budget 

and as to how this budget may have impacted upon them. So as 

I was actually driving home on Thursday, I thought of a lady 

who has always been very, very open and very honest with me 

and a very fine person. 

 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6965 

So I was not too far from where she lives, so I swung in to that 

particular neighbourhood and went up and knocked on the door, 

only to my surprise to find out that she no longer lived there 

and that she had moved nearly seven or eight months ago. And 

so I had her phone number so I gave her call in that evening, 

and I had a discussion with her as to why she decided to leave 

that nice little house that she was in. 

 

It was an older house, Mr. Speaker, but it was well maintained. 

It was a nice little house and certainly suited her needs as a 

single mother with two children. I thought it was a good fit, and 

so did she. Mr. Speaker, she thought it was a nice house too. 

She’d been in there for a few years. She really liked the house. 

She was renting that house. But unfortunately the rent costs, the 

utility cost, the increase in utility cost put her into a bind where 

she had to make a decision, Mr. Speaker. She said it came down 

to making a decision between paying the rent or buying food 

for her children. So of course, Mr. Speaker, she made the 

decision to look for other accommodations — not as suitable 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but more affordable. And that was what 

drove her decision to move, was simply because her money was 

no longer stretching to be able to make all the bills, to pay the 

rent, and to be able to buy food for her children. So she made 

that decision, Mr. Speaker, that she was going to leave the nice 

little house that she’d been in for several years and move into a 

less desirable location, but one that she could certainly afford. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, then caused me to think of a couple who 

also live just outside of my riding, but a couple I’ve known for 

a number of years. I believe that they would probably be in 

their early 70s today. And I gave them a call because I know 

that they’re, you know, people who stay certainly up to date on 

the news and follow the goings-on in this province. And I 

would think that they would have a good idea of what was 

contained in the budget, particularly as it might apply to 

seniors. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So I was able to talk to them and to find out what was new in 

their life and how this budget may have impacted upon them. 

And it was an interesting conversation, Mr. Speaker, much, 

much longer conversation than I had thought it would be 

initially. It was a conversation because, longer because he was 

telling me that that was a house that they had lived in virtually 

all of their married life. They’d raised their family there. It was 

their home. They had looked after it. It was in good shape — 

been looked after, Mr. Speaker. They were proud of it. But they 

were experiencing difficulty being able to continue to pay the 

bills because they were on a fixed income. And what they were 

experiencing in the last few years was steadily increasing utility 

rates, increasing cost of living, increasing food prices, and 

finding themselves in the circumstances where they may have 

to move out of that house because they can no longer afford the 

cost of living in that home — in their home, Mr. Speaker, a 

home that’s been theirs for virtually all of their married life. 

 

That then, Mr. Speaker, made me think of another lady I knew 

who lived in an apartment building that used to be in my 

constituency. It’s just outside of, but I’ve known this lady and 

her late husband ever since I was, well a very young fellow. 

And so I gave her a call as to how she was doing. And that was 

another conversation, Mr. Speaker, that certainly surprised me 

because I had thought that she was doing fairly well, but only to 

find out that she was contemplating looking at other places to 

live because her rent had gone up so dramatically over the last 

four or five years. Add to that the increased cost of living over 

the last four or five years, and she was finding it difficult, Mr. 

Speaker, very difficult to make ends meet. 

 

The sadness here, Mr. Speaker, is she doesn’t have any 

immediate family in Regina. She doesn’t have any immediate 

family in the province. And she was wondering basically where 

she would be able to go to a location that she’d be able to afford 

and be able to yet continue to live in a level of dignity that I 

think she deserves after being a senior citizen who has worked 

their entire life, lived her entire life in this province, worked her 

entire life in this province, sacrificed to build Saskatchewan to 

what we have today, and now have to be worried about where 

she’s going to live in her golden years. Mr. Speaker, that is 

what has been some of the effects of this budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when talking to these folks, it’s easy to see 

that this budget simply failed many of the people in this great 

province of ours. This budget has certainly failed to address 

affordable housing. This budget has failed to address the ability 

for seniors, those people who have, particularly for seniors — 

those people who have worked in this province, lived in this 

province, dedicated themselves to this province, and in many 

cases when called upon, sacrificed for this province. It’s failed 

to be able to provide them an adequate support levels for their 

golden years, for the times that they should be able to retire and 

retire in dignity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of aspects in this budget that 

one could go into, and I’m certainly not going to go into them 

all tonight, but I do want to touch on a few topics. 

 

Another topic that has been brought to my attention has been 

certainly the topic of highways, highways particularly in the 

southern part of the province here as it pertains to our resort 

areas, lakes, and resort cottages. Those, Mr. Speaker, certainly 

those roads are in sad state of repair. In fact there was a poll, an 

unofficial poll on a website. I think it was mysask.com here 

most recently that indicated that 72 per cent of those who 

responded to that poll indicated that the highways to our lakes 

and to our resort areas were certainly in bad state of repairs. 

And they were urging the government to pay some attention to 

those roads because those are the roads are the arteries to much 

of our tourism — tourism from within this province and 

tourism from outside of the province — and yet, Mr. Speaker, 

they are not being looked after by this government and certainly 

are in a sad state of repairs. 

 

But when you talk about highways that are not being looked 

after, Mr. Speaker, you can’t help but think of northern 

Saskatchewan. Communities in northern Saskatchewan don’t 

have the luxury that many of the communities in southern 

Saskatchewan do, and that is having an all-weather road in all 

four directions from the community. In northern Saskatchewan, 

there’s one road — one road in and the same road out, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet this government has failed to address the 

issues of maintaining those roads in proper all-weather 

conditions, in proper safety conditions. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those people in northern Saskatchewan are 



6966 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2011 

the people who are the custodians of much of the resources that 

we enjoy in this great province and we extract from northern 

Saskatchewan without returning any of that revenue in a 

meaningful way to maintain the highways in northern 

Saskatchewan. The resources we extract from northern 

Saskatchewan such as uranium, such as gold, more recently 

diamonds and some of the richest diamond . . . I believe and 

I’ve been led to believe that some of the richest diamond fields 

are located in northern Saskatchewan, and they will yet be 

developed as time goes on. Rare earth minerals — another very 

rare mineral that has been certainly discovered in northern 

Saskatchewan will be developed there. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan offers a great deal of tourism and the 

opportunity for tourism, an opportunity to expand the tourism, 

particularly with sports fishing in the summer and hunting in 

the winter months and so on, Mr. Speaker. There’s a real wealth 

in northern Saskatchewan that is not being shared with the 

people in northern Saskatchewan through at least maintaining 

their road structure, their highway structure so that they would 

have decent and safe roads to travel on. After all, as I said, they 

only have that one road — one road in and one road out. They 

certainly are entitled to a decent all-weather road, one that they 

can rely on regardless of whether it’s wintertime or 

summertime, that they can drive on that road and that highway 

without fear, in safe and reasonable conditions and safe 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget, this budget has failed to provide the 

people of Saskatchewan the needed roads and highways that we 

need in a meaningful way. I know this government likes to brag 

about the amount of money that they have in the highways 

budget but, Mr. Speaker, they’re not spending it in a 

meaningful way that’s supporting the people who really, really 

need that, particularly in northern Saskatchewan where those 

roads, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’ve drove on them. And I would 

encourage all the members over there to drive on them if they 

think that it’s wonderful, to drive to Pelican Narrows, drive to 

Sandy Bay and see what that road is like. And I would advise 

you not to do it around 4 o’clock or 5 o’clock in the afternoon 

when the sun is going down because you simply are going to 

run off the road because it’s a very dangerous stretch of road, 

Mr. Speaker. And I drove on that road more than once, and I 

can assure you, Mr. Speaker, it is a dangerous stretch of road. 

And I believe that the stats of accidents, stats that you can get 

from SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] will back that 

up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Health care, health care is another issue, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government has certainly not been able to keep up its election 

commitments on. And these are various . . . Health care is a 

very broad and large field, Mr. Speaker, so I’m not going to go 

into them all. But there are some things that I think that we 

need to do as a province here and that this government’s 

certainly failed, and that is being able to provide for our seniors 

of this great province — the people, in many cases, who have 

lived here all their life, have worked here all their life, 

dedicated themselves to Saskatchewan, committed themselves 

to this great province, sacrificed for this province when they 

were asked to — and now they find themselves, Mr. Speaker, 

being let down by this province. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because we see that the funding for 

long-term care has certainly shrank in this province, most 

notably in certainly the Canora, Kamsack area there where most 

recently they announced the closure of 18 long-term care beds 

— 18 long-term care beds in Canora; I believe another five in 

Kamsack, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I find this really, 

really strange because in that part of the province we have twice 

the provincial average of senior citizen population. As I 

understand it, the senior citizen population of Saskatchewan is 

approximately 13 per cent, but in the Canora, Kamsack, 

Yorkton area it’s 26 per cent. Instead of opening up long-term 

care beds for the senior population in an area of the province 

that has twice the provincial average of seniors, what do we see 

happening? We see long-term care beds being closed by this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, doing that during a time that they have big money 

for the CEOs, chief executive officers . . . In fact they give their 

chief executive officers raises that are larger than some families 

live on for an entire year in this province. They do that, Mr. 

Speaker, but yet they have no money for health care workers, 

for the people who provide the health, the care, the services on 

a day-by-day basis, the front-line troops, the front-line workers. 

They have no money for them, but they have money for chief 

executive officers at a rate that is greater than some total family 

incomes in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this budget 

has certainly failed to provide the people of Saskatchewan 

much needed health care in their times of need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will just briefly touch on another subject that I 

think needs to be touched on, and that is certainly the subject of 

agriculture. Last fall, Mr. Speaker, we had a producer group 

down here that represented livestock producers. They were here 

to lobby the government and the minister for some meaningful 

help because as we all know, that last year was a very wet year 

and that there was . . . Certainly the grain producers had a very 

difficult time in getting their crop in, and in most cases with a 

little luck in October they were able to get most of it off. 

 

But livestock producers had found themselves in a real problem 

because they hadn’t been able to put up an adequate amount of 

feed to be able to meet their needs going into the winter 

months. Normally many of them would have kept their calves 

through, whether they be short keeps or kept them until they 

were finished. But, Mr. Speaker, they had to make a decision 

last fall because they didn’t have enough feed to feed their 

calves and their cows. They needed to buy more feed. They 

didn’t have the money of course to do it, so they sold their 

calves early, used that money to buy the feed. 

 

So after lobbying the government here to finally come up with 

some money in that direction, there were was an announcement 

made toward springtime by the provincial government to 

provide funds for a livestock feed program. But, Mr. Speaker, it 

was after the calves were sold. It was after the calves were sold 

in order to generate money to buy feed to maintain the main 

herd. So, Mr. Speaker, once again this government came up 

with a little bit too little and a lot too late. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see the same thing in crop insurance. We see 

crop insurance, recently announced by the minister, that there 

would be an increase in the crop insurance premium of 21 per 

cent. Yet I’ve had producers show me their recent crop 

insurance statement that indicates in their particular situation 



March 28, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6967 

their bill has increased by nearly 100 per cent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again this budget has failed the 

producers of Saskatchewan, the livestock producers of this 

province. It has failed the grain producers of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, it is truly . . . When you look around the various 

aspects of the provincial economy, and it is not hard to see that 

this budget has had a negative impact on much of the economy 

and much of the province. So with that, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

obvious to tell, I’m sure, that I will not be voting for the budget. 

I will be though voting for the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Thank you. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6943 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6944 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6947 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6950 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6952 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6955 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6959 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6961 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6964 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


