




















































Hansard: April 04, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 42A  MONDAY, APRIL 4, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7087 

 April 4, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Premier, I’d just ask 

members if, once the Premier’s made his introduction and a 

response from the opposition, if they would give the Speaker 

then the opportunity to introduce our SSTI [Saskatchewan 

Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 

Democracy] teachers. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

one of those special days here in the legislature as we have a 

number of very important guests, Mr. Speaker, including 

someone that I’m very pleased to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of this Assembly — Her Excellency 

Nouzha Chekrouni, ambassador of the Kingdom of Morocco in 

Canada. We’re welcoming her to this Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Her Excellency was born in the Kingdom of 

Morocco in 1955. She’s married with two daughters. From 

1998 to 2002, Her Excellency served as delegate minister 

responsible for women’s issues, family and childhood 

protection, and the integration of the disabled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that Her Excellency has been in the 

province on a number of occasions. And we welcome her visits 

because, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is Morocco’s largest 

trading partner both in exports and in imports as well. We do a 

lot of business. And more importantly, through that business 

there is obviously, Mr. Speaker, some mutual benefit to families 

that Her Excellency represents and families that we represent 

here in this Legislative Assembly.  

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan exports to Morocco consist almost 

entirely of agricultural commodities including wheat and 

pulses, mostly lentils and also a small amount of oilseeds. Mr. 

Speaker, our imports from Morocco also fluctuate, but our 

purchases include olive oil, Mr. Speaker, and air filters as well. 

And as we say, as I’ve pointed out already, it’s the largest 

trading partner, our province is with Morocco, not just in terms 

of our selling but also in terms of our importing of goods from 

Morocco. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ambassador is accompanied by Ms. Charlene 

Richmond, who we’d ask to stand as well, and Mr. Mohammed 

Meskaouni, minister-councillor in the embassy of the Kingdom 

of Morocco and Canada. Ms. Richmond is the newly appointed 

honorary consul of the Kingdom of Morocco in Saskatchewan. 

The ambassador and the Provincial Secretary announced the 

appointment of Ms. Richmond earlier today. She has, since 

graduating from the University of Saskatchewan with 

distinction in 1988, gained extensive legal experience at all 

levels of court, including appearing before the Supreme Court 

of Canada. She co-founded the Richmond Nychuk Law Office 

here in Regina and practices family and agricultural law there. 

 

We’re going to have a chance to meet a little bit later on in the 

day, and there’s a program for Her Excellency over the rest of 

the day as well. So we want to welcome them here to this 

Assembly. And we want to say in the name of this trading 

relationship, thank you. 

 

Asalaam Alaikum. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

Premier in welcoming the ambassador from the Kingdom of 

Morocco to our Legislative Assembly, Ambassador Chekrouni 

who is, I understand, doing a great job for the people of 

Morocco. Along with her, Ms. Richmond. I want to say 

congratulations to you as well as being the honorary consul here 

in Regina. 

 

But of course Morocco is very important to Saskatchewan 

because we have a lot of agricultural products that are 

exchanged. I think largely the exchange is to Saskatchewan’s 

favour because we sell a lot of farm products including durum 

and chickpeas and lentils and other things, into Morocco. 

 

I might also add that there’s another similarity. Morocco has a 

very, very large oil shale project, and I know that Morocco is 

looking around the world for someone to help develop that 

industry. And I know that the expertise we have in western 

Canada in the oil sands, both in Alberta and Saskatchewan, I 

think there may be a linkage there that we should be talking to 

Morocco about. So welcome to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure as well today to 

introduce a group that have joined us, a group of teachers who 

are here for the 13th annual Saskatchewan Teachers’ Institute 

on Parliamentary Democracy. The institute began on Saturday 

and will conclude on Wednesday. 

 

This group has already met with a number of people including 

members of the judiciary, the acting Chief Electoral Officer, 

and the Clerk. Earlier today they met with caucus staff from 

both sides of the House, the Sergeant-at-Arms, and House 

leaders. They’re scheduled to meet with caucus Chairs, caucus 

Whips, several MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], 

cabinet ministers, including the Minister of Education. 

 

And I’d like to introduce them individually now. And I’d ask 

that they wave as I introduce them by name: Mrs. Valerie 

Brooks, Bert Fox Community High School in Fort Qu’Appelle; 

Ms. Victoria Danyluk, U of R [University of Regina], Regina; 

Mr. Perry Enns, Sacred Heart High School in Yorkton; Mr. 

Geoffrey Haacke, Pierceland Central School; Mrs. Corinne 

Harcourt, Englefeld School; Mrs. Amy Jago, Waldeck 

Elementary and Junior High School; Mr. Jonas Kiedrowski, 

Public Legal Education Association of Saskatchewan, 

Saskatoon; Mr. Troy Koepke, Punnichy Community High 

School; Mr. Daniel Koskie, U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan], Saskatoon; Mrs. Michelle Lane, Osler School; 

Mr. Chad Lechner, Davison School, Melville; Mr. Matt Linner, 

Warman High School; Mrs. Kristine Neustaeter, Langenburg 

High School; Mr. Paul Orlowski, Faculty of Education, U of S, 

Saskatoon; Mr. Derek Paul, Warman High School; Ms. Fallon 



7088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2011 

Prince, Langenburg High School; Mrs. Jill Radwanski, James 

Hamblin School, Qu’Appelle; Ms. Amanda Schafhauser, 

Vanscoy School; Ms. Holly Stasiuk, Aberdeen Composite 

School; Mrs. Cherry Staszczak, Wynyard Composite High 

School; Mr. Armand Tetreault, Vickers School, Prince Albert; 

Mrs. Linda Varty, Harris-Tessier Central School in Harris; Mrs. 

Rhonda Watchel, Churchill Community High School in La 

Ronge; Mr. Darren Weinrauch, U of S, Saskatoon; and Mrs. 

Brenda Werner, Pilot Butte School in Pilot Butte. 

 

Also joining the teachers from the Ministry of Education, Mr. 

Brent Toles, and our coordinators: Ms. Maria Sparvier, 

Cowessess Community Educational Centre in Cowessess First 

Nation; Mr. Robert Jardine, Blaine Lake Composite School in 

Blaine Lake; and Mr. Paul Weiman, Holy Family School in 

North Battleford. 

 

I’d ask the members to join me in welcoming this group of 

educators from the province of Saskatchewan to their 

Legislative Assembly. I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you, it is my pleasure to introduce 

a couple of guests seated in your gallery. Joining us today is 

Robbie Scott. Robbie is the president of the Royal Caledonian 

Curling Club in Scotland. The Caledonian Curling Club is 

known worldwide as the mother club of curling. The 

Caledonian was formed in 1838 and received permission from 

Queen Victoria in 1843 to use the word royal in the title. 

 

Robbie is accompanied today by his lovely wife, Kathleen 

Scott. This is Kathleen’s second visit to Regina. She was here in 

1995 with 24 lovely Scottish lasses on a curling tour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina is proudly hosting the World Men’s 

Curling Championship, and I encourage everyone who has the 

opportunity to take in the fine curling. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

the members on both sides of this House to join me in 

extending a cordial welcome to our guest from Scotland. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with you in extending a welcome to the teachers who are here 

with us today. We often have school groups visit the legislature 

on an ongoing basis, but we know it’s a special time of year 

when the teachers make it to the legislature for the 

action-packed days that you have planned for them. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to say 

welcome. And I know I speak for many members on both sides 

when I say that I look forward to the chance to meet with you. I 

know we have a number of breakout groups or sessions planned 

to share a bit about the Legislative Assembly. So welcome here, 

and we look forward to more conversations over the next few 

days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 

want to join with you in welcoming the teachers that have 

joined us today and the organizers for the institute. We did have 

a chance to have a visit. I had a chance to have a visit with them 

this morning and a bit of a nickel tour of the Premier’s office. 

And it was worth every, every penny, I’m sure they would say. 

 

We did have a pretty good discussion about public policy in the 

province and the organization of government, but I know 

there’ll be many more chances to have a much more in-depth 

discussion that these teachers will have with members of this 

House. And we join with you in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the legislature, I’d like to introduce somebody seated in 

the west gallery. Larry Kowalchuk is the legal counsel for 

Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union in the province, 

a tireless worker for union rights. And I’d ask all of my 

colleagues to welcome him to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to introduce to you some relatives of mine 

joining us today. My Uncle Gary and Auntie Patti Harrison 

from Wakaw are in town as well as my Uncle Lyle and Auntie 

Val Thibault who are joining us from Quill Lake where Lyle’s 

the mayor, actually, of Quill Lake. Amongst other things, 

they’re here to watch the curling. So welcome to the legislature, 

and it’s good to see you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have guests 

in the gallery that I think are guests of probably both sides of 

the House. These people are tenants from two apartment blocks 

on Portnall Avenue. I think they’ve met with some of the 

members opposite and have met with myself and the Minister 

of Social Services as well as representatives from the Office of 

Residential Tenancies. 

 

We had discussions regarding rent increases, which I think all 

members would find difficult and unacceptable, as well as other 

issues regarding their tenancy. We would like to thank them 

very much for coming and sharing their concerns with us. And 

we’d also like to thank them for not just that issue but the other 

issues that they raised, which will probably be of some 

assistance to the government going forward. So I would like to 

ask all members to welcome them and join them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the 

minister in welcoming the renters from I believe it’s 3211 

Portnall Avenue in Regina. We have had discussions, as the 

minister has, about the rent increases that these individual 

families are facing that, as all of them readily admit, all the 

families in that particular apartment and many other hundreds 

of apartments in the province find it’s unsustainable. And I’m 



April 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7089 

sure we’ll be having further discussions. I just want to welcome 

them all to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 

great pleasure to introduce Jeff Stusek, president and CEO 

[chief executive officer] of Information Services Corporation. 

He’s joined with Charlene Gavel, the chief financial officer. 

And thank you very much for joining us today. Today we will 

be tabling ISC’s [Information Services Corporation] annual 

report. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue that over the past four 

years too many Saskatchewan tenants have faced surging rent 

increases that are simply making living in Saskatchewan 

unaffordable. And, Mr. Speaker, it also notes that a majority of 

Canadians now live in provinces with rent control guidelines 

including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and 

Prince Edward Island. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also points to the issue that rent-controlled 

Winnipeg generated more new rental units than Regina and 

Saskatoon from 2007 to 2009. And CMHC [Canada Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation] data shows that there are fewer than 

300 rental unit starts in Saskatchewan’s two largest cities 

combined. During that same period in rent-controlled 

Winnipeg, there were over 1,500 new rental units generated. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action to cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents from Buena 

Vista, Raymore, Fort Qu’Appelle, Lumsden, Regina, 

Saskatoon, Tantallon, Humboldt, Craven, Wapella, White City, 

North Battleford, Grenfell, Ituna, Fenwood, Melville, Langham, 

Aberdeen, Moose Jaw, Wolseley, Moosomin, Whitewood, and 

Balcarres. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions on behalf of people who want the government to 

know: 

 

That they ought to recognize the need for timely access to 

comprehensive and quality health care services for all 

communities within the province, including Wakaw and 

surrounding areas, and that the disruption of emergency 

services and in-patient services at Wakaw Hospital will 

not serve the needs of the residents in this community and 

surrounding area; and 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding area will also not serve the needs of the 

residents; and 

 

That the government realize that the utilization and value 

of the full range of professional skills offered by health 

care providers is promoted through the address of critical 

retention and recruitment issues and by ensuring safe 

staffing levels; and 

 

That such promotion can only be achieved through the 

commitment of adequate public funding to publicly 

administer publicly accessible health care. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

These signatures are from people from Saskatoon, Domremy, 

Wakaw, Humboldt, St. Benedict, Yellow Creek, St. Louis, 

Cudworth, Lang, Belle Plaine, Yorkton, Langham, and 

Aberdeen. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that Saskatchewan’s 

income gap between the rich and the poor continues to grow, 

and now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in deepening 

poverty. We also know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And 

citizens living in poverty have long identified affordable 

solutions such as the national plan calling for dignity for all, 

and these plans have a lot of worth. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition from constituents who live in Hampton 

Village about the need for a new elementary school for their 

children. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 



7090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2011 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents in the neighbourhood of Hampton Village. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of a potash royalty review for the province 

of Saskatchewan. The petition is being circulated because 

Saskatchewan has a 1,000-year supply of this strategic, 

world-class resource, but the owners of this potash, the people 

of Saskatchewan, deserve to maximize the potential of the 

resource; and that there is, according to a CEO of a potash 

company in Saskatchewan, a new norm for potash and the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And I’ll read the prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Cause the government to begin a comprehensive, 

transparent, and public review of Saskatchewan’s potash 

royalty system with a view to maximizing the return from 

this strategic resource for its owners, the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We wish to use these additional potash royalty resources 

for needed investment in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from the 

city of Saskatoon and the town of St. Louis. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition to restore funding equity to Regina 

Catholic Schools. Mr. Speaker, Regina Catholic Schools 

received $275 less per pupil than Regina Public Schools, 

amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total. That 

funding inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk. The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic 

school boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

with a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effect that the enactment of Bill 160 

would have on human rights law in the province. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Moose Jaw, Regina, 

Lebret, Lipton, Balgonie, Balcarres, Brownlee, Eatonia, 

Kindersley, and Melville, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the fact 

that this government has run deficits and increased debt at times 

of historic highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker. In fact this year 

alone total public debt is increasing by $548 million, and total 

public debt has increased over the last three years by more than 

$1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker, set against a landscape of record 

highs and revenues. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 



April 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7091 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Lanigan, Wadena, Margo, Canora, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Autism Resource Centre Summer Program 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 2nd marked the 

fourth annual World Autism Awareness Day. World Autism 

Awareness Day promotes awareness about autism spectrum 

disorders throughout society. Our province is currently 

implementing its provincial strategy for autism spectrum 

disorder services. 6.5 million is being invested annually to 

improving services and supports for ASD [autism spectrum 

disorder]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with summer around the corner, I would like to 

highlight a therapeutic summer program that Regina’s Autism 

Resource Centre provides. The focus of the summer programs 

is to develop new skills and maintain already learned skills. 

Each participant has an individual planned program to follow 

throughout the day. IPPs [individual planned program] focus on 

communication skills, life skills, vocational skills, and overall 

independent skills. 

 

Our government has provided $100,000 this year to ARC’s 

[Autism Resource Centre] summer program. And what this 

funding means is that parent fees will decrease and ARC is now 

able to add two new summer programs — the senior summer 

program and the senior adventure camp — to increase capacity. 

 

In 2010 ARC had 105 participants. This summer they will have 

space for 120 participants. Promoting awareness and providing 

support to people with ASD takes place all year-round, and our 

government is committed to adding additional support. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Cancer 

Awareness Month in Canada, a time when we strive to raise 

awareness and funds to help combat this devastating disease. 

Every year the Canadian Cancer Society steps up its efforts to 

promote cancer awareness during the month of April, also 

known as daffodil month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this weekend, Mandi Schwartz, the 

Yale University hockey player from Wilcox whose battle 

against cancer made headlines over the past two years, passed 

on Sunday. Mandi, who was only 23, fought acute myeloid 

leukemia for more than two years and received a stem cell 

transplant in September. Although the transplant was at first 

thought to be successful, the leukemia returned. 

 

More than 4,200 people were added to donor registries in 

Canada and the United States as a result of Mandi’s situation. 

The people who worked so tirelessly on her behalf and for the 

benefit of all patients with her form of cancer have a fighting 

chance because of her example. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, I commend the Canadian 

Cancer Society and other organizations dedicated to the fight 

against cancer. As well we extend our sympathies to the 

Schwartz family and all other that continue to fight this terrible 

disease. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Business Builder Awards Ceremony 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 30th, the 

hon. members from Saskatoon Greystone, Saskatoon Southeast, 

Silver Springs, and Meadow Lake, and I had the privilege of 

attending the North Saskatoon Business Association 14th 

annual Business Builder Awards in Saskatoon. 

 

This annual event is an opportunity to celebrate the best and 

brightest of Saskatoon’s business community, many of whom 

are located in my constituency of Saskatoon Northwest. Some 

of this year’s winners include Jeremy Thompson of Sawyer’s 

Trees & Landscapes with a New Direction Award; Brent Banda 

of Banda Marketing Group, Member of the Year; Alex Miller 

and Tyler Mathies of Innovative Residential for the 

Teambuilding Award; and Barry Ghiglione of Handy Group of 

Companies who won the Shirley Ryan Lifetime Achievement 

Award, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That night began with inspiring words from Mr. Brett Wilson 

and Mayor Don Atchison, with both emphasizing the many 

positive impacts a successful business community has on both 

the city and the province as a whole. 

 

The year’s NSBA [North Saskatoon Business Association] 

Builder Awards also provide an opportunity for young 

entrepreneurs to showcase their talents and ideas. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to acknowledge Keith Moen and the NSBA board of 

directors for their hard work each and every year and 

congratulate them on another successful Business Builder 

Awards ceremonies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Aboriginal Family Services Benefit Gala 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday night 

I, along with the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley; MNS 

[Métis Nation of Saskatchewan] President Robert Doucette; 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Vice-chief 

Dutch Lerat; Senator Panna Merchant; and city councillor Fred 

Clipsham had the honour of attending the Aboriginal Family 

Services’ 15th anniversary benefit gala. The gala was a great 

way to celebrate and showcase 15 years of struggle and success 



7092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2011 

in providing services to urban Aboriginal families and children 

in the Regina and area since 1996. 

 

It was quite the night, Mr. Speaker, and things got under way 

with some fine drumming and singing from Piapot’s own 

Dancing Young Buffalo and with wise words of prayer and 

blessing from elder Kirby Littletent. Master of ceremonies 

Nelson Bird put in his usual excellent performance, and artistic 

guests Jason Chamakese, Andrea Menard, and Mike Keepness 

wowed us all. 

 

But of course the real stars of the show were people like North 

Central hero Claudette Alexson, who bravely told the crowd 

what a positive difference the Aboriginal Family Services had 

made in her life, in the lives of her children. And the gala itself 

was a wonderful opportunity for Delora Parisian and Lorna 

Blind and all the staff and supporters to tell an inspiring story of 

15 years of making a difference, going from one program and 

three staff to seven programs and 50 staff, and the joys and 

heartaches that come from administering the largest of 150 

Aboriginal head start programs in Canada. 

 

The story of Aboriginal Family Services is one of responding in 

a positive way to the terrible legacy of those who had set out to 

kill the Indian in the child. Delora Parisian and Aboriginal 

Family Services are building a new legacy, a legacy of healing 

and pride and self-sufficiency, one that takes up the challenge 

of Sitting Bull, Tatanka Iyotake, when he said, “Let us come 

together and see what we can do for the children.” Happy 

anniversary, Aboriginal Family Services. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Humboldt District Health Complex Opens 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to tell everyone about the celebration of the grand opening of 

the new Humboldt District Health Complex that took place this 

past Friday on April 1st. The opening of this new complex 

comes almost 100 years after the city’s first hospital began 

construction in 1911. 

 

And what a long way we’ve come, Mr. Speaker. This new 

facility houses both the Humboldt District Hospital and the 

Humboldt Community Services. The new hospital has the 

capacity for 34 in-patients with an additional four bed 

observation area and 10 day surgery spaces. There is increased 

capacity for resident and visiting surgeons, diagnostics, 

therapies, and cancer care. 

 

It was an exciting event, Mr. Speaker, to celebrate the grand 

opening, rather than just the erecting of yet another sign. The 

project was first announced by the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] in 1999 by the member for Saskatoon Nutana. This same 

project was announced again in 2005 by the member from 

Regina Lakeview. And then again it was announced in 2007 by 

the member for The Battlefords. It took the Saskatchewan Party 

government to actually commit the dollars to make this 

state-of-the-art facility in Humboldt a reality, although of 

course this complex would not have been possible without the 

hard work of the community. Local funding for construction 

was contributed by 29 municipalities, the Humboldt District 

Hospital Foundation, the Saskatoon Health Region. The 

completion of this project is just another way that our 

government continues to put patients first. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Cost of Living 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

families continue to face increasing difficulty in keeping up 

with the rising costs of living. Take basics like food, Mr. 

Speaker. About a month ago George Weston Inc., which 

produces bread products under a number of common household 

brands, announced it would be raising its prices by 5 per cent 

starting April 1st. Other companies like Maple Leaf are raising 

their prices too, and many family’s food budgets, already 

stretched tight, won’t be able to absorb the increases. Food bank 

visits could rise along with the prices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Things are no better when it comes to shelter. CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] reported last Friday that some 

tenants here in Regina are facing rent increases ranging from 63 

per cent to as high as 70 per cent. The only limit is six months 

advance notice. As one tenant told reporters, and I quote: 

 

Somebody can come in and give me a piece of paper that 

says in six months you have to drastically increase your 

earnings or you have to get out. And there’s nothing that 

can be done about it. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing that can be done 

about it is also the answer we’re getting from this government 

on issues like the rising cost of living and unaffordable housing, 

both of which were left out of the budget. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

answer that needs to change so we finally see some action to 

protect renters and families who are struggling to make ends 

meet here in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Opposition Statements 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Inaccurate 

statements are again coming from the NDP. The most recent 

disregard for factual information comes from two senior 

members of the NDP caucus who have been here long enough 

to know better. 

 

During budget debates on March 29th, in reference to our 

government’s housing initiatives, the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview seemed to think he was speaking on behalf of 

Saskatoon’s mayor and he said, and I quote, “. . . the mayor is 

not very happy . . .” Well, Mr. Speaker, we have talked to 

Mayor Atchison. He said that the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview does not speak on his behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if he has not already done so, the member for 

Fairview should retract these words and apologize for this 

absolutely inaccurate statement. 

 



April 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7093 

But not to be outdone, the member for Saskatoon Eastview 

claimed on March 29th in this House that there was a reopener 

provision in the Saskatchewan Medical Association’s contract. 

This statement was made after calling the SMA [Saskatchewan 

Medical Association] for clarification, who told her that there 

was no such provision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SMA has responded to the member with the 

following, and I quote, “I’m left to wonder why you bother to 

solicit information from the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 

as it would appear you don’t seem to accept it as being 

reliable.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s statements are so lacking in credibility 

that if they wish you good morning, you had better check your 

watch. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Response to Rent Increases 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as indicated during 

introduction of guests, we have a group of renters from 3211 

Portnall Avenue in Regina with us today. And the reason 

they’re here is because last week they were notified by the 

owner of the apartment they live in that rents would be going up 

August 1st anywhere from 63 per cent to 100 per cent on 

August 1st. Now, Mr. Speaker, these are not rents that have 

been frozen for a period of time. In fact the rent in this building 

has gone up 10 per cent per year for the last three years for a 

total of 30 per cent, and this new increase of 63 to 100 per cent 

comes on top of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up to this point the government has been saying 

that rents are going up at an appropriate rate and has failed to 

protect Saskatchewan families the way 80 per cent of Canadians 

have protection with rent control or a cap on their rent. Can the 

minister or the Premier explain to the people from 3211 Portnall 

why it’s okay for rent to go up an average of 75 per cent August 

1st for these families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not acceptable that that 

would happen to people renting in this province or anywhere 

else. Mr. Speaker, this is a very unfortunate anomaly that’s 

affecting the lives of people that have joined us today, who now 

face the prospect of the August 1st deadline as the Opposition 

Leader has pointed out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that, like the industry in the province, like the 

mayors in the province, like the major dailies in the province, 

we think a plan to overall increase the supply of student housing 

and new homes, as well as build new public housing and 

increase rental allowances, that’s the right broad strategy to 

pursue, Mr. Speaker. We don’t want to, we don’t want to inhibit 

supply in the long term, which would not help those in the 

gallery today or anyone else. 

 

However, there is a housing summit coming up, Mr. Speaker. I 

can tell you this government will be listening carefully to the 

partners in this housing summit. There may be options the 

government has with respect to the amount of notice that can be 

given and other measures that are possible to protect those who 

rent from what are obviously unacceptably high increases. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday I had the 

opportunity to meet with a woman, an elderly woman, 85 years 

old. Her name is Ann. And her rent is going from $625 to 

$1,100 per month. I know Moses, who’s with us here today, his 

rent is doubling or going up 100 per cent on August 1st. 

 

Ann has a situation where her income is $1,200 per month. She 

doesn’t have an opportunity to go get more income. Her income 

is fixed. She knows exactly within a dollar how much she 

spends on food, 125 a month, 625 for her rent, $30 a month for 

her alert, $100 for medical, pharmaceuticals, and so on and so 

forth. She said she can adjust her income $5 one way or the 

other and after that there is no room. And the other families 

who live in this apartment and many other thousands of 

apartments in the province are in the same position. 

 

Can the Premier tell us, not what he’s planning to do in terms of 

meetings, but what is he doing to put in a form of cap or rent 

control to protect these tens of thousands of families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these rent increases facing 

these folks in the gallery are unacceptable. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there are measures that may be possible. We want to work 

together in concert with partners who provide housing across 

this province to find out what’s possible. We need to point out, 

we need to point out for the debate that the average monthly 

increases in rent in Regina is 6.3 per cent and also in Saskatoon 

that the increase is 4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks, what is the government 

doing for those who are most vulnerable? For the first time in 

history, Mr. Speaker, this government has taken the steps to 

increase rental accommodation allowances and then index them 

to inflation. And, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in 16 years this 

government increased the seniors’ income tax . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

to allow the Premier to have the same opportunity to present his 

response without interference. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve doubled the plan for 

seniors, the income assistance plan for seniors that was 

neglected for 16 years. 114,000 fewer people are paying income 

tax in the province. This particular situation deserves the 

attention of government. Ministers met with the group. It’ll 

continue to get the attention of government. In the meantime, 

we’ll continue with a long-term housing policy that will 

actually increase the supply. That’s the long-term answer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



7094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2011 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a long-term plan for 

housing is very important, and the opposition couldn’t agree 

more that we need a plan for affordable housing in this province 

because for the last four years we haven’t seen a plan. But we 

need more than that in the interim for people like Ann who are 

85 years old. A long-term plan isn’t working real well for many 

of these families. 

 

The Rentalsman, when individuals from this apartment went to 

meet with them or were told by people who went to meet with 

the Rentalsman, is there’s absolutely nothing that can be done 

under the existing law — that these kind of increases of 100 per 

cent are absolutely legal and okay, and the Rentalsman can do 

nothing. 

 

There is someone who can fix this situation. That’s the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And what we need is a cap on 

rent through rent control, the way that 80 per cent of Canadians 

have that kind of protection. In Quebec, in Ontario, in 

Manitoba, in British Columbia they have protection. 

 

When will this Premier move to protect families in this 

province by a form of a cap and rent control to look after 

families and protect them from these kind of rent increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that our rent 

situation in our province is in a state of change. We’ve had 

some very significant shortage of space to have in our province. 

There’s been issues, but I can tell you that in the most recent 

survey by CMHC, the vacancy rate has increased from 1.9 per 

cent to 2.5 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, we are somewhat over the 

worst of the situation we’re at. 

 

Early on in our mandate, Mr. Speaker, we appointed the task 

force on affordable housing, which was Ted Merriman and Bob 

Pringle. Those gentlemen did a considerable amount of work. 

One of the recommendations that they had was to increase the 

notice period to offer a better period of transition and a cushion 

to tenants. That increased the notice period, Mr. Speaker, from 

some three months to six months. 

 

We are taking every step possible to ensure that we work with 

these tenants to provide adequate and appropriate solutions for 

them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Situation of Low-Income People 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know the unequal 

way prices for things like rent and food have been rising 

relative to wages and income is creating a horrible strain on 

many of Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable families. 

 

To the minister: this affordability gap is hitting families hard on 

the lower end to the wage scale, with low-wage earners forced 

to spend up to 70 per cent of their income just on housing and 

food. To the minister: when will this government take some 

steps, real steps, in addressing the challenges for these men and 

children? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an important question 

for the member opposite. And I’m sure that the members realize 

that everything we do in this government does address the 

issues for people that are in need. That’s why it’s taken 114,000 

people off the tax rolls and, with this budget, we’ve lowered 

utility costs and we’ve doubled low-income tax credits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every ministry looks at the people that are the 

weak, vulnerable and that we should be looking at for their 

support. Mr. Speaker, it’s an important issue for our people. 

We’ve indexed rental supplements and shelter aids five times. 

We’ve indexed them both to the cost of living. We’ve made 

sure that the people in our province . . . We’ve increased the 

income threshold for seniors by 48 per cent in urban areas. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve doubled the number of seniors eligible for 

benefits under the seniors’ income plan. There’s a lot more to 

be done, but we have a growing economy and we have people 

that are involved in the economy and want to help. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re relying on them as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, that minister would know that 

seniors don’t qualify for the rental supplement, and that’s a big, 

big deal for many seniors. It seems like affordability issues are 

like kryptonite to this government and they don’t want to touch 

it with a 10-foot pole. And many people, many people are 

suffering because of the lack of inaction because of this 

government. And the faces of these families are suffering and 

today she can just list off in cold comfort the things that seem to 

be out of control in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when will this government let go of its mantra that 

everything is A-okay in this province and take some serious 

action to address the affordability issue here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite 

stands up, he always talks about things like strategies. Well 

what we do in this province is something that’s called action. 

What we’re trying to do is make sure that we’re growing the 

economic pie for everybody in this province, where we’ve got 

more people working in this province than ever before. The 

average weekly earnings are up and the employment rate is the 

second in Canada. We’re putting money back into the pockets 

of people right across the province by increasing the 

exemptions. We have low-income single parents who have 

saved $2,800 annually, thanks to some of our tax cuts. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re doing things like investing in life skills. We’re 

doing things like investing in basic adult education. And we’re 

providing financial support for the most vulnerable in our 

province. 

 

There’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of the work that 

we’re doing across ministries. And I’m proud of the fact that 

there is an advantage, and that’s why there’s more people 

moving to this province than ever before. 



April 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7095 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mother Baby Unit 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister said he 

wasn’t prepared to do anything until the review around the 

circumstances of baby Cambria’s death is complete. Mr. 

Speaker, that review is going to take at least six months. No 

family should have to go through what baby Cambria’s family 

is going through now. 

 

To the minister: one baby has died because something wasn’t 

right within the mother baby unit. What precautions is he taking 

while he waits for the results of the review to immediately 

assure families that this won’t happen to them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said last week, our 

condolences absolutely go out to that family. I want to assure 

all expecting mothers and parents, mothers and fathers that their 

safety in our facilities is the number one priority of all health 

care deliverers throughout this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to the ministry officials last week, and 

we looked at what else could be done. As of today, ministry 

officials are reaching out to the family themselves to see if 

there’s any assistance they can be as far as the recovery process 

and the grieving process, Mr. Speaker. Also the ministry as well 

as the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses are looking at possible steps as we move 

forward, Mr. Speaker, as to staffing levels. But according to the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, at the time it was 

appropriately staffed. 

 

A review is being conducted, a formal review, as by the 

guidelines on the critical incident regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll let that work take place, but in the interim, Mr. Speaker, 

communications between the family, health regions, 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and the Ministry of Health is 

under way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, on March 31st the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses, SUN, issued a media release stating that their 

members working at the mother baby unit had raised concerns 

about the staffing levels and safety practices on the unit. They 

raised them at a presentation made about the old unit to the 

health region board of directors on June 15th, 2009, and in their 

presentation to an independent assessment committee on June 

29th and 30th of 2010. Nothing was done to address these 

concerns in the new unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the minister said he was not aware of 

any complaints or issues. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how 

could he not know about staffing and safety issues that have 

been raised officially at least twice in the region? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member is accurate 

today. She wasn’t accurate last week when she said that the 

review had not been conducted on the new unit. And at least she 

was accurate today to say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the independent assessment committee is a 

committee that is struck as to the collective bargaining 

agreement set out by SUN and its employer, SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations]. It is in the 

contract that this group has to be struck if there are concerns. 

That group was struck. It’s made up of nurses, Mr. Speaker, 

management, that review the concerns raised by, for example, 

in this case, SUN. They review those concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

They put forward recommendations if recommendations are 

needed to change. In this particular incident, there were no 

recommendations came forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having said that, we are working with SUN. We are working 

with the health region and the ministry to look at what else can 

be done, Mr. Speaker, to make sure all concerns have certainly 

been listened to and alleviated. But the independent assessment 

committee made no recommendations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, nurses have raised multiple 

concerns about limited access to the nursery and level of 

staffing on the unit. To quote the SUN media release, “We are 

here today because the fears of those in SUN have been 

realized.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: he said he would take his lead, he 

said last week he would take his lead from people who are 

experts in this field. Nurses who work in the unit say they need 

more staff. One baby death is too many. Is the minister going to 

listen to the nurses and immediately increase the number of 

staff to work in the mother baby unit while he waits for the 

review? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the issue 

around patient safety and putting the patient first has been 

paramount for our government since we became government. 

That’s why we work very hard to make sure we have the proper 

complement of health care professionals, whether it’s nurses, 

doctors, Mr. Speaker. As I said last week, the Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses’ Association for the first time have identified 

over 10,000 nurses working in this province, a far cry from 

what was happening under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the independent assessment committee is made up 

of nurses, Mr. Speaker, that made no recommendations. That 

being said, we are still reviewing the situation, Mr. Speaker. 

The member is absolutely incorrect. I know she’s trying to 

exaggerate like she normally does, Mr. Speaker, that the review 

will take six months. It will probably be done within two 

months, Mr. Speaker, not six months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard in a member’s statement where she 



7096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2011 

actually phoned the SMA, then came into the House and 

misquoted. The SMA had to send her a letter reprimanding her 

of those comments, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how much we 

can trust from that member. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Issues 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the SMA and I have had 

conversations about why my questions came to the House. Two 

previous officials in the Department of Health reviewed that 

contract, and the questions they asked me to ask were the ones I 

did in this House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister showed the pattern of not 

listening to experts, not acting on recommendations, and not 

properly funding the health regions. He refuses to listen to 

nurses. He has 10,000 of them, but he doesn’t listen to any of 

them. He refuses to listen to paramedics. He failed to act on the 

recommendations from the IAC [independent assessment 

committee] that SUN was in, and the 19 recommendations from 

his own EMS [emergency medical services] report sit idle on a 

shelf. Mr. Speaker, the minister has provided no new funding to 

ambulance services, no new funding to mental health, long-term 

care beds, or the North Battleford hospital in this budget. 

 

To the minister: Mr. Speaker, the minister’s inaction, inability 

to do his job, and distancing himself from his responsibilities 

has proven deadly. Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to 

take full responsibility and do his job? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the past three and a 

half years, Mr. Speaker, we have done an awful lot of work to 

repair some of the neglect that this health care system saw 

under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote one 

more time. Not only did that member phone the SMA, she 

phoned the SMA to ask if there was a reopener, heard the 

answer, came back, and asked for something different. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is what the SMA said: “I am left to 

wonder why you bothered to solicit information from the SMA, 

as it would appear you don’t seem to accept it being reliable.” 

The SMA’s not reliable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she just stood and said that we’ve underfunded 

health regions. I’m glad to report, Mr. Speaker, that all 12 

health regions, including the Cancer Agency, are going to come 

in at budget or a surplus, Mr. Speaker. Under their watch, with 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview and Nutana, under their 

watch, they put out a press release gloating that the health 

regions were only running a $32 million deficit — so much 

better than the year before when it was $49 million. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister of 

Education claimed that the Sask Party government has no 

control over negotiations with teachers; rather, according to the 

minister, it’s all up to the school boards. But the teachers who 

are watching today know that such claims simply are not true. 

 

To the minister: how many representatives does the Sask Party 

government have at the bargaining table? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I said 

last week — and obviously that member didn’t listen or just 

chose not to listen — what I said last week is we would not be 

conducting collective bargaining negotiations on the floor of the 

Assembly. So I would encourage STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] to return to the table so that collective bargaining 

can take place where it should. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the 

minister to go back and listen to her scrum from Thursday in 

the rotunda and see what she said about her role in the 

negotiations. 

 

Here’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party government has 

five representatives at the table. The school boards have just 

four. The government has a majority at the table. And those 

school boards are now 100 per cent dependent on the provincial 

government for all of their funding, so the Sask Party 

government is in full control of this entire negotiation process. 

 

To the minister: is she unaware of the government’s lead role in 

the bargaining process or is she simply trying to keep it a 

secret? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — No, Mr. Speaker, there is not a secret 

about the bargaining process. What will not happen is it will not 

happen on the floor of the Assembly. The bargaining process 

will take place between STF and the government bargaining 

team, Mr. Speaker, which consists of members from the 

Ministry of Education and members of the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not a different process that was in place 

when the members opposite were government. They understand 

collective bargaining, or they should. So, Mr. Speaker, I will 

repeat again: we will not be having collective bargaining 

negotiations on the floor of the Assembly. I encourage both 

sides to return to the table and have the negotiations where they 

should take place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again we see from this 

minister an unwillingness to recognize her role in this process. 

She’s happy to blame everyone else. She’ll blame the SSBA; 

she’ll blame the teachers; but she will refuse to take 



April 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7097 

responsibility on her own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister can play around with words all she 

wants, but the reality is that the Sask Party government is fully 

responsible for these negotiations, and they’re completely 

disrespecting teachers. One teacher recently wrote a letter 

saying: “I make enough to pay the bills. No more, no less. I’m 

barely surviving.” Another said, “Please show us that you value 

teachers and all the work we do above and beyond our job 

description by giving us a reasonable wage increase.” 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party refusing to properly 

value the important work of teachers by refusing to give them a 

reasonable wage increase? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there is no question that 

this government values teachers and we value the work of the 

school boards, and we have increased funding for schools 

across our province for the school divisions. We have made 

unprecedented investments in schools, which is a better 

environment for our teachers to work in, Mr. Speaker, $422 

million investment over the last four years. 

 

We respect teachers and we believe that there should be a 

collective bargaining process in place in this province that 

doesn’t have political interference, Mr. Speaker, and that is how 

we respect the teachers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this year’s Sask Party budget is 

37 per cent higher than the last NDP budget in 2007. They are 

spending a lot of money. Surely they can find the necessary 

money to treat teachers with respect. But for some reason, they 

are refusing to do so. Here’s a quote from a teacher who works 

in my constituency: 

 

Actions speak louder than words. Let’s resolve the current 

collective bargaining agreement so that teachers can once 

again feel respected and appreciated for the hard work we 

do. 

 

To the minister: teachers are watching today and they are tired 

of empty rhetoric. They want action from the Sask Party 

government. When will the Sask Party government finally show 

teachers some respect? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Well I’m very glad, Mr. Speaker, that 

the member opposite recognized that there has been substantial 

increases to the school divisions. As he knows, this budget does 

not include dollars that will be agreed upon when the teacher 

negotiations are completed. We will be putting that funding in 

the school boards’ budgets when and if the agreement is met. 

Mr. Speaker, that is so that school divisions are able to handle 

the financial increases that they will experience when the 

teachers’ negotiations are completed. 

 

That is unlike the situation that they’re seeing in Alberta right 

now, Mr. Speaker, where the school divisions are finding that 

they are not receiving enough funding in order to maintain their 

staff levels. In Alberta, they’re looking at massive layoffs of 

teachers. This is the second year in a row that that’s been 

happening. That is not what we want to see happen to the 

teachers in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, teachers in this province are 

asking for respect and they’re asking for recognition for the 

vital role that they serve in our society. In listening to their 

stories, it’s clear that the minister does not value their work and 

the minister won’t even recognize her important role in the 

bargaining process with respect to getting a contract, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why won’t she stand up, show respect to 

teachers, and return to the table ready to bargain a truly fair 

contract for our province’s teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The government bargaining team is 

ready to bargain at any time, any moment that the teachers 

indicate that they want to return to the table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that member opposite suggesting that a minister 

should sit down and do the negotiations? Because it certainly 

wasn’t the case in any other negotiations. I don’t think that is a 

respectful process. I believe that we should allow the bargaining 

team and the STF to conduct the process as it should take place. 

I think that is a respectful process. So why is the member 

opposite suggesting that all of a sudden it should all be decided 

by one person? 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are 

three guests. They are Madeleine Robertson, recently retired 

from legislative drafting in the Ministry of Justice. And because 

she’s now retired, any problems there are with the legislation, 

she’ll certainly take full and complete responsibility. She is 

joined with her husband, Neil Robertson, another one who 

shares my profession. He was at one time with the city 

solicitor’s office in city of Regina and more recently has 

represented the Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers. 

Probably if you ask them today, their most notable achievement 

is they are the parents of one our Pages, Tristan Robertson. 

 



7098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 4, 2011 

They are also joined by Neil’s brother, Colin Robertson, who 

was with the Department of Foreign Affairs in Ottawa, and I 

think very recently retired from that, if I stand correct. And I 

would ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members welcome them to the 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

my colleagues in the legislature. I wanted to join with the 

Minister of Justice in welcoming the guests to the Assembly 

today. Ms. Robertson’s provided great service to the province 

of Saskatchewan under a number of administrations. And as we 

know, and certainly as the minister knows and I know, almost 

all Bills that come to this legislature are Justice Bills, and the 

ones that aren’t Justice Bills, Justice probably got their 

fingerprints on them. And Madeleine Robertson’s fingerprints 

are on a lot of legislation in this province. 

 

And I would also like to join the minister in thanking her 

husband, Neil, for his service, both in the legal community and 

specifically to the city of Regina, which was under my watch 

recognized by a Queen’s Counsel appointment, but that of 

course is not nearly enough. So thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Lakeview 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I ask for leave to join the welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Well it’s a very great pleasure to have not just 

three Robertsons but four in the Assembly because their son is 

one of our Pages, and he’s provided good services in his role. 

But I want to say a special thank you to Madeline on behalf of 

the opposition. But more importantly, when we were in 

government after many, many years with the legislation 

committee and working with Madeline in the Department of 

Justice, we ended up, I think, learning many things from each 

other. And her husband has provided good advice to the 

profession over many years. 

 

But especially Mr. Robertson, who’s come from afar to Regina, 

I get regular newsletters from him about Canada-US [United 

States] relations and many things that happen within our North 

American continent. And he is providing some very good 

advice to all Canadians and Americans about how we can make 

our continent work better. And I think all members of the 

legislature should thank Mr. Robertson for that. Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 166 — The Renewable Diesel Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 166, 

The Renewable Diesel Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 166, The Renewable Diesel Act. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 167, The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 167, The Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 

 



April 4, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7099 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 168, 

The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read for the first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved first 

reading of Bill 168, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to lay on the 

Table, according to the provisions of section 41(1) of The 

Provincial Auditor Act, the financial statements of the Crown 

agencies for the years ending in the 2010 calendar year. 

 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 

Bill No. 619 — The School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan 

Appreciation Day Act 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On orders 

of the day, I ask for leave under rule 15(2) to withdraw Bill No. 

619, The School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan Appreciation 

Day Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member of Athabasca has asked for leave 

to withdraw Bill No. 619. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Bill 619 is withdrawn. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn to go to committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Thank you. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. Order. Order. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:37.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7087, 7088 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 7087, 7088 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7087 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7088 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7088 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7088 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7088 

  Morgan .......................................................................................................................................................................... 7088, 7097 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7089 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7098 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7098 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7089 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7089 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7089 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7089 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7090 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7090 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7090 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7090 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Autism Resource Centre Summer Program 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7091 

 Cancer Awareness Month 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7091 

 Business Builder Awards Ceremony 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7091 

 Aboriginal Family Services Benefit Gala 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7091 

 Humboldt District Health Complex Opens 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7092 

 Cost of Living 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7092 

 Opposition Statements 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7092 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Response to Rent Increases 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7093 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7093 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7094 

 Situation of Low-Income People 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7094 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7094 

 Mother Baby Unit 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7095 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7095 

 Health Care Issues 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7096 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7096 

 Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7096 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7096 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 166 — The Renewable Diesel Act 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7098 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7098 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7099 

 



 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7099 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 Bill No. 619 — The School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan Appreciation Day Act 

  Belanger ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 7099 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


