




















































Hansard: March 29, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 39B  TUESDAY, MARCH 29, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7003 

 March 29, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7, the House is now 

back in session on budget debate. I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to be able to join back in the debate after our break 

for supper. Mr. Speaker, I briefly began my remarks with 

thanking my staff and my family and, Mr. Speaker, I won’t go 

over that again. 

 

But I do want to move into the budget, Mr. Speaker. And first, I 

guess, adding my voice of congratulations to the Finance 

minister, Mr. Speaker, but also to the members of the Treasury 

Board and members of this government caucus who I think we 

work very well together. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that 

I’m certainly very proud to be a part of, to support and take 

back home to my constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy and say 

that this is a very good budget, a great budget for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that when you look at what’s 

going on and you put it in the context of other provinces and 

other jurisdictions that are now slowly coming out of the 

recession, Mr. Speaker, I think, probably for the first time, Mr. 

Speaker, to quote my good friend the member from Carrot 

River Valley, Mr. Speaker, I think this is the best budget in all 

of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you look at a budget that does a couple of things, Mr. 

Speaker . . . It does a lot of things, but really I think the 

hallmark of The Saskatchewan Advantage builds upon the work 

that we’ve done already as a government in that, Mr. Speaker, 

one, we’re cutting taxes for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Two hundred million dollars in tax cuts in this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, to help people around this province, to help 

businesses to be able to continue to invest in their businesses, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you look at the changes that we’ve made, Mr. 

Speaker, one thing that I think we can take a great deal of pride 

in is the fact that with the changes another 22,000 people will 

be coming off the provincial tax rolls, meaning that 114,000 

people will no longer pay provincial income taxes in the 

province of Saskatchewan because of the changes that we’ve 

made. 

We’ve seen a bit of . . . really the differences of where this party 

stands on this issue and where the opposition stands, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve had some members from the opposition that are 

really, I don’t think very supportive or encouraged by the fact 

that this many people — over 100,000 people in the province 

— will no longer pay provincial income taxes by the changes 

that we made and really in a lot of ways belittling the number 

and belittling the amount of money that people will save, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think that shows a clear division between this side and 

that side because, Mr. Speaker, I believe and I think my 

colleagues believe that whether it’s $1 or $10 or $2,447 that, for 

example, a family of four that earns $50,000 in combined 

income, that they will save. Mr. Speaker, whether it’s $1 or $10 

that people will save or $2,000 or more, Mr. Speaker, I think 

whenever there is an opportunity, if the choice is between 

allowing the people to keep that money or pay that money in 

taxes, Mr. Speaker, I think the best thing to do is allow people 

to keep that money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I think that, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a very 

positive development. And we’ll probably hear more from 

members opposite to say, well you know, at the upper ends of 

the threshold it’s, you know, people are only saving $30 a 

month extra or $100 a month extra. Mr. Speaker, I will side, 

however long my time in this House is, I will side with people 

keeping their hard-earned money in their pockets to decide how 

they choose to spend it, Mr. Speaker, rather than it going into 

the government coffers, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s a clear 

division between this side and that side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the changes that have been made, basic and 

spousal exemptions have been increased, Mr. Speaker. The 

small business rate has been reduced, saving $80 million per 

year, Mr. Speaker, for people to be able to invest back into their 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, one thing — and I’ll probably 

touch on this a little bit later, Mr. Speaker — is the education 

property tax reductions that we have instituted in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, over the four-year term of government. For 

example, on agricultural land, over 80 per cent reduction in the 

amount of education property tax paid by producers and 

landowners across the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a continuation of paying down the provincial 

debt, Mr. Speaker. $325 million this year will be paid off on the 

provincial debt, bringing the debt down to less than $4 billion 

— $3.81 billion, the lowest level since 1987, Mr. Speaker. And 

I think that is very positive. That’s something that I hear all 

across my constituency, people that are supportive of the debt 

repayment by this government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that were in this budget 

are things that are no surprise because this is a government and 

a party that made commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. 

And we are keeping those commitments, whether that be on one 

full percentage point of the PST [provincial sales tax] being 

paid to municipalities for revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, that has 

been done in this budget. It was a promise made and a promise 

kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s going to have significant benefits for all the 



7004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

municipalities across this province, including as well as 

municipalities in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I can see that the change for the city of Weyburn 

alone, Mr. Speaker, will be an additional $1 million this year 

alone, compared to back when the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] were the Government of Saskatchewan and their last 

budget, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the city of Weyburn has 

been very appreciative of this. The deputy mayor, Andrew 

Broccolo, spoke on budget day on behalf of the city and had 

some very good comments. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the city and our council, 

Mayor Button and the council for the work that they’ve been 

doing, investing back into our city into the services into our city 

and focusing, Mr. Speaker, on some of the issues — and I’ll 

maybe speak about these later — but really being aggressive on 

retaining and recruiting new businesses to the city and to the 

area, Mr. Speaker, and also on addressing housing issues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The city has been very proactive, and I think the plans that were 

announced by the Minister for Social Services are an area that 

our city will be very interested in because we know that the city 

and all parts of the constituency cannot continue to grow like 

they have without dealing with some of the challenges. Mr. 

Speaker, for many years Weyburn, where I live, had a very 

stagnant population base, didn’t change for many, many years. 

And I think this last year alone, the city of Weyburn grew by 

about 14 per cent population, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing new developments all across 

the city and all across the constituency. Not just in the city of 

Weyburn, but if you look at communities around the 

constituency, they’re all doing a great job of attracting people. 

And we’re seeing that all across the province with new people 

coming to the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also speak on, touch briefly on health 

care. This is an area, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll say right off, Mr. 

Speaker, that one of the announcements that was made before 

the budget but takes place or is going forward beyond this 

budget is the change in the funding formula for capital projects, 

particularly long-term care or hospitals, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 

issue that is being very . . . lots of interest in our constituency, 

whether you talk right along the border between Weyburn-Big 

Muddy and Estevan. 

 

And I’m looking forward to being with my colleague and my 

friend from Estevan on Saturday night in Radville at a 

fundraising event and a community event, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know that the news of the 80/20, the new funding formula, has 

been very well received. I’m not sure if the Health critic for the 

NDP has been to Radville lately, Mr. Speaker, but I think the 

doom and gloom that she likes to perpetuate all across this 

Chamber and this province, Mr. Speaker, is quite different from 

the reality when you actually get out into the country, Mr. 

Speaker, around the province. 

 

This also something we’re also very interested in Weyburn, of 

looking at building a new hospital, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

that fundraising activities have been well under way long before 

the change of the funding formula. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

publicly commend the Mainil family of Weyburn who, along 

with a lot of people that have done a lot of fundraising, have 

recently announced that they are giving an investment portfolio, 

one of their investment portfolios over to the health foundation. 

And its current value is at about $800,000, and so it shows the 

generosity of many people in our area, in our constituency that 

want to work with their local foundations. In fact PGA 

[Professional Golfers’ Association] tour golfer Graham Delaet 

from Weyburn is actually coming back to host a fundraising 

tournament this summer, Mr. Speaker, and I’m looking forward 

to being part of that. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to offer my thanks and 

congratulations to the Health minister for all the hard work on 

this file. I also want to thank the member from Melfort and the 

work that he’s done on the STARS [shock trauma air rescue 

service] project. You know we heard even earlier today, Mr. 

Speaker, comments from members of the opposition that are 

really not favourable towards the STARS program, Mr. 

Speaker, and telling people, don’t get your hopes up, Mr. 

Speaker, that this . . . And I don’t really understand the 

rationale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you go out around my constituency, whether it’s Minton 

or Coronach or Bengough or even in the oil industry further east 

of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, this is something that has been well 

supported — the concept of it — including, Mr. Speaker, 

companies like Crescent Point that have a sizeable presence in 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, and in the Weyburn area. And they 

have generously committed to being a financial donor to the 

project, Mr. Speaker. And I think that that is something that 

constituents are looking forward to, having that service 

provided in the province of Saskatchewan. So congratulations 

and well done and keep up the good work to the member for 

Melfort who has done a superb job on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also do want to congratulate the region, our 

health region, Mr. Speaker. I was recently at an event in 

Bengough where we celebrated the beginnings of the Rural 

West Primary Health Team, Mr. Speaker. Bengough is going to 

be working with a great doctor, Dr. Oberholzer in Radville, 

with a nurse practitioner in the community of Bengough to 

provide doctor services, Mr. Speaker. It was a great event, 

maybe one where I think maybe the health region doesn’t get 

enough credit, Mr. Speaker. But this is one where they’ve 

worked collaboratively with many communities in the area, Mr. 

Speaker, and one where the entire, it seemed like all of 

Bengough and Pangman and surrounding communities were in 

attendance, and it was a great event, Mr. Speaker. And so 

congratulations to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other areas that I could speak 

on. One I need to talk about is agriculture. Obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency is blessed with 

good farm land, productive farm land, also productive 

ranchland. Mr. Speaker, agriculture is at the heart of our 

constituency and the people that I have the good fortune to 

represent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I dare say that this Agriculture minister is going to 

break a bit of a streak that tends to stay with Agriculture 

ministers in the province, Mr. Speaker, because for many years 

we’ve had a record, Mr. Speaker, where Agriculture ministers 

was a bit of a career limiting move. It was a bit of a trying time 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7005 

for Agriculture ministers to get re-elected in the province. And I 

think the Saskatchewan Party Ag minister, who’s been the Ag 

minister, has been for the entire term of this government so far, 

Mr. Speaker, and I think that he’s certainly going to break that 

record. 

 

He’s been a great Ag minister to work with, Mr. Speaker, and 

one only has to look at the budget, Mr. Speaker. We are fully 

funding programs that we’ve signed on to as a province, which 

happened sometimes under the former government but not 

always on budget day. They weren’t always fully funded, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Of course we know the importance of the changes on 

agricultural land for education property taxes that I and many 

members have spoken on already, Mr. Speaker. And extension 

offices are being reopened, Mr. Speaker, after a number of them 

were closed prior . . . under the former administration. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think this is the second highest agriculture budget in 

the history of the province of Saskatchewan. And I think the 

only one that beats this was just, I believe, two years ago under 

the same Ag minister. So my compliments to the Ag minister. I 

know he’s well respected across this province and, Mr. Speaker, 

I can say that he is in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 

He has a good reputation in our constituency, and I want to 

thank him for his leadership. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just from some local comments . . . I know 

we’ve had members that have talked a little bit about reaction to 

the budget, Mr. Speaker. And certainly that has been the case in 

my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time seems to go quite quickly as always so I 

need to talk just briefly. I should mention, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

very pleased with our environment budget for this year, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to be doing a number of very good things 

with this budget. I’m very pleased that my colleagues have saw 

fit to increase the operating grant for Sarcan, Mr. Speaker, 

combined with a capital grant that will be going to Sarcan to 

help projects all across this province, Mr. Speaker. We’re back 

to the level of over $22 million, which will equate to what we 

believe is the environmental handling charges that are collected 

from recyclable containers that Sarcan deals with, Mr. Speaker. 

So I’m very pleased with that, and I look forward to working 

with Sarcan going forward, Mr. Speaker, over this coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also, I’ve spoke a little bit about a couple of 

plans that will be coming forward, Mr. Speaker, including a 

boreal water management strategy that will be coming forward 

to make that announcement, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to see a 

more vigorous testing of our northern, particularly our northern 

lakes, Mr. Speaker. We know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

know that there are concerns with how industry may be 

impacting, Mr. Speaker. And for many, many years I think 

there was inadequate work done on this file, Mr. Speaker, and 

we are going to be correcting those deficiencies and as I’ve 

said, Mr. Speaker, working with industry in other jurisdictions 

and the federal government on this very important work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to be significantly enhancing the 

areas in our forest services branch, Mr. Speaker, to deal with 

some issues that are of concern. When you look at the health of 

a healthy forest, Mr. Speaker, we know the damage that insects 

and pests like the mountain pine beetle have caused in British 

Columbia. And it’s moving its way east, Mr. Speaker. And so 

we are going to be enhancing the work that we do around that 

and also spruce budworm. And that money was I think over a 

200 per cent increase dealing with those areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I believe I’ve probably exceeded my time for this 

evening. There’s so much more that I would like to say on this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, that I haven’t had the chance to. We’re 

doing some exciting things in our constituency around 

education, Mr. Speaker, with renewals at the high school and 

the regional college and some of the elementary schools, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact the Education minister’s going to be in 

Weyburn in the coming days, and I look forward to having the 

opportunity to, maybe have the opportunity to show her some of 

the work that’s being done. And we’re all looking forward to 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I believe my time is at an end. And so 

with all that to say, Mr. Speaker, there is so much more I could 

say, but with that, I will not be supporting the amendment and I 

will be very pleased to support the budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I rise today to put a few of my comments on 

the budget. Before I do that, I’d just like to thank the people of 

Saskatoon Fairview for their support over the years that I have 

been their MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. We 

continue growth in our part of the city with the new Blairmore 

Suburban Centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The city is planning 

seven new neighbourhoods out there, and things are growing in 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the comments I want to make after 

listening to the member from Weyburn are around the budget 

and the deficit. It’s sort of the good story that they put out and 

talk about all the things that they have done in this budget. But 

what is central and what is missing here is a total vision for the 

province. They have thrown, put some money in places that are 

needed, but what is missing, because as some people have said, 

there is another Saskatchewan here that is feeling some pain. 

And nothing is being done, and it’s being missed. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they talk about the budget, not 

one person from that, not one of those members have talked 

about the public debt increasing, what is happening to the 

increase in public debt, in the debt of the Crown corporations. 

All of these things are going in the wrong direction, Mr. 

Speaker, even in the public debt and in general revenue. And 

the projected debt is going to rise to more than what it was in 

2008. So those are just some of the general comments about this 

budget and the things that are lacking and that have not been 

said or talked about from the members opposite.  

 

But again one of the things they have talked about on various 

occasions is that in the royalty that we have . . . And they have 

acknowledged that it was the NDP royalty regime or plan that 

brought in the expansion of the potash mines. Oftentimes we 



7006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

hear the things of . . . The Minister of Advanced Education talks 

about population figures, and that was our program, the 

nominee program that we put in. And they’re bringing that in. 

Mr. Speaker, we have brought those things in. 

 

And it has been . . . really in terms of addressing some of the 

concerns that the people of Saskatoon have, I could very easily 

say that for the last three and a half years, they have done 

nothing, and nothing to address these problems in terms of 

Saskatoon is a growing city. Population is growing. We have a 

lot of immigrants coming to the city, and nothing has occurred. 

In fact in Saskatoon, where the population is growing, 

Saskatoon has had to come up with its own housing initiative, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they have been struggling with that 

program with no help from the provincial government. 

 

So now what has occurred is that the provincial government has 

determined that the municipalities have to get into their own 

programs around housing. And so as we have seen in the rural 

areas where many times in a number of areas where 

municipalities have had to put levies on their residents, on the 

people in those . . . to build doctors’ offices, to recruit doctors. 

And this again is a downloading. 

 

But at the last minute . . . And before maybe I get into that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, over the last number of years we have had 

renters in my constituency who have had — and perhaps maybe 

in the constituencies around — who’ve had to move not once, 

but twice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and sometimes three times 

because the rents have gone up. And there have been calls and 

calls to this government, and they turned a deaf ear on those 

things. And it was the city that had to step in and start 

something so to address these concerns of residents of 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we went to meetings with tenants who had 

moved once and were getting another rent increase, and a 

number were moving out and didn’t have anywhere to go. So 

there were two problems: there were people that were, rents 

were increasing 2, 3, and $400. And these were people on fixed 

incomes. They were seniors, whether they were students or 

people working on minimum wage. Now I’ll be talking about 

the minimum wage a little later on. But this issue around people 

not having a place to live, we have to . . . Something very 

central for people. And nothing was being done. 

 

Now the other day the minister rose and talked about a housing 

program that they have introduced. And they have put in 250, 

$230 million into housing and are trumpeting that as some sort 

of success that is going to deal with this problem. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they’re putting in $200 million into, as they 

say, to make available interest-free loans so people can get into 

starter homes. Now these homes will be in the range of 180,000 

to $300,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Who is it in, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in that they are giving these loans to contractors to 

build homes, but who is going to use these homes? 

 

In Hampton Village, we have Hampton Village is an expanding 

— which is right next to my constituency — is an expanding 

suburb. And there are, when I went on the MLS [Multiple 

Listing Service], there are about 50 homes in this price range of 

about 250 to $260,000. What is the impact of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, of putting those homes on the market? Now those 

people can now afford the mortgage to get into that. So what is 

the impact on this? What is the impact of renters who have 

moved because they can afford the homes in this price range in 

Hampton Village? They move in and now the government is 

going to say to contractors, why don’t you build houses of 

$250,000 and we’ll put those on the market along with the other 

50 in Hampton Village? Now what is the rationale of spending 

$200 million on a program like that? Who is this serving, and 

what does it do to address the issues of the people I was talking 

about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people who have moved not 

once, not twice, but three times and are looking for some rental 

relief in the city of Saskatoon, in the city of Saskatoon? 

 

Now they’re not very happy about this, and the mayor is not 

very happy about that they have to do that. Now they will say 

. . . and take all the money that they can from the government to 

assist them in that, but this is downloading, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This is downloading a responsibility from the 

provincial government onto the municipal government, and it is 

serving no purpose, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The only thing that it might do is after there are . . . And I’d, if 

we could go back to those 50 MLS listings in this area, in 

Hampton Village, if those young people that bought those 

homes will now see an extra 50 houses on there, and what will 

that do? What will that really do to the prices? What will it do 

for the prices of those young people who have put money into 

their homes who thought, who thought that maybe in a couple 

of years or five years they could sell that home and move on? 

That is not . . . There is no need for those houses. 

 

We have money that should go into rental homes, and they are 

throwing money away, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And where did this 

money come from? Well it came through the federal 

government, and now, now they’re guaranteeing that. So for 

example, if the economy went bad, if the economy went bad . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The chatter is 

getting a little loud in here. I’m having a hard time hearing the 

speaker. I would recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, somebody’s 

benefiting from this. Somebody’s benefiting and it’s not the 

people who are moving from one rental unit to another rental 

unit. It is not those people who are benefiting. And that’s where 

people two years ago, in fact maybe three years ago were asking 

for some relief, and there’s nothing in here. This is shameful, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people in this province . . . and 

that they can stand day after day and say what a great budget 

this is, how they’re taking care of people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so who is it that is getting the $200 

million? And what is happening? This program was around 

before on the 200 million, but it wasn’t guaranteed. But now it’s 

going to be guaranteed. So let’s think if for example, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if the housing market turned, the province will 

be on the hook for the $200 million now. It’ll be on the hook for 

the $200 million and people will be able to walk away, I 

imagine — the contractors — from this deal. 

 

We have not heard anything, anything why, where this works. I 

would want to know. I see the . . . Earlier in the day I asked the 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7007 

member from Kindersley, what about the rental units in 

Kindersley? Because every time we go there, that’s what people 

talk about — housing. No place to live. No rents. No rental 

places in Kindersley. His answer to me was, in Kindersley we 

build our own homes. That’s what his answer, that’s what his 

answer was to the people who are renting and trying to, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to deal with this. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the same, the same when it 

comes to, this is the same tune that they’re saying when it 

comes to minimum wage. They increased the minimum wage. 

There was the former minister of Labour from Greystone who 

said, I’m working on indexation. Now we have, now we have 

his buddy there from Southeast and he’s working on indexation 

too. They’re all working on it and studying it. Meanwhile 

people have no place to live. People are suffering because their 

rents, and on fixed incomes those rents that have gone on 3 and 

$400, they come to my office. They come to the constituency 

office and, Mr. Speaker, we can’t, there’s not much we can tell 

them. Because the rent, there’s no rent, no place for them to 

rent. And that’s why the city of Saskatoon put on their own 

program where they give, per unit, $5,000. They do that. 

 

Now which other community have they contacted? I would like 

to know from the minister which other community. Because it 

isn’t Kindersley, because they build their own homes. I don’t 

think it’s North Battleford. And the member from Weyburn 

didn’t seem to talk about any rental things that were happening 

there. I wonder which communities are on board with this. 

 

Who is on board with this? What was their consultations? 

Because obviously they didn’t consult in this because they don’t 

consult on anything else. But who is on board with this? Which 

communities does this benefit? Where is this $200 million 

going? Where are these houses that are 180,000 now up to 

300,000, where are they being built? I want to know. Maybe 

they’re in Northwest. I don’t know. Maybe they’re in Saskatoon 

Northwest. I don’t know if they have any there. Maybe they’re 

in Biggar. I don’t know if Biggar town is willing to put up 

$5,000 for that. Maybe they’re there. I don’t know. Where are 

they? Where are these homes? 

 

[19:30] 

 

I wonder if they’ll go to Wakaw where they just shut down the 

hospital. I wonder if they’ll go to Kindersley. Kindersley’s had 

10 physicians. They were down to five and now they’re leaving. 

On the front page of the Kindersley Clarion was they’re leaving 

for Swift Current. 

 

Now where is that money? They have $200 million for this kind 

of plan. Where is the money for health care? Where is the 

money for those long-term care facilities? Where is the 

announcement on that? Where is it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

That’s what’s important in Saskatchewan as a place that we 

want to be proud of, that people have a house and people have 

enough food to put on their table —not rising cost, not 

increasing gas prices, not increasing utilities, and not having to 

move every second month because the rent’s going up. And 

where is their plan? Where is the long-term vision? No 

long-term vision. They won’t talk about rent control when most 

of the other provinces in Canada have it. They don’t want to 

talk about that because they don’t care. 

Today in North Battleford, well we’re looking at a homeless . . . 

Because they couldn’t do that. A shelter that everybody were 

helping. Now a society is known by how it treats its less 

fortunate people, and this is shameful what is happening here. 

This is shameful what this $200 million — and who’s this $200 

million going to? Where’s this $200 million going to? I wonder, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, where’s the $200 million going to? So, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in no time in all of this, whether it be 

the minimum wage that they’re dealing with or the costs of 

utilities, all of these things seem to be of no consequence, seem 

to be of no consequence. 

 

So they read the budget, and member after member over there 

stands up and talks about how it is good that somebody is 

saving $100 or something. They would take that any time. They 

would take that any time. Well that’s shameful, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because there are certain people that come into my 

office and come into those members’ offices, and they don’t 

have a place to live. They don’t have a place to live and nor do 

they take very much comfort in the rising that they’ve gotten in 

those increases. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another thing they talk about is all the 

people they’ve taken off the tax rolls. They took off a bunch of 

people last time off the tax rolls. They don’t pay any taxes, but 

you know what? A lot of those people are low-income and they 

have had no increase and everything else has been increasing. 

So this does them no good to say, we have some more people 

who are going to save $10 here or $5 there or $8 there, because 

they have no place to live. They have no place to . . . If you’ve 

been paying $800 as rent and now you have to pay $1,100, a 

$300 increase and you were living on $1,600, what is that going 

to be for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What is that going to be for 

you? 

 

I wonder with that kind of vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 

we’re going. And you know, they’ll laugh about the royalty 

structures and why we shouldn’t be looking at that and don’t, 

you know, don’t get excited because everybody’s going to 

leave. Well I’ll tell you what the miners in those mines say 

when they say about royalty structures. They say yes, it’s fair, 

and don’t ever let anybody tell you that those companies are 

going to leave or there’s going to be job loss. That’s the people 

who work in the mines; they say that. Go and talk to them, 

because that’s what they’ll tell them about the royalty review 

and why Saskatchewan shouldn’t get, the people of 

Saskatchewan shouldn’t get their fair share. When we go, when 

I go up and down my streets and visit my constituents, they talk 

about that. They have no problem with saying that we should 

get . . . that it’s our potash. They understand that this is our 

potash and that they should be getting their fair share from it, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. They should be getting their fair share. 

 

And in terms of the, in terms of the rental program, I suppose 

we still have to see. And why is it that it’s three and a half years 

later that we are now considering that rent is an important issue, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, rent is an important issue? Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there’s many people have spoken out on this issue, and 

many groups are disappointed who deal with low-income 

people. And it seems that these folks have just simply turned a 

blind eye to this. 

 

The terms in the budget as we go and where we don’t see 



7008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

anything happening in terms of the education sector, we’ve got 

the teachers bargaining, but they’ve taken away, when they took 

away the rights of the school boards to tax, they definitely . . . 

and put in the budget this year, what about the support staff? 

What about the education assistants that are in there? What 

about the people who work in dietary? What about the 

maintenance workers? What about the support staff in our 

education system? They have left that to the local school boards 

to negotiate those people. 

 

And there’s a certain sense of disrespect felt right across, that 

being whether it was in the health care sector with the provider 

groups or now in the education sector where they don’t, where 

they aren’t. And I think earlier, or was it yesterday, the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview talked about this sort of feeling of 

disrespect and way of dealing with people that causes this 

feeling throughout Saskatchewan so that people feel that they, 

that what they do is not respected. And so you hear from that, 

we hear from that from . . . I’ve received emails from PAIRS, 

the Professional Association of Internes and Residents of 

Saskatchewan, when we brought that issue up here in the 

legislature, saying that they also feel that way. We’ve talked to 

the medical students and who have to face this. And the medical 

students . . . It was interesting, because they came and said, we 

need an agreement. We need an agreement when it comes to 

health care because we have to feel the confidence as we move 

forward. So even they understood in their first two years when 

all they’re concerned about is trying to . . . that they have gotten 

into the medical school and are concerned about trying to build 

a career. Even they have concern about what the PAIRS is 

happening. 

 

And what about the SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] workers, health sciences members are 

out there? These things have been dragging on. They have been, 

these negotiations have been dragging on for two years or more, 

two years or more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And everyone in 

Saskatchewan is watching, and I’m sure the members feel that 

they have, with their election budget is out there and feeling 

more than, more than happy that they have resolved and 

satisfied everybody. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s an undercurrent here that 

these people are not listening to. They’re not listening to and 

they’ve growing out of touch in terms of what is happening. 

Because they, I know they scoffed at when we said that we 

went around the province and that people said that they were 

not in these facilities. So I can imagine that they obviously 

haven’t heard from a lot of these people because many of them 

would not allow these people to meet with them in their offices. 

So of course you want to hear from one side, you want to see 

one side, then that’s what you’re going to, that’s what you’re 

going to get. But there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s . . . When 

you continue to treat people this way, perhaps it’s one day 

you’ll have to look at those people and have to answer. And for 

these people, that day will be coming. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things, and which is a 

topic that is perhaps not that easy to talk about, and that is the 

fatalities in the province, the fatalities in the workplace. And 

this issue, which we all agree is serious and we all agree that 

something should be done, but to have this continue at the rate 

that we’re doing . . . And for example, in 2008 the number is 

22. We have 2009 is 24. A total we have in 2010, we’re up to 

21 as of September, I believe. These are alarming, alarming 

statistics. 

 

Yet in this budget, in this budget in terms of a total vision for 

the province and in terms of for those people who don’t think 

that it is a, it is a dangerous occupation in those potash mines 

where a worker a year has died in over the last, I believe, 54 

years, that is a serious issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we saw 

nothing in the budget, nothing in the budget regarding what 

we’re going to do to prevent further not only injuries, but 

fatalities in this province. And to those people and the damage 

that we do to the families and that in not dealing with this is an 

issue I don’t think has been looked at properly here, nor has it 

been addressed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps what we could have done, 

perhaps what we could have done . . . We’ve done the whole 

gamut. We’ve run our Mission: Zero. We’ve run the buses, 

we’ve put the ads on the buses. We’ve run ads. We’ve had stick 

people. We’ve run ads that in fact, some of the ads . . . And I’m 

actually glad I’m not seeing any more of them where the worker 

was in some ways, in some of them, you could read into where 

people actually . . . Perhaps that’s why they pulled them 

because people were complaining that it appeared that it was the 

worker’s fault. 

 

We have to have, we have to have the government, we have to 

take responsibility and look at this issue seriously. We either are 

serious about this or we are not serious about this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. The last time I had an opportunity was to go to the 

Esterhazy mine when there was a death there, and it’s traumatic 

for the people there. I went and met with the workers and talked 

about it. We didn’t really . . . There was not a lot of blame, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. In those kind of situations, people are . . . It’s 

hard to understand for them as to what happens, but we have 

built a culture where we do not, we do not take these things 

seriously. 

 

So I would wish, I would wish on behalf of all of us that there 

would have been something more, something in this budget, 

some initiative because I think on a daily basis, every time there 

is a budget, we should be looking at this issue and saying, 

here’s what we’re going to do. And this time there is just simply 

. . . We haven’t heard very much on this issue. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that, I have more, more to say on the 

housing issue. I see, I see the member from Silver Springs, I see 

the member from Silver Springs will be taking that discussion 

up further because I can’t see how he isn’t, you know, 

mentioning this, and he didn’t mention it in his speech. He 

didn’t mention it in his speech. I was disappointed with that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But with that, I will not be supporting the budget but I will be 

supporting the amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a real pleasure to rise in the House this evening and enter 

into this budget debate. I want to start from the very beginning 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7009 

by stating that I will be supporting this motion and I will be 

voting against the amendment. I have a feeling there may be a 

discussion across the floor as we, as I have my speech tonight, 

so I want to get it on the record that I am very supportive of the 

work that’s been done by our Finance minister to make sure we 

bring forward a budget that is supported by so many people in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to start by thanking people 

that are really important in my life and in my world as an 

elected member. I want to start with my constituency. Linda 

Griffith has worked in my office now for 16 years, since June 

the 15th, 1995 when I was elected the first time, and she has 

been with me and working hard, and I appreciate her work. 

 

I have another lady who has been with me a couple of years. 

Her name is Rhonda, and I want to say hello to her but I 

especially want to say hello to her dad. I’m not sure of his exact 

age, but I know that it’s more than eight decades. And he’s 

dedicated to politics in this province. In fact, he’s dedicated to 

politics from the people who are on this side of the floor. And 

he watches with interest daily to make sure that we are bringing 

forward the word that he wants us to bring forward, that I 

represent him. And I want to say hello to him. 

 

In my office here in Regina I have Kelly and Kim and Theo and 

Amanda and Sherry and Shelley who work very, very hard 

every day. I know that they have the interest not only of the 

minister at heart but of the people of the province. And I’m very 

proud of the work that they do, and I thank them. I also have 

staff as people who work with me in the Public Service 

Commission and the Ministry of Social Services, the DMs 

[deputy minister] and the ADMs [assistant deputy minister] and 

every one of the people that come to work on a daily basis and 

do their very best for the people of the province, and I want to 

thank them and congratulate them. 

 

I know that everyone is aware that it takes a team effort and 

dedication and hard work to put a budget together. And all of 

these people, the Minister of Finance, all of my colleagues on 

Treasury Board, we worked very hard. The staff at Finance, all 

of them have worked hard to make sure that we brought a 

budget forward that makes a difference to the people of the 

province, and I want to congratulate the minister. 

 

And finally and very, very importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

want to thank my family. We cannot do the job without the 

support of the people that we love and that love us. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, 16 years ago, my oldest grandchild was a baby. I now 

have six more grandchildren, and they watch their grandmother 

at work, and I am sure at times they wonder what I am really 

doing. But I know that they are proud of the fact that they live 

in a province where there is initiative and ideas for going 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, overall this budget is going to ensure that people 

in Saskatchewan continue to be economic leaders in Canada. 

There is a growing advantage to living in our beautiful 

province. Our population is at all all-time high. There are more 

people working in this province than ever before, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. There’s unprecedented economic growth and it’s given 

our government the capacity to invest in areas that are 

important to the citizens. 

This budget, whether the members opposite realize it or not, 

shows that we have $250 million more for regional health 

authorities. We lowered the taxes. We now have 114,000 

people who no longer pay taxes in our province. We’ve 

invested $2.2 billion over four years in infrastructure, 

infrastructure that was left by the members opposite . . . 

[inaudible] . . . it was left in a state of just about disrepair, and 

we worked very hard to make sure that the infrastructure’s 

available for the people of our province. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the number of people that spoke to me over 

the weekend about our budget, one of the things that they were 

very impressed about was the lowering the debt another $325 

million, which means the debt is 45 per cent lower now than it 

was in 2007 when we came in office. And I think that that 

shows that there is a dedication and a commitment to the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the Finance minister presented last week is 

going to help sustain our economic momentum. This budget 

provides our province with a strong foundation for the 

Saskatchewan advantage to continue long into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I represent the area of Kelvington-Wadena, and 

I’m proud to stand up here and know that I am the voice of the 

19,000 people in that area who have lived through a lot of 

harder times as a farming community lately. There’s been 

excessive moisture and droughts and frost that my farmers have 

had to deal with the last number of years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

know that most of the colleagues on my side of the House and 

most of my friends know that I’m actually a very tall person, 

and I want to measure people . . . I want people to know that 

last year with the 40 inches of rain we had and the 30 inches of 

snow, we have moisture that is just about 5 feet in our 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier came 

out to my constituency last year to meet with farmers and to 

visit the area to determine what needed to be done. What they 

did last year and what was responded to in the budget this year 

is record crop insurance coverage and funding to ensure that our 

farming sector can continue to operate in the face of 

weather-related disasters. 

 

I’ve stood in the House many times and spoke about the 

innovation of the business people in my constituency. And one 

of the companies is Milligan Bio-Tech crushing and biodiesel 

facility at Foam Lake. Over the years, Milligan Bio worked 

with the federal government and the provincial government and 

the Saskatchewan Research Council on many successful pilot 

projects, and proved that canola is a top feedstock for biodiesel 

for use in cold weather. 

 

This is one of the many companies and the agricultural 

producers who will benefit from this government’s launch of 

the renewable diesel program, which has the mandate to include 

2 per cent renewable content in the average annual diesel fuel 

pool in Saskatchewan for fuel distributors beginning in July 

2012, and will provide a 13 cent per litre grant to eligible 

renewable diesel producers for the next five years. This 

mandate will also help Saskatchewan meet its climate change 

targets. 



7010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, our government has believed in the economic 

prosperity of the province and its potential for growth. Our 

government recognizes that prosperity is dependent on 

maintaining a viable infrastructure. Unfortunately, the previous 

government let our roads and highways deteriorate at an 

alarming rate. The budget that we have presented is going to 

invest $556.2 million in our transportation system, bringing our 

total to 2.2 billion. It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out 

that our transportation system will ensure that Saskatchewan 

will continue to prosper. Rural Saskatchewan is dependent on 

roads and highways as the residents have to travel distances for 

basic services. Our services, our resources are situated in rural 

areas and it’s incumbent upon government to ensure that the 

transportation system is there to continue so businesses can 

develop and to grow. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a huge 

land base and one of the largest transportation systems in this 

country. It’s always a challenge to ensure that our roads and 

highways are maintained and improved upon, but I know this 

budget will continue to ensure that these challenges are 

addressed. 

 

Small businesses are the backbone of our province and that’s 

why this budget puts Saskatchewan businesses in a much more 

competitive position by cutting the tax rate from 4.5 per cent to 

2 per cent. We’ve lived up to our commitment to reduce the 

education portion of property tax by 17 per cent. We recognize 

these reductions in taxes will allow business owners to invest 

the money and put it back into businesses. Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers in my constituency also know that by keeping our 

commitment to the education portion of property tax, they’ll be 

paying 80 per cent less education property tax this year than 

they did four years ago. That’s a promise that we made, and a 

promise that we kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every little town in Saskatchewan has a hotel that 

sells off-sale. These business owners will not only benefit from 

the tax reductions but also from the increase in beer discount to 

off-sale retailers. I know the hotel owners in my constituency 

are delighted by these changes and I’d like to congratulate the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] for working with this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education is the hope for the future. A school is 

four walls that houses tomorrow. We know that every dollar 

that is spent on education at an early age is going to save 

society $7 in future costs in health care, justice, or social 

programs. We must spend our money and utilize our human 

resources correctly to ensure our children are getting life skills 

and basic education. Mr. Speaker, this budget did not forget 

about children who have disabilities and learning difficulties, 

and we’ve allocated funds for enhanced intensive support for 

these students. 

 

Our population is growing and births are increasing. As my 

family has grown and become young adults and then parents, 

one of the concerns they’ve expressed to me and I continue to 

hear as an MLA is a shortage of daycare spaces. Our society has 

moved towards a necessity of all parents working after 

maternity leave has expired, and many parents found it a 

challenge to find daycare. They want the best possible care for 

their children while they’re working. The budget that we are 

presented continues to build on past commitments from the 

government, and we have an announcement of an additional 

500 new child care spaces, which will increase licensed spaces 

by 4.1 per cent to 12,700 spaces. 

 

Health care demands continue to grow as our population grows 

and ages. This is one of the areas that my constituency receives 

calls on, and I’m very pleased that our government’s 

commitment to health care in this budget has committed an 

additional 6.2 per cent increase to health care. 

 

And I firmly believe that municipal government is one of the 

most responsible and effective form of government that people 

in Saskatchewan have. The previous government reduced 

finances to this level of government. Our government 

appreciates and acknowledges the work that this level of 

government undertakes and meets our budget commitment to 

provide them with one full point of provincial sales tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the areas that I have responsibility for as a 

minister are important to every citizen in this province, and I’d 

like to start by talking about housing. I’d like to start by 

spending a few minutes on what our housing plan is versus 

what’s being proposed by the opposition. First of all, I want to 

start with the opposition’s plan and give you a few of the 

reasons why none of their ideas are reflected in the budget that 

we just brought forward. First of all, their plan has two parts. 

They plan to impose a job-killing resource tax that could 

possibly solve the housing problem because it’s going to send 

all the citizens back to Alberta for jobs just as they did under 

the previous government. Mr. Speaker, the potash royalty tax 

that they would impose if they were government would kill jobs 

in this province. It would send people out of the province, and 

we would not have the need for housing because people would 

be gone again. Then they want to impose rent control so that 

anyone remaining would absolutely have no incentive to invest 

in low-income housing. 

 

As usual, the NDP’s only plan is to manage decline. I spent 10 

or more years in opposition listening to the members opposite 

when they were on this side of the House, talking about 

managing the decline, knowing that the last one here should 

turn off the lights, and if there was a few people left here, there 

would be more revenues for the ones that were left. Mr. 

Speaker, it was a strange way to govern; it was a strange way to 

manage the resources in this province; and it’s the reason why 

people of the province were very tired of them and after the last 

election decided they should sit on the other side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rent control may sound good politically but it 

simply doesn’t work. Just like tax hikes on potash, rent control 

hurts the very people it’s supposedly designed to help. It’s like 

the NDP’s potash position. It takes us back to the 1970s where 

everybody talked about disco balls and platform shoes. But 

even a left wing economist, Paul Krugman, called rent controls, 

and I want to quote, “a textbook case of economic stupidity.” 

 

A survey quoted in The StarPhoenix yesterday noted that, the 

other day noted that 93 per cent of economists agreed that a 

ceiling on rents reduces the quantity and the quality of houses 

available. That’s a fancy way of saying that rent control hurts 

poor people. It’s not the Opposition Leader that has to live in a 

dilapidated housing unit in Winnipeg that suffered from years 

of neglect because of rent controls. 

 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7011 

As one Swedish economist said, “In many cases, rent control 

appears to be the most effective technique presently known to 

destroy a city except for bombing [it].” Forgive me if I’m 

worried about this issue, but that’s exactly what the NDP seems 

intent on doing. The NDP wants more affordable housing while 

at the same time handcuffing the private sector who’s trying to 

build it. 

 

They hold up Manitoba as a model, but they ignore the fact that 

that province has an ever-shrinking vacancy rate. The member 

for Saskatoon Centre cited a report from the University of 

Calgary, but even the authors of the report are split on rent 

control. Here’s an example of a quote from that report: “The 

major disadvantage of any kind of rent control is its . . . 

negative effect on the investors’ willingness to invest in 

multi-unit rental housing.” That factor outweighs, in the view of 

one of the authors, any possible favourable effects of any sort of 

rent controls. 

 

Presumably the author of this report supported rent controls as 

part of the 7 per cent of the economists who would do that. Not 

surprisingly, the NDP has thrown in their lot with the fringe 

economists as well. They’re willing to take a risk with the 

livelihoods of vulnerable people, but we are not. We’re going to 

side with the 93 per cent of economists who know that rent 

control does not work. 

 

And we’re not joining the NDP on the campaign to demonstrate 

the private sector on rent controls or on any other issue. We 

know that it’s going to take the private sector to build the 

houses that are needed for the people that are waiting for homes 

and are waiting for rental spaces and waiting for the opportunity 

to call Saskatchewan home because they have a roof over their 

head. 

 

Our allegiance is to do what works. On this issue, what works is 

providing more affordable spaces and putting more money back 

into people’s pockets. That’s why we’ve removed 114,000 

people from the tax roll. With more money in their bank 

accounts, people in Saskatchewan are better able to afford their 

rents. They’re better able to put food on their table and buy the 

necessities they need for their children. But what also works is 

the supply. That’s why I was very proud, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

yesterday, to announce that we were going to spend $252 

million in total investments to create 4,600 new homeowner and 

rental units, 4,600 units. That is going to make a huge 

difference to the people of the province, and supply homes for 

many people. 

 

I think the members opposite read the article in The 

StarPhoenix today that talked about the idea of our five-point 

plan. They like the idea and they had a few thoughts on what 

the NDP was saying, and I’m sure that they aren’t reading those 

out loud today either. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Headstart on a Home is an opportunity for people 

to actually have some home ownership. It’s the opportunity to 

be able to call a place their own. This is an opportunity that 

there has not been in the last number of years when it comes to 

being able to find a space that they can raise their family. And I 

am very proud to be working with a government who 

understands the importance of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is building on the significant investment 

we’ve made over the last three years. We’ve completed 860 

affordable units. There’s 1,100 more currently in development. 

And then the private market rental starts have tripled and 

housing starts are up 115 per cent. The result is an increasing 

vacancy rate in our province. When the NDP left office, the 

vacancy rate was 1.2 per cent. Today it’s 2.5 per cent and it’s 

rising. And according to RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], 

Saskatchewan has hit the sweet spot in 2010, a strong yet 

affordable housing market. And despite all the noise about 

housing prices, home ownership costs in Saskatchewan remain 

below the national average. 

 

And the most basic thing that allows people to afford a home or 

to pay their rent is a job, and that’s why we talk about growth, 

not because it’s the ultimate goal but because growth is the 

means to a better future. And that’s why I’m proud of our 

record. There are 7,400 more people working in Saskatchewan 

than a year ago. Our unemployment rate is the second lowest in 

Canada. The average weekly earnings increased by 5.1 per cent 

in 2010. That’s the highest percentage increase in all of Canada. 

We have a momentum. The RBC predicts Saskatchewan will 

lead the country in growth in 2011 and in 2012. It’s estimated 

that our economy will grow by tens of thousands of jobs in the 

next two years, and this budget will continue the momentum. 

 

With lower taxes and investment in infrastructure and 

significant debt relief, this budget not only helps to bolster our 

current economic prosperity but it’ll help to give future 

generations a strong foundation for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Minister Responsible for Housing, Habitat for 

Humanity is an important part of the work that we’re doing and 

we have the opportunity this year to have the first ever 

women’s-built house in Habitat for Humanity here in Regina. 

 

We have a number of colleagues that are working on this issue, 

and I am very pleased that this year, I believe in the first week 

in April, we’re going to have the basement dug for this 

women’s-built house. We have a young family, a young man 

with four children who will be moving into this house. This 

house is going to be built by women. There will be a lot of 

support from men. 

 

I’m proud of the initiative and I believe that Regina citizens are 

pleased with the fact that they’re involved with Habitat for 

Humanity, and I would like to thank them for their support, and 

look forward to them helping me pound nails and paint walls 

this summer as we show that women can be not just vulnerable, 

but women can be professionals and working with their 

colleagues to mentor other women. I’m very pleased with this, 

proud of this project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the money in 

the budget for the government’s child and youth agenda. Just 

like housing, I’d like to compare what the opposition is 

proposing versus what we are doing. 

 

Last Thursday, the member from Saskatoon Centre, the critic 

for Social Services, made this statement. He said he wanted to 

touch on the child welfare thing. He wanted to touch on the 



7012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

child welfare thing, is his exact quote. He said, called it a thing 

like it was a creature out of the blue lagoon or something, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s not a child welfare thing; it is an 

opportunity for us to deal with children that are vulnerable, as 

government, to make sure that we change their lives. 

 

Maybe he didn’t know what to call it because the NDP never 

paid attention to the child welfare issue. The problem of 

overcrowding foster homes was identified as early as 1986. In 

the year 2000, the Children’s Advocate identified it as a serious 

gap and a major disconnect in the child welfare, yet the NDP 

allowed caseloads in child welfare to grow by 53 per cent 

between 2000 and 2007. The number of children that were not 

at home, in their own home or with extended family members, 

increased by 53 per cent and, Mr. Speaker, that’s not something 

the members opposite or anybody should be proud of. 

 

On December the 6th of last year, when asked by a reporter 

why the NDP didn’t have the political will to confront problems 

in the child welfare system, the member from Saskatoon Centre 

replied, many initiatives were started, but unfortunately they 

weren’t sustained, and he said clearly more needed to be done. 

 

When asked by Geoff Leo why the NDP never followed 

through on the child welfare, here is the response from the 

member from the member from Saskatoon Centre. He said, 

that’s . . . hmm, I think when you look back over the last 20 

years that we need to take . . . hmm, you know, we’re looking 

forward. That’s where we feel really optimistic. 

 

He felt optimistic when the issue of the child welfare issue was 

in our hands, not in the hands of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one area where we agree. We’re looking 

forward with optimism as well. We’re looking forward with 

optimism in child welfare because we’ve laid the foundation for 

fundamental change by making significant investments. We’ve 

had the opportunity to work with Vice-chief Lerat and president 

of the Métis Nation, Robert Doucette, who is pleased and 

willing to work with us when we make this significant and 

fundamental change in the child welfare system that is very 

much needed. 

 

With this budget, we’ve increased the child and family services 

by 124 per cent since November of 2007, and they’ve been 

smart investments and they’ve yielded significant results. 

Children in direct care of the ministry is declining for the first 

time in over a decade. It’s down 10 per cent since March of 

2009. And then the number of children placed permanently with 

extended family has increased 44 per cent since March of 2007. 

We’ve cut the number of overcrowded foster homes by 48 per 

cent since November 2007. We’ve cut the number of children 

who live in overcrowded foster homes by 51 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP had homes with 21 children living in them. 

We have also created 308 out-of-home care spaces for children 

in need since 2007. 

 

So with this budget, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are presented with a clear choice on children in care. The 

member from Saskatoon Centre presented their single plan last 

Thursday. He said, we’ve called for an all-party committee. So 

the choice between the NDP’s call for a committee or our 

choice of spending $34 million that we’ve committed in this 

budget to bring action on a child and youth agenda is clear. We 

also have a . . . Our approach includes $15.3 million to address 

the long-standing issues that were identified by the panel. It 

includes more money for residential care spaces and help to 

place children with their extended family. 

 

In addition, we are addressing the over-representation of First 

Nations and Métis people in the system. We know we have to 

address the gaps in First Nations and Métis education and 

employment. That’s why we’ve invested $17.1 million in this 

budget to address the gaps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also as part of this child and youth agenda, we’ve 

set aside $1.6 million for the autism strategy and the FASD 

[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] strategy. Mr. Speaker, I know 

that the members opposite are well aware that I have a passion 

for the FASD issue, that there is a . . . We know that this is a 

preventable condition. We know that we have to do more to not 

only educate but to work with the young people who have this 

condition. And I was disappointed when I looked at the 

platform that was presented by the members opposite and they 

didn’t even have the word FASD in their platform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the investments that we’re talking about is just a 

start. We know that more needs to be done. We know that this 

is just the first phase of our approach, but we’re working with 

the First Nations and Métis partners on the next step. But the 

question is going to be in this fall: who should be trusted with 

the next step? Who should be entrusted with addressing the 

needs of our children in the welfare system? Should the people 

across the way who watched this problem develop or should it 

be the people on this side of the House who are addressing the 

issue? Mr. Speaker, should it be the party that admitted that 

many initiatives are started but just weren’t sustained, or should 

it be the people on this side of the House who’ve addressed the 

overcrowded foster homes and reduced the number of children 

in care for the first time in over a decade? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just spend a minute talking about the 

other area of my responsibility, and that’s the Public Service 

Commission. In particular I want to highlight the progress that’s 

being made under the direction of the Public Service 

Commission under the lean initiative. For those people who 

aren’t familiar with lean, lean is the methodology used to 

improve workplace efficiency, outcomes, and customer 

experience. 

 

We started work on the lean across the entire public service in 

June of 2010. The first phase is completed and we’re proud of 

our accomplishments. Lead training was provided to 

approximately 250 managers. There is 36 teams of front-line 

staff and managers who were brought together to map out 

processes and identify solutions and common sense ways to 

improve how their work gets done. The projected benefits to 

date equate to $4 million return — $4 million return on $1 

million worth of investment. In terms of lean training sessions, 

the employees are telling us about how pleased they are to be 

involved in it. 

 

One of the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] employees who had taken the lean training said, I’ve 

been here for 28 years and no one has ever asked me for my 

ideas on how we could make things better. Another efficiency 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7013 

training session said, there’s so many things that we just do 

because we’ve always done it that way. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it’s an opportunity to do things differently. They aren’t 

top-down efficiency measures. We’re following the lead of our 

employees, the people that are on the ground, and we’re 

listening to them. It’s the public employees that are driving the 

lean and they are asking, can we do it better? Can we do it more 

quickly? Can we reduce the number of times an application gets 

handled? 

 

I’m proud of the lean initiatives within Social Services. They’ve 

reduced the number of forms required in caregiver payments 

process from 45 down to 7. Not only does that save employees’ 

time; the process helps reduce paperwork and simplifies the 

process for the clients of the ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Advantage is more than just a 

title on our budget; it’s our government’s philosophy. It’s a 

reminder to keep us continually asking ourselves, what do we 

need to do to improve economic momentum? What do we need 

to do to preserve our prosperity for the future? What do we 

need to do to continue making life better for our citizens? Last 

Wednesday with this budget, the Finance minister gave us a 

template for sustaining this advantage, and we’re taking his lead 

by asking, what more can we do? 

 

What we’re doing is, when we admit that we’re doing more, is 

doing what we admit by spending $34 million on our budget for 

child and youth agenda of just one step. In the long term we 

know we’ve built on the results we have in the child welfare 

reforms since November 2007. We’ve engaged First Nations; 

we’ve made a change in the welfare system; but most 

importantly, we’re capitalizing on the eagerness of our 

government to make life better. This budget provides political 

leadership from investments in housing to lower taxes on 

infrastructure investment, and we’re working hard to sustain our 

economic momentum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growth is not means to an end. More people 

means more people able to put food on the table. More people 

getting higher wages means more people to pay rent. More 

families earning stable income sends more kids to school on a 

full stomach and helps people, parents feel optimistic about the 

future. So growth isn’t trivial; it’s essential. That’s why we’re 

working hard to maintain the Saskatchewan advantage. It was 

John Kotter who said: 

 

Leaders establish the vision for the future and set the 

strategy for getting there; they cause change. They 

motivate and inspire others to go in the right direction and 

they, along with everyone else, sacrifice to get there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very thankful for all the leaders across this 

great province, and particularly those in the Kelvington-Wadena 

constituency who have motivated me to serve as their MLA. 

I’m very pleased to have had the opportunity to be part of the 

budget process led by the Minister of Finance that truly reflects 

the priorities of the people of this province. It’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Lower taxes, improved quality of life, 

a lower debt — it doesn’t get any better than that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I will be supporting this budget. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I request 

leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you, a very good friend 

of ours, Pam Schwann, and her husband, Russ Hodgins, and 

their children Kellen and Lauren. 

 

Pam has been working along with myself and the Minister of 

Social Services on the wonderful project of the Women Build 

for Habitat for Humanity. So she was in for a meeting today — 

wonderful opportunity for her to come sit in her House of 

Legislative Assembly and be able to experience some of this 

evening. And she has brought her family with her. They’re 

residents of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, so I’m so pleased to be 

able to introduce this fine family to the Legislative Assembly 

this evening. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve spent 25 years in the legislature, and this will be 

my last response to a budget. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And I’m glad that the members opposite are 

applauding me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what I want to do tonight is there’s a 

couple of issues I want to talk about. But one of the issues that I 

think is important to remind ourselves is that in 1991, when the 

NDP came to government, upon coming to government we 

immediately struck the Saskatchewan Financial Management 

Review Commission, which was headed by Donald Gass. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important document because what this 

document did was pave the way for how an NDP government 

was going to deal with a very, very dire fiscal situation in 1991. 

And I want to review some of the contents of this report 

because I think it is appropriate today in terms of what is 



7014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

contained in this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Donald Gass report indicated at the time that 

the former Devine government in one year, from March of 1991 

until October 31st of 1991, had a deficit of over 1.3 . . . or $1.2 

billion. Mr. Speaker, in those days, revenues were about $2.3 

billion and expenses were 3.5. So there was a deficit, a deficit 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, and he says, what was a loaf 

of bread? Well I can tell the member that in those days 

Saskatchewan had the second highest debt to GDP [gross 

domestic product] in Canada. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we were 

broke. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Now I know the members opposite don’t want to hear this, but 

this was the reality. And one of the things that Donald Gass 

reported to the public was that on March 31st, 1990, the 

Government of Saskatchewan had issued guarantees for point 

nine six two billion, and a year later, the guarantees had 

increased by almost 40 per cent to 1.329 billion. And according 

to his schedule, the province’s guaranteed debt on September 

30th to October 31st, 1991 was $1.693 billion. Now why do I 

raise this? You know, Mr. Speaker, every member of the 

legislature should have to read this report because it talks about 

what happened and what we needed to do in order to go 

forward. 

 

Now I just listened to the Minister of Social Services talk about 

her highways initiative, and I want to make this observation. 

Mr. Speaker, contained in the provincial budget is a decision by 

the members opposite to now guarantee the Immigrant Investor 

Fund. And according to their housing program, over the next 

five years $200 million of the Immigrant Investor Fund is going 

to be guaranteed by the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1999 when the federal government changed the 

rules and said to the provinces you now have to guarantee these 

funds, the NDP government at the time made the decision that 

we were going to withdraw from the program because we 

thought, and it’s even reported . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Oh, they’re saying it’s a missed opportunity. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker? In the last report of the 

Saskatchewan GGF [Government Growth Fund] Management 

Corporation, 2008, under their government, what does the last 

report say? And I quote from page 2: 

 

Saskatchewan participated in the IIP from 1989 to 1999 to 

avail itself of this source of investor capital to support 

employment creation in the province. However, in 1999 

the Federal government modified the terms of the IIP such 

that SGGF MC [which is the growth fund] would be 

required to guarantee the return of principal to the 

investors. Because of the risk involved with this 

guarantee, the Province withdrew from the program and 

began the process of “winding-up” SGGF MC. 

 

My point is this: that what the minister announced yesterday is 

a 200-and-some-odd million dollar housing initiative. But $200 

million is backstopped by the province, Mr. Speaker, when in 

their own annual report it was indicated that the risk was too 

high to the province to do this kind of loan guarantee. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, who are they . . . You know, let’s be honest. 

We are going to add over $230 million according to their order 

in council of loan guarantees, which is added to the debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And that is exactly how we got in 

trouble in the 1980s and the early 1990s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The difficulty here is, Mr. Speaker, according to the minister’s 

document and one of the issues that is, one of the holes in this 

budget is how they’re going to deal with not only affordable 

housing but low-income housing. Here is what they’re doing. 

Loans with this loan guarantee to the immigrant investors will 

be provided to developers for projects approved by 

municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, you know, what we had was 

we had Capital One corporation, which was determining which 

projects would be financed by the Immigrant Investor Fund, 

and they’re leaving it up to the municipalities. 

 

Loans will be available for 90 per cent — 90 per cent — of 

construction cost including land costs, at 4 per cent interest rate 

which could be adjusted over time. Now, Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at what the minister says, apparently all of the people who 

are going to get into this housing are going to have to be able to 

go to the bank or the credit union and be eligible for a 

mortgage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my question is this: why is the province of Saskatchewan 

loan guaranteeing $200 million to the Immigrant Investor Fund 

when in 1999 we decided to withdraw from it because it was 

too big a risk to backstop developers to build houses for people 

who have to be eligible at the local credit union or the CIBC 

[Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] or the Royal Bank for 

a mortgage? How is this going to get people into new housing 

stock? The minister has not been clear on that. 

 

And the number one issue, Mr. Speaker, in the province are all 

of these people whose incomes have not gone up to meet the 

cost of escalating rent in the province of Saskatchewan. But 

particularly, I can speak in my own constituency where rents 

have gone from $450 for a one-bedroom apartment to over 

$815 for an apartment. And, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened 

when that is going up over 400 or close to $400 a month in the 

last four years, Mr. Speaker, their incomes have not increased in 

order to meet the escalating cost of rent. And I understand from 

our critic, the member from Saskatoon Centre, that there are 

literally thousands of people waiting to get into low-income 

housing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I see nothing in the minister’s announcement 

of yesterday that is going to help the single woman who is 63 

years of age whose rent is now $815. She is not going to be able 

to go out and buy a house when she’s on a fixed income or 

income support because she doesn’t have the money for a down 

payment, and she wouldn’t be eligible for a mortgage at the 

bank. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a concern. 

 

We see for the first time, for the first time — and there may be 

other deals that are going on — but for the first time we see the 

government doing something that is very risky and adding to 

the long-term debt of the province, over $200 million by loan 

guaranteeing the Immigrant Investor Fund. And I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that up until November of 2010, Saskatchewan wasn’t 

into this. It got into it apparently. But one of the provinces that 

has not gone down this path is the province of Alberta, which 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7015 

the members opposite like to trumpet weekly in the Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a problem. And we’re going back to the 

past, and I see, Mr. Speaker, that we are going down a road of 

loan guarantees when it’s entirely inappropriate, entirely 

inappropriate because there is . . . It is not about, it is not about 

some independent organization determining what is a good 

investment. And one of the things that Don Gass talked about in 

his report in 1991 which is important is the government decided 

to loan guarantee groups that couldn’t go to the banks, and it 

was far too risky, Mr. Speaker. And so this is entirely, entirely 

inappropriate. 

 

And there is no, there is nothing in the minister’s announcement 

about low-income housing for people who are facing escalating 

rents. And they aren’t getting escalating income increases, and 

they’re sitting on wait-lists for low-income housing, Mr. 

Speaker. And there is nothing in their housing strategy for those 

people, and this is an issue. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I used to work for the Office of the 

Rentalsman a long time ago. And the members opposite say it 

was the NDP that got rid of rent control. Actually it was Grant 

Devine and his government that got rid of rent control and went 

to rent review. And the onus was on the tenant to go to the 

Office of the Rentalsman in order to have their rent reviewed, 

and if it was too high relative to the costs that the landlord had 

incurred, it could be rolled back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that 80 per cent of Canadians 

that rent have access to some sort of rent review in this country. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think you will see, before the election, the 

NDP indicate how this review would work, Mr. Speaker. 

Because there is no question that because of . . . not developers 

but speculators coming in, we’ve seen a significant increase in 

the cost of rent. And I don’t think the loan guarantee to the 

Immigrant Investor Fund which gives money, lends money to 

home developers is going to get us any more people into the 

housing market because, as the minister said, all of these 

families are going to have to go to the bank and be eligible for a 

mortgage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other issue that I want to talk about, which is 

important and was not really addressed in this budget, is the 

whole issue of child daycare. Now this government has said on 

numerous occasions that they’ve increased child daycare spaces 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, when I 

look at the Minister of Education’s plan for 2011-12, she has 

some measurements that she reports on. And, Mr. Speaker, last 

year the minister of Education — not this Minister of 

Education, but the present Minister of Finance — indicated that 

we were going to have 11,650 child daycare spaces in the 

province. Well there’s a lot of child daycare that’s going to have 

to be built because according to the minister’s baseline, there 

were 10,848 spaces. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister of Education, who was the 

minister . . . or is the Minister of Finance, he indicated to us last 

year that there were going to be 235 additional child care spaces 

and at the end of this fiscal year we’d have 11,650 spaces. And 

then what do we get in this budget? This is where the 

conservative math just doesn’t quite add up. Because in this 

budget they say that they’re going to have an additional 500 

new child care spaces for a total of 12,700. Well last year it was 

11,650. This year it is 12,700. I don’t quite understand the 

math, and maybe someone can explain it to me. 

 

But here’s what I know: Saskatchewan has the highest labour 

force attachment of women with children five years of age and 

younger. Saskatchewan has the poorest record when it comes to 

child daycare. And, Mr. Speaker, I take some responsibility for 

that because I was part of a government that did not put a lot of 

new resources into child daycare. But there was a whole policy 

that was developed when the Martin government was going to 

put $150 million into child daycare in this province. 

 

I still have the policy document. You can probably get Wynne 

Young to dust it off and you might want to use it, because it 

made sense. And let me tell you why it made sense. There was 

going to be a significant increase in child daycare spaces in the 

province of Saskatchewan because we had the highest labour 

force attachment of women with children five years of age and 

younger. And I have to say that with our population growth, 

with our birth growth, we need to do much more than 500 new 

child daycare spaces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that if we were really 

innovative . . . And I note the minister went off to Russia. 

Because Saskatchewan is the only province that has early 

learning and care in Education. It took us some years to get it 

moved out of Social Services, but it was moved over to 

Education I believe in 2005. And what we need to do is have 

early learning and care centres in every elementary school in the 

province so that parents aren’t running their children to daycare, 

then trying to get them over to pre-K [pre-kindergarten]. And 

then maybe they’re not in pre-K but they’re in child daycare. 

They have to get them over to kindergarten and so on and so 

forth. 

 

I’m pleased that we’re now going to start putting early learning 

and care centres in any new elementary schools, but I think 

there’s an opportunity for us to start to do much more when it 

comes to early learning and care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And that is the other significant hole in this 

budget. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final point I want to make is this, if I can find 

my papers. When this conservative government came to office 

in 2011 . . . or 2007 I should say, they were lucky, and I mean 

lucky. Let me tell you why they were lucky. They were lucky 

because the prices for our commodities, our resources — oil, 

gas, potash, uranium, you name it — was beginning to increase, 

and increase substantially, Mr. Speaker. If you look at the last 

NDP budget in the province of Saskatchewan it was about $7.8 

billion. Today, Mr. Speaker, with this budget we have seen 

some significant increases in expenditures and revenues . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Pardon me? Say it. You know, 

we’ve got all these people over there that are, you know, so 

brilliant, so brilliant, so brilliant, but there’s some things that 

they haven’t quite gotten right, Mr. Speaker. So brilliant that 

they’re adding $200 million in long-term debt and not telling 

anyone, and they’re supporting developers to build houses that 

. . . which is not going to do anything to get people into a new 

home because they still have to go down to the bank and be 



7016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

eligible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let me tell you what I was going to go say. Here’s what this 

government has done. In 2007-08 the budget was in terms of 

expenses was going to be about $7.8 billion. What is it today, 

Mr. Speaker? What is it today? Well over $10 billion. What 

were the actual revenues in those days some four years ago? 

About $8 billion, Mr. Speaker. What are they today? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look at what the conservatives have had in the 

last several years, let me give you an example. In . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the Sask Party, all of you are, basically all 

of you are conservatives. Let’s call a spade a spade — or is it a 

shovel, Mr. Speaker? They are conservatives and most of them 

support the Steven Harper Conservatives even though they 

don’t want us to know they are conservatives. But you know 

what, Mr. Speaker? They’re not fiscal conservatives. They’re 

not fiscal conservatives. They spend money like there’s no 

tomorrow. 

 

And we’ve just started to see the beginnings of loan guarantees. 

Well you knew about it last spring with Amicus, the $27 

million nursing home loan guarantee. And now we’ve got 

another one, a $230 million loan guarantee. And so that gets us 

up to $250 million in loan guarantees when Donald Gass told us 

not to do it. But they wouldn’t know the Donald Gass report 

because none of them have read it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just talk about the conservatives. 

Let’s talk about the conservatives. In 2007-08 the budget was 

7.7 in terms of expenditures. What is it this year? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s well over 10 billion. 

 

It was the reality of revenues. It was the reality of revenues. 

And what do we have now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what 

they’re planning on spending? They’ve increased spending in 

this province by over 38 per cent. You know, Mr. Speaker, if 

you look at the revenue they’ve had, they had over $10 billion 

in additional revenue, and we left them with $2.2 billion. And 

the most disgusting thing, the most disgusting thing, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they have stripped the Crowns bare. They’ve 

taken $1.7 billion out of the Crowns. And they say, oh they’re 

reducing the debt. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got a great big flashy, a great big 

flashy pamphlet that we’re all going to see. It’s going to come 

to our doors. And what do they say? They are reducing the 

provincial debt — they call it provincial debt — to 3.8 billion. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is not the provincial debt because when you 

go into their book you . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh. 

Provincial debt is not GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt, my 

friends. Provincial debt is not GRF debt. Provincial debt is GRF 

debt and Crown corporation debt, and what is it? What is it? 

 

Well let’s find it in their little budget book. What is it? Here we 

are. Their debt is going . . . Their Crown corporation debt is 3.6 

billion on its way to 6 billion. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? 

By 2015, by 2015 the province’s debt, the public debt is going 

to $10.5 billion. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was 10.9 billion when 

they came to office. So they paid debt down on the GRF side. 

Crown corporation debt is going up. And the public debt, is it 

going down overall? Absolutely not. The trajectory is up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I would just like to remind the members, read the Gass 

report. Read the Gass report. Because this is what conservatives 

do to the province of Saskatchewan. I know they’re riding high 

and they think they’re big time spenders. They’re investing in 

everything, and they’re guaranteeing loans to their friends, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s exactly how we got ourselves in trouble in 

the 1980s, and it took us a decade to get ourselves out of it. And 

we had to scrape and claw our way out of it. And there were 

bond agencies — and they can ask the people over in Finance 

because many of them are the same people — there are bond 

agencies that didn’t want to lend the money, lend the province 

any money because it was a basket case. 

 

And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that if these guys don’t rein it in, 

we’re back. We’re back . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, you 

know what? He says, are we going to get an upgrade? Well you 

know, Mr. Speaker, you might get an upgrade. You might. But 

you’re adding to the long-term debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s what you’re doing. And you know what? 

We got upgrades. We got upgrades. Now why did we get 

upgrades? Because we had our fiscal house in order. But there 

are risks associated with this budget, and the risk is they’re 

starting to loan guarantee again. They’re starting to loan 

guarantee again — $230 million to the Immigrant Investor Fund 

— when it was clear that there’s too big a risk in this, and that’s 

what they’re up to. 

 

And I predict, I predict commodity prices collapse, which they 

may. We’ve got ourselves one big mess because they’ve 

increased spending by just about 10 per cent a year in the last 

four years — 38 per cent. And, well, it keeps going up and up 

and up. And their own-source revenues are going down and 

down and down, Mr. Speaker, because they’re becoming too 

reliant on commodity prices. And we know what happens with 

commodity prices — what goes up comes down. 

 

And so I would say to the members opposite that you should 

have put a little bit more money onto debt with these kind of 

revenues in the last four years. They think . . . They’re so proud. 

They’re so proud that they’ve reduced the debt by 3 billion on 

the GRF, but Crown corporation debt is going up. 

 

The last thing I wanted to talk about is potash. Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite, the members opposite have just torn a strip 

off of us because we’re talking about a review of the royalty 

structure in the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I sat on the 

Treasury Board when we changed the royalty structure in order 

to have mine expansion in the province. And what was the 

price, what was the price of potash at the time? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the member. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I sat on the Treasury Board when we 

changed the price, the royalty structure for potash. And I sat on 

the Treasury Board at the time and the price of potash was a 

little over, I think, $300 a tonne — I’m going from memory, but 

I reviewed my old notes. I reviewed my old notes. What we 

gave the potash industry was 120 per cent depreciation . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Write a book. 

 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7017 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, I am going to write a book and some of 

it’s going to be about you people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we gave the potash industry 120 per cent 

depreciation on potash that was, what, $90? 

 

An Hon. Member: — About 90. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — $90 a tonne. Well, Mr. . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh you can say I’m redder than whatever, but 

you know, this is the level of debate over there. That’s the level 

of debate. There’s nothing classy about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the price of potash was, I correct myself, was about $90. 

We gave the potash industry 120 per cent depreciation so they 

didn’t have to pay royalties, Mr. Speaker. And when the price 

of potash is escalating, I think it makes fiscal sense to review it. 

You know, maybe just a little tad more we might be able to get 

in order to pay for maybe low-income housing, instead of 

having to loan guarantee immigrant investor funds. Maybe a 

little bit more in order to put more money into child daycare in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Maybe we should do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I don’t think it’s a stretch, but not these people over here. 

They’re onto their spin. They’re not thoughtful. They’re not 

thoughtful. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I thought about what it would have 

been like in the 1990s if these people had been in charge. Well 

I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, they can rip us a new one every day of 

the year. But I know this: we got this fiscal house of our 

province in order. I know that. 

 

Secondly, we started the change under Lorne Calvert where 

people started to come back to the province, you know. And I 

know the Premier at least has the good graces to acknowledge 

that, even though the members opposite don’t. The last big . . . 

The largest increase in population came in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

Review Statistics Canada. We know that the immigrant 

nominee program was put in place under the Calvert 

government which is leading to population growth in the 

province. 

 

We know that basically the royalty structure for oil, gas, potash, 

diamonds was put in place and we can review . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . You see, they say now we want to change it. It 

makes sense. It is prudent to take a look, to take a review. I 

can’t imagine a government not being prepared to at least look 

at it because it’s 120 per cent depreciation when the price per 

year . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . In terms of their capital 

investments in the province. Not 100 per cent. Because it was 

$90 a tonne. Now it’s going up. Maybe we want to review that, 

Mr. Speaker. Now is the time, Mr. Speaker. Now is the time. 

Review it. Review it. 

 

Now you see, you don’t hear me . . . [inaudible] . . . with the 

peanut gallery yipping and yapping again instead of paying 

some attention. It is not inappropriate to review your finances 

all the time, Mr. Speaker. It is not inappropriate. But these guys, 

these guys have to spin around the province and say, oh the 

world is falling in. The world is falling in . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well that’s what you’re doing. 

You know, they’re spinning around the province: the world is 

collapsing — and it’s not. Prudent people, good thinkers, 

fiscally responsible people look at resource rents to see whether 

or not we’re extracting the right price for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken beyond my 20 minutes. I want to 

thank the members opposite for indulging me. But there are two 

things that this budget does not address, whether they like it or 

not. It does not address child daycare in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and it does not address the issue of low-income 

housing. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you, I will be 

supporting the amendment as introduced by my colleagues. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I have a number of comments I would like to say 

about the budget speech, about the budget, Mr. Speaker. I think 

it’s an excellent budget. But after listening to the member 

opposite, I recognized or realized, I should say, that the speech 

given by the member from Saskatoon Nutana was the budget 

speech she never got to deliver as the minister of Finance, Mr. 

Speaker. This was her opportunity tonight to deliver the budget 

speech she never had as the minister of Finance, because her 

stay as the minister of Finance was so short, and she never got 

to deliver a budget. So the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

finally got to deliver the budget speech she never had, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I noted in her speech and in the speech of a number of the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but it was reinforced by the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana that in 2007 when the 

Saskatchewan Party defeated the NDP at the polls, that the NDP 

claim there was $2.3 billion. Now and when we listen to their 

speeches, Mr. Speaker, they always say, well we couldn’t afford 

to do that because we didn’t have any money. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, either there was $2.3 million there and they had 

money and they chose not to invest in child care, because there 

was a dearth of child care spaces in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:45] 

 

They chose then not to provide funding for highways that we 

hear the members from Cumberland and Athabasca 

complaining about all the time. They even admit that the roads 

were in terrible shape under the NDP but they had . . . If it’s 

true they had $2.3 billion, then their NDP chose not to fund 

those highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When they complain about the hospitals and the long-term care 

and affordable housing, if they had $2.3 billion at election time 

in 2007, Mr. Speaker, then they chose not to build those 

facilities — no hospitals, no schools, no long-term care, no 

affordable housing, Mr. Speaker, and no highways. That was 

their choices then if the money was there. So they can’t have it 

both ways. They can’t have money in the account and still 

claim they had no money to be able to carry out those things 

that the people of Saskatchewan wanted. They can have one or 

the other, but they cannot have both, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

that’s what those members always claim. 

 



7018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

Now I’d like to return to where I had intended to start, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege and pleasure to 

be able to serve the constituents of Cannington. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I remember some of the original speeches of the 

members opposite in 1991 when they first formed their last 

round of government, Mr. Speaker. In fact is, I remember the 

Finance minister of the day, Mr. Ed Tchorzewski, claiming that 

there had been no debt in 1982 when the Conservatives had 

defeated the NDP of Allan Blakeney, but that there was a 

massive debt in 1991. 

 

And yet after persistent questioning of Mr. Tchorzewski, he 

finally admitted, Mr. Speaker, that indeed in 1982 there was 

debt in the province of Saskatchewan. We just saw, we just 

saw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

say that the GRF debt is not just the debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan. She wants to include the Crown debt. She wants 

to include the unfunded pension liabilities, Mr. Speaker. Well 

those things were there in both 1982 and in 1991. They didn’t 

want to count it in 1982, but they sure want to count it now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s changed? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — What’s changed? They’re not the 

government now. That’s what’s changed. 

 

For the 16 years the NDP were in government, summary 

financial statements were not to be seen. Mr. Speaker, no one 

was to ever refer to summary financial statements. It was GRF 

only. Well, Mr. Speaker, we talk about both of them. We record 

both, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the 

first time that both the GRF debt and the summary financial 

statements are in a surplus position, Mr. Speaker. Again I was 

distracted by the member opposite’s comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take the opportunity to thank my 

family for their support over the years. My three children were, 

I think, eight, seven, and five when I first got elected. Well two 

of them are adults working on their own, and the last one is in 

his . . . This will be coming up his final year of university. So 

it’s been a lifetime for them, and it’s been a lifetime for me as 

well. 

 

And, you know, the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, my 

constituency assistant started work the same day I did as an 

MLA. She has been there during the campaign to win the 

nomination meeting, during the campaign to become an MLA 

for the very first time, and every time since then. And she still is 

part of my office . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Well one 

of my colleagues says, if she puts up with me, she should get a 

medal. In fact is she likes it very much when her husband and I 

go off on a hunting trip because then she’s free of both of us. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Cannington constituency has certainly 

been growing in the last couple or three years. We have seen a 

huge expansion of the oil industry in our area. Agriculture is 

doing very well. And as you tour the constituency, you will see 

that most of the communities are growing. There are new 

buildings going up in virtually every community. There are at 

least one new subdivision, if not two or more, going up in the 

communities. If you look at communities like Carnduff, 

Oxbow, Redvers, Carlyle, Stoughton, Lampman, Wawota, there 

are new homes, new businesses going up in every one of those 

communities. 

 

And fact is, Mr. Speaker, my hometown of Alida, which had 

probably not grown throughout virtually all of the NDP years 

starting back to 1944, has seen a significant growth of new 

homes in the community in the last two years. So, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a brand new store. We have a new restaurant, and we 

have a number of oil-field-related service industries as well that 

are new in the community. And we have a very large trucking 

company that calls Alida home, Three Star Trucking, that runs 

probably well over 100 employees, Mr. Speaker. So in a 

community of 180 people, 100 employees is a lot of people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these communities are benefiting from the 

rules and regulations that have been put in place by the previous 

administration and our administration, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to the oil patch. We haven’t changed the royalty rates 

and that is what’s allowing industry to grow. 

 

The fear though is that if the members opposite should ever 

return to power, which doesn’t look like it’s going to happen in 

the near future, but with their statements that royalties need to 

be reviewed — we need more money so we need to raise those 

royalty rates, Mr. Speaker — that only scares business away. It 

doesn’t encourage people to come to set up in Saskatchewan, to 

invest in Saskatchewan, to risk in Saskatchewan, and certainly 

doesn’t encourage them to grow Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And fact is, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen since we have 

formed government is an expansion of education in the 

Cannington constituency. Before I was elected, I was on what 

was called the ad hoc committee for education in the Oxbow 

School Division, and that took place about 1989, 1990. And 

part of that discussion was the need to build a new high school, 

elementary school in Oxbow, Mr. Speaker. So we’re talking 

more than 20 years ago. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a new K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] school in Oxbow. That school was started under the 

current Minister of Finance, the previous minister of Education, 

Mr. Speaker. He got approval for that school. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the current Minister of Education and I will be 

attending the grand opening, the ribbon cutting ceremony for 

that school here in a couple of weeks. 

 

So a project that started more than 20 years ago being talked 

about, had the opposition had the opportunity to meet the need 

in that area for education, they claim to have $2.3 billion sitting 

in their hip pocket in a bank account and chose to not make that 

investment in the youth of our province. This government has 

made that investment. As my colleague said, that choice not to 

make that investment was Roy’s rural revenge, Mr. Speaker. 

Rural Saskatchewan did not vote for the NDP after 1995, and as 

a consequence of which, the NDP had a scorched earth policy 

across most of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I may actually get up to 2011 before we’re 

done here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout all the years . . . And I have a highway 

that continues to suffer the fate imposed by the NDP, a gravel 

— well gravel is being generous, Mr. Speaker — a clay 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7019 

highway, most of which was stuck to the side of my truck until 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are building significant roads across this 

province. We’ve invested well over $2 billion in the past three 

years of rebuilding our highway infrastructure that was allowed 

not only to deteriorate but disappear under the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker —more than $400 million in this budget going into 

highway construction across this province. We can’t get it all 

done in one year, Mr. Speaker, but we’re certainly making a 

heck of a head start on getting some of it done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And over the next 10 years, we will more than complete that. 

Because of all the new growth that’s taking place in this 

province, those highways are still being stressed. And we’re 

going to need to continue to provide support to those areas of 

the province, especially where the resources are being extracted 

and where that infrastructure is paying the cost of all that work, 

hard work and new people coming into the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked about Oxbow. Well we have a young 

gentleman from Oxbow working presently in the legislature. 

Lance Hammell is one of the interns from Oxbow, Mr. Speaker. 

I saw Lance move up through the school system in Oxbow 

before the new school was built, and he is certainly a good 

representative of our area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is doing quite well in our area of the 

province. We have a lot of snow this winter. We had substantial 

moisture last year, but we weren’t nearly as badly affected as 

most of the rest of the province was, Mr. Speaker. So we’re 

hoping that the weather will turn around, that it will cease 

snowing, and that the snow will melt and we can finally get on 

the land and start one of the largest annual investments that any 

province sees. And it’s called seeding, Mr. Speaker, where the 

farmers of Saskatchewan invest billions of dollars in a risky 

venture and hope to capitalize on it in the fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of other things that have been happening 

in my constituency related to the budget is the investment that is 

taking place in municipalities. We have seen significant 

investment through the Ministry of Municipal Affairs, both in 

urban projects, in new subdivisions, new water projects, Mr. 

Speaker, new water filtration systems, new wells, even a water 

pipeline, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, even 

sewers. The member opposite talks about sewers. Yes, even 

investments in sewers, none of which happened while he was 

the minister responsible for any of these things, Mr. Speaker, 

not even highways. He was the minister of Highways at one 

point in time, now he complains about the highways he didn’t 

fix, Mr. Speaker. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, he’s no longer a 

minister but sits in opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health care is an important issue in my 

constituency as well. We have seen new health care facilities go 

in. We have seen quite a number of new doctors come into our 

constituency, which is very important, Mr. Speaker, for without 

doctors, without nurses, we would not have a health care 

system. What this government has done, we had promised to 

bring forward 800, recruit 800 new nurses over four years. We 

succeeded in doing that in less than three years, Mr. Speaker. 

And Cannington constituency, as many of the other 

constituencies across the province, have certainly benefited 

from this. 

 

[21:00] 

 

One of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that we are benefiting from has 

been the investment in libraries that have taken place, Mr. 

Speaker, under the current Minister of Finance, the previous 

minister of Education, who put a significant capital investment 

into all the libraries for a SILS [single integrated library system] 

program which automated a significant number of their 

systems, Mr. Speaker. This dramatically increased the 

investment in libraries for that year. While the capital cost has 

been reduced as an investment to the library system, we still 

have continued to maintain significantly more money going into 

the library system than was happening under the previous 

administration. 

 

And I think it’s something that the libraries have all 

appreciated, Mr. Speaker, and something that we continue to 

recognize is a very needed educational tool and an opportunity 

for people to better themselves and for entertainment in reading 

books. Reading books is very important, Mr. Speaker, and the 

fact is being a somewhat more senior member of our caucus, I 

still like the feel of paper when I’m reading a book, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the areas that the members opposite have failed to talk 

about in their speeches, Mr. Speaker, is the reduction of the 

income tax that occurred in this budget — $1,000 more 

deductible, Mr. Speaker. So that means it’s $1,000 less you’re 

paying taxes on. And it doesn’t really matter whether you’re 

earning minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, or if you’re — to use a 

name from the opposition side — Bill Doyle, you will not pay 

the tax on that $1,000. Now it certainly benefits the person at 

the lower end of the scale a lot more than it would benefit Bill 

Doyle, and it has a significant impact across the province. 

 

A family of four earning more . . . or less than $45,000, Mr. 

Speaker, would pay no personal income tax in Saskatchewan. 

That is extremely significant, Mr. Speaker. That allows people 

to invest in their children’s recreation — hockey teams, 

volleyball teams, figure skating, dance, whatever it might be, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s an additional amount of money that people 

can advance to their families, Mr. Speaker, or it could be an 

additional amount of money that they can invest into their 

community. Because most communities, whether they be the 

larger urban centres and their smaller communities within those 

cities or the small communities across rural Saskatchewan, 

every person in those community invests in their community, in 

their rink, in their community hall, whatever it might be. They 

invest both in volunteer time and in cash, Mr. Speaker, as 

donations for any new projects that need to take place in those 

communities. 

 

Our community of Alida just rebuilt the community hall here 

over the last number of years, put cement floor in the rink, 

rebuilt the swimming pool, Mr. Speaker. There are many 

recreational facilities and educational facilities that go into these 

small communities, Mr. Speaker, that are done with volunteer 

labour and donations. 

 

One of the things that happens throughout the community on a 

regular basis is a fundraiser for the health care centre or for an 



7020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

educational opportunity. And fact is a friend of mine, his wife 

phoned me up the other day and said, I need some money. Oh 

what do you need some money for? Well I’m in jail. There’s a 

jail and bail at the school in Redvers and I need a contribution. 

So I sent the lady in question a contribution, and it helped her 

get out of jail, Mr. Speaker. And the community raised over 

$15,000 for school projects in that community. So, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a very, very good budget. 

 

Now I could start on this part of the speech, but I’m suspicious 

that the Whip will be tugging at my coattails here very shortly 

and indicating that it’s time for me to wrap it up. But, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the areas that the members opposite also don’t 

talk about and that’s the small-business tax, income tax that was 

reduced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had under the NDP — and it had carried on under this 

administration — a medium-high level of small-business tax at 

4.5 per cent. Well we cut that by over half, down to 2 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, making us the lowest small-business income tax in 

all of western Canada, in all of the new West, Mr. Speaker, and 

third lowest in Canada. That puts us in a very strong, 

competitive position for new small businesses moving into this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They can see that they have an 

opportunity to grow in this province, along with the province 

itself, Mr. Speaker. That is good news for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing that I haven’t heard anybody over on the other 

side mention, Mr. Speaker, and I guess it is somewhat 

understandable since none of them actually represent anything 

outside of a major metropolitan area, Mr. Speaker. We do have 

the two members from the North, but there’s very, very little 

agriculture takes place there. Mr. Speaker, a major reduction in 

education property tax has been completed in this province, the 

largest ever reduction of property taxes in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The mill rate on agricultural land is reduced to 

3.91 mills. Well, Mr. Speaker, before we started on this effort 

here two years ago, the mill rate in my municipality from 

education was 21 mills, 21 mills. And we’ve reduced it down to 

less than 4 mills, Mr. Speaker, more than an 80 per cent 

reduction. Every farmer across the province of Saskatchewan 

benefits from that. Whether they’re an owner or a renter, Mr. 

Speaker, they all benefit from that reduction. 

 

But we didn’t forget the rest of the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Every residence was also reduced, Mr. Speaker. Every 

residence was reduced to 9.51 mills, Mr. Speaker. Not as 

significant as the reduction in agricultural land, but a significant 

reduction nevertheless. 

 

As well business was reduced, Mr. Speaker, business was 

reduced. So, Mr. Speaker, back in 1944 Tommy Douglas, the 

person the NDP put on a pedestal and revere every morning, 

Mr. Speaker, said that education property taxes on agriculture 

was unacceptable and needed to change. I don’t know if Allan 

Blakeney said that, but certainly Roy Romanow when he was 

the NDP premier said that. And Lorne Calvert certainly said it. I 

was at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] when he said about education property tax that 

the status quo was not acceptable. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they had, according to them, $2.3 

billion in the bank, but they couldn’t afford to reduce education 

property taxes. They chose not to do it, Mr. Speaker. This 

government with the Premier from Swift Current did it, Mr. 

Speaker. First time in 65 years, Mr. Speaker, and we did it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the Saskatchewan, the member 

from Swift Current, was named the Politician of the Year. Well 

I happen to agree with that: the politician of the year in Canada, 

the politician of the year in Saskatchewan, and the politician of 

the year in this legislature. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 

budget, voting against the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 

honour and a pleasure to join in on the reply to the budget. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is an honour to be here representing the 

Cumberland constituency. 

 

And I definitely just want to take a few minutes out and 

recognize some of the individuals that work with me and 

support me: my wife; my family; Elder Catherine Charles, I just 

want to acknowledge her; the leadership and community 

members; and the team that works with me and trying to make 

sure that we deal with, I guess, the constituency concerns. And I 

just want to thank my CA [constituency assistant] Al Rivard 

and the members that help us out and do the job that we need to 

do in bringing the information forward and their concerns. And 

it’s an honour to represent them and try to deal with their issues. 

Sometime the issues are, I guess they touch your heart, and you 

try to do all you can to help them dealing with the different 

ministries. 

 

But you know, I guess I want to reply to the budget. And you 

know, you look at the budget and there’s record revenue. And 

I’ll give the government that. You definitely have record 

revenue. You have spent a lot of money. I’ll give you that. I 

think members on both sides have talked about that. And I do, I 

will give you that. You’ve spent a lot of money, in four years 

just about $40 billion. It’s amazing: record revenue. You have 

picked your priorities. You have made your decisions as a 

government. And I will get into that a little further on, on 

comments on whether I feel they were right or wrong. You may 

feel they are right. And I guess the people spoke, and you will 

make the decisions for now. Granted that; we’ll give it that. 

 

But you know, when you look at the hard times, and there are a 

lot of people . . . And you can comment about the cuts to 

income tax. And I think I have to admit, people like to see that, 

and the cuts are good. So I’ll give you that credit, that there is 

tax cuts. It’s good. It helps the economy, whether it’s business, 

individual, a family. 

 

But you know I have to be honest with you. It’s very 

concerning when you left thousands, maybe tens of thousands, 

maybe a hundred thousand, you left people behind that are not 

the same income level that others appreciate in this province. 

They’re struggling out there. They’re families. They’re 

hard-working. They’re trying. And you left them behind. And 

you can sit here and say, and we can go back and forth and 

debate it day after day, but you left a lot of people behind in 

your budget. You didn’t take into consideration the challenges. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7021 

You had such opportunities. There’re people out there that look 

at the budget. And I know some of the mayors talked about 

hope and talked about what could be in this budget for them 

because it was record revenue you had. You had such 

opportunities — $40 billion to spend over four years, over four 

years, what things you could have done to address some of the 

needs of the trappers, of the trappers, northern trappers. What 

did you do? Nothing for them. You cut their budgets. So don’t 

stand here and ask what you can do. They’ve been telling you 

what you can do. 

 

Then you talk about housing. You talk about the fishing 

industry in northern Saskatchewan. What did you do there? 

Nothing. So don’t come here and say oh what should we do? 

They’ve been telling you. We as MLAs have spoken for them. 

So don’t tell me that, what can we do? But if you’re really 

sincere about that, when we come forward and the leaders, the 

leaders of the Northern Trappers Association come forward and 

ask, then I’m glad to see if you’re asking, that you’re telling us, 

Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to do something. Wonderful, 

right on, good. So the trappers know that now. You’re saying 

you’ll help them. That’s good to hear. 

 

I hope you’ll do that as well with the fishermen because, I 

mean, their industry is struggling. You give them an 

opportunity. You take them out of a monopoly, and then you 

turn around and don’t give them any support to achieve what 

they need to achieve. So shame on you for that. You’re playing 

games. 

 

But anyway, you want to talk about certain areas. You go into 

an area and you talk about First Nations and Métis. And yes, 

you gave them some increase in funding, and I will commend 

that. This year in your budget, you gave them increase in 

funding. I give you that. You made some announcements, and 

that’s good. But you know what? You had record revenue. Year 

one, year two, year three — you did nothing for them but cut 

their programs. Why is that? But you know what? We know 

that in six months or so, we’ll be into an election, so I guess 

maybe that’s your little incentive. I really don’t think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s going to work well with northern people, 

First Nations, and Métis. They’re not going to buy it. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Now we go into the housing area, and we know, we know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we look at housing issues throughout the 

North, throughout this province. We’ve had petitions. We’ve 

had delegations come here. We’ve had individuals who are 

losing their home. They lose their home, a safe place to raise a 

family, and they talk about it. And then they come up with a 

plan after the fact. And they put a plan in of 1.7 million, I 

believe, in the budget for housing but 5 million for, I guess — 

what was it? — beer, for the off-sale retailers to receive an 

increase in funding. And good for them, good for them if they 

got some help from the government. 

 

But it sure shows what they didn’t do for the housing. There’s 

their commitment. And that today is pretty sad to see a budget 

. . . And they can announce things. The eleventh hour, they can 

announce all they want at the eleventh hour, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They can say, oh we’re going to create this housing, a 

housing plan. Well I think — you know what? — people are 

looking at this and they’re watching. What will it actually 

mean? And I think when it’s rolled out, the budget, some people 

will give you the compliment you’re looking at, and if they get 

adequate increase in funding, it’s a good thing. There’s nothing 

wrong with that. If they get increase in funding, that’s good. 

 

But I’m telling you, there’s people out there suffering to make 

ends meet with utilities, groceries for their family, provide 

clothing, provide heat. And I see very little to the northern 

people or people being affected that live in poverty. Whether 

it’s seniors barely making ends meet . . . and you talk about rent 

controls, and you don’t want to look at certain things you run 

away from. It’s pretty sad when you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the government that won’t commit to protecting our citizens of 

our province who need the help, and they should be sticking up 

for those residents. 

 

The government of the day had record revenue and I say that, 

record revenue. Never seen anything like this, no government, 

it’s a wish list. And they had such opportunities to help the 

individuals that needed the help. And what did they do? On 

northern people, First Nations and Métis, for years you turn 

your back and cut programs. You should be ashamed of 

yourselves. But on the eleventh hour, they want to reach out. 

Trust us; we’re going to take care of you. So they’re going to 

make the promises, the promises. Why now do you make the 

promises? Why didn’t you start them in your first year when 

you had revenues that you had? The second year? The third 

year? But you waited. 

 

And then you sit here saying that mayors are all happy. That 

isn’t so. That isn’t so. You’re saying that the mayors are all 

happy. In some areas, you’ve got compliments; I’ll give you 

that. But in some areas, the mayors are very concerned. And 

you know it’s interesting, watching some of the mayors make 

comments, and you know you invite them here and you listen. 

Not all of them left here so happy. And I mean, you know, you 

think about it. I think one of your old candidates has some 

issues. He’s out there making some comments. So it’s 

interesting what’ll happen at the end of the day. I hope he 

shares that with you because — you know what? — he should 

share that if he’s not happy. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very clear, very clear. You know, 

there are mayors who are not happy. There are leaders out there 

that are not happy, didn’t think they got a fair deal in this 

budget. Record revenue that they have, record spending you 

guys did and I guess some will say reckless. Some will say you 

did a good thing. But there are so many people left behind, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

This government’s vision . . . I don’t know who put the plan 

together, if it was just, you know, a certain few that got to, and 

maybe some of the special ones with the membership, $1,000 

membership, got into that, and maybe they got their influence in 

that. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I know a lot of the 

people back home, and the people that are struggling, and the 

people that I know and share and talk with, they sure didn’t get 

any input. And they couldn’t afford to pay $1,000 to get in and 

get any advice. They didn’t get to. But I know this. They’ve 

made it very clear that they’re suffering. Their families are 



7022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

suffering, and they’re trying to make ends meet. And they’re 

very proud. They’re trying all they can. And some people work 

minimum wage jobs, and they try hard. You know, you talk to 

some of the people that are working two jobs, and they’re 

trying. They’ll put in the 14, 16 hours a day to make ends meet. 

 

And then you talk about cuts, tax cuts that some of them will 

never see. And you say oh everybody’s going to benefit from it. 

It’s not so. And I think sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, take a 

little time and think these things out. You owe that to the people 

of our province. We all owe that, to defend them. 

 

So you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you see all the different 

things going on in our province. And you talk about the 

economics, and a lot of things going on. And you know, you see 

concerns and you see articles. Well I guess if you think about 

the Professor Eric Howe and his comments and his concern 

about the young Aboriginal population, and under this Sask 

Party government how you failed the Aboriginal population, 

and he’s calling it, he’s calling it an economic disaster. He’s 

very clear about that, under your watch, under this government. 

 

So this Sask Party government, Mr. Deputy Speaker — let’s 

make it very clear — they have their priorities, and they have 

their special friends. And those special friends get sweetheart 

deals, and we know that. And things will come out as time goes 

on because I really don’t think they can help themselves, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I don’t think they can help themselves get the 

fingers in the cookie jars. You know, it’s like my grandma 

would tell you, same scenario, same scenario. They can’t help 

themselves. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

let me make it very clear. People are hurting out there, and they 

want help, and they’re expecting the help of a government to 

come forward with programs. And they expect to be consulted, 

and they want to feel like their government agencies are 

listening to them, that their government official are out there 

doing what they need for all Saskatchewan people, not picking 

and choosing winners. It isn’t right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

isn’t right. 

 

Now having said that, you know, you see the challenges on 

some of the community member’s faces. And some of them 

come into the office, and you listen to what they’re going 

through and the challenges they’re feeling, and they feel 

hopeless. And then you’ll have others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

who are scared to come forward, people actually scared whether 

their business . . . different ones scared to criticize. I wonder 

why? Why would they be scared to criticize? And that’s 

interesting. Why should they be? It’s a democratic process we 

live in. People should have their views, criticize a budget. And 

yes, if there are things in the budgets that are good, let’s 

comment about them. But let’s be honest. There’s been a lot of 

people — and I said this before, I don’t know if it’s thousands, 

maybe it’s tens of thousands, maybe it’s a 100,000, maybe it’s 

more — that are left behind by this budget. It doesn’t deal with 

their needs, their housing, homeless people. 

 

And, you know, we heard some of the stories from my 

colleagues today in question period about the suffering of some 

of their community members, that they won’t have a place to 

sleep at the end of this month. It’s pretty sad to see, with record 

revenue, a government . . . And you know, there’s people who 

fight. And all over this world, we’re seeing the challenges, a 

democratic process, people fighting for a right, a right to speak 

out, a right to vote, a right to have a quality of life they feel they 

should have. 

 

And in this province we talk about the wealth. Yes, it’s a 

beautiful province, a province to be proud of. We have many 

family members that fought to protect that right in this 

province. And it is an honour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to sit in this 

House and to share the hopes and dreams of our constituents. 

But I’m telling you; your budget does not address the needs. It 

doesn’t. It falls short. And that I cannot support in your budget. 

 

But I have given you some compliments where, I think, it is 

right to. Well you know what? Sometimes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you know what? It’s okay, you know, because I think 

of it this way. You know, at the end of the day, I hope for the 

citizens out there that the government will take a second look at 

some programs. 

 

And when people come forward and they ask for programs, and 

I think about the trappers. I thought there would be money in it 

for them, to help them out. And they talk about new programs 

and they had a program, you know. They wanted to apply for 

some funding to help at-risk youth, youth that are at risk. And 

the trappers wanted to reach out to those youth and they wanted 

a program. This program would actually reach out and maybe 

save them from being incarcerated, save them from going down 

a road that is not good for them. So they applied for dollars, and 

unfortunately — you know what? — there’s no money in the 

budget for them. 

 

And then we get asked to bring your ideas forward. The 

Environment minister makes it very clear: bring your ideas 

forward. They didn’t bring no ideas forward from the trappers. 

Well we’ll bring the ideas forward. And now I want to see what 

he’ll respond to them. I hope they get the money that they’re 

looking for because it’s about time. 

 

Now we talk about our youth and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want 

to be very clear. The youth, our young people, not only in 

northern Saskatchewan but in our beautiful province, that are 

suffering. Suicides, addictions — there are many challenges. 

You know, not all mayors are happy and saying yes it’s good to 

see there’s extra money out there to deal with suicide, suicide 

and addictions. You know, but unfortunately some of them are 

questioning how much of this money, the new funding, will 

touch their homes, touch their communities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. How much of this money in this budget will actually 

help them with the youth suicide, the addictions, and have a 

plan? 

 

Now there is a plan. There is a plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I 

look at that and I think this budget falls short of the crisis with 

our young people. And we talk about education. We talk about 

education and we look at that. We’re saying that we have such a 

growing population of our First Nations and Métis. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s very clear that this government is trying to 

reach out in the last minute, in the last minute. 

 

You know, and I’ve said this before. At the last minute they’re 

going to reach out and now say, it’s election year. And they’re 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7023 

going to reach out to them. And I’m telling you, they are going 

to send you a message. And I encourage people out there, 

young and old, people that are struggling, people that don’t 

have a place to live, people that are truly living in poverty, 

people who cannot . . . and are trying to work two jobs to make 

ends meet for their family — clothes, food, shelter — and they 

can’t afford to do it. 

 

I’m going to tell them this. On election day, we hear all the 

bravos and all the polling you want. This Sask Party 

government wants to make it sound like . . . I don’t know if they 

don’t care, if they’re not listening to those individuals, to the 

seniors. I don’t know if they’re not listening to the people that 

are struggling, homeless, all these different individuals, families 

that can’t make . . . And I don’t think they’re hearing. But I’m 

going to say this to them: get out and vote. Send the message to 

the Sask Party government that you can’t be taken for granted, 

that you have rights, and that you are protected. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget I don’t believe goes far 

enough to help northern people, to help First Nations and Métis, 

to help . . . A lot of our residents in this province have been left 

behind by this reckless spending in a budget. They have not 

addressed . . . And again anyway, and again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, very clearly they have missed and left many people 

behind, and they will pay a price for that. I know that. 

 

At this time I know a lot of my colleagues would like to join in 

on the debate, and we’re going to get a lot of time to express, I 

guess, our views on the budget. And at this time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m prepared to allow other members to go ahead. And 

I will be supporting the amendment and not supporting the 

budget. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — It is a pleasure for me to be able to stand in my 

place and join the debate tonight on this outstanding budget. It’s 

a document for which we have worked diligently. We think that 

we have addressed many of the needs of the people of this 

province. It’s a document that clearly shares the prosperity of 

this province across as wide a spectrum as possible. 

 

And it’s a document to which much labour and much concern 

was directed because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the quality of 

government is often indicated by the budget document. The 

concerns of a government, the directions of a government, the 

aspirations of a government, and the aspirations of the people of 

any jurisdiction, such as the great one in which we live, are 

often reflected in these budgets. So so much care and attention 

is given to them as the centrepiece of any government’s 

leadership. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And the title of this particular budget is The Saskatchewan 

Advantage. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think I’ve seen a 

document presented as a budget in this House in my 12 years 

that more clearly reflects that very reality — the Saskatchewan 

advantage. We’ve seen budgets come and go. We’ve seen them 

address priorities of different kinds at different times, but none 

has so clearly addressed the prosperity of the province and the 

ability of the people of the province to share in that prosperity. 

And that’s why I’m so proud of this particular document, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Tonight, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the very real 

support that I, like other members, enjoy from our families. And 

in my case of course, my family is now dispersed. I have 

children in Alberta. I have a daughter now making her 

temporary residence in Ontario. But my wife and I have started 

to experience the empty nest syndrome, and as a consequence, 

we spend more time together. We travel a little more together, 

and we’ve really begun an opportunity to enjoy each other’s 

company in a different way. 

 

So I want to acknowledge the support and love of my wife, 

Marilyn, who is at this time working in the health care centre in 

the community of Eastend. And we appreciate the opportunity 

for her to participate in the care of individuals that are residents 

in that facility. She’s developed a real love and concern for the 

seniors that are residents there, and it’s been a mutually 

beneficial arrangement for her to be employed in that centre. 

 

But I also want to acknowledge the very generous efforts on my 

behalf by my constituency staff. We have Beth, Glenna, and 

Carol working in the Cypress Hills constituency office in 

Eastend. Beth has been with me for 10-plus years now, and 

she’s been a real steadfast soldier on my behalf meeting with 

the constituents as required, dealing with issues that come to 

our office on a regular basis. And I can say the same for Glenna 

and Carol, who are a little more recent but who have taken to 

their job with real determination and professionalism and, every 

now and again, just a little bit of relish. They quite enjoy the 

job, and I appreciate that. 

 

I want to say my own appreciation to the caucus staff, the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus staff. Researchers and other 

individuals, particularly those who are in communications and 

media, have worked very hard on my behalf from time to time. 

And I think that they often do good work for us, but so often 

that work goes unrecognized. So tonight I’d like to 

acknowledge their efforts on our behalf. 

 

And there’s one other group I really want to acknowledge 

tonight. I won’t address this particular endeavour in detail, but I 

also have the opportunity to chair the board of directors for the 

Global Transportation Hub Authority. And there are a fine 

group of very professional people working in that office in the 

leadership team. And they’re doing great work on behalf of that 

project, on behalf of the province, on behalf of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, and they need to be acknowledged tonight as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some of the highlights of this past year in the Cypress Hills 

constituency would include the response of the communities 

that were affected by unusual flooding conditions this past 

summer. And as most people are aware, the community of 

Maple Creek was hit with a tremendous flood episode on the 

18th, 19th of June last year. But the impact of that particular 

event carried through the whole summer, into the fall, and even 

now into the winter. 

 

And while I won’t go into a lot of detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

suffice it to say that an episode like that, an event like that 



7024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

really proves the mettle of a community. It’s an opportunity for 

the community to come together under the most adverse 

circumstances. But it is those circumstances that really show 

what a community is made of, what kind of leadership there is 

in a given community, what kind of perseverance people can 

and will show under trying circumstances, and how they can 

move forward after that type of catastrophe. 

 

And the community of Maple Creek, I want to single out as one 

of the best examples of that community endeavour to 

rehabilitate itself and to support each other and to work together 

to achieve great things on behalf of the community. And those 

who were devastated were assisted by those who escaped the 

carnage. And seeing the impact on the community and how it’s 

brought them together as a community has been a very 

rewarding experience for me as the MLA for that area. 

 

It doesn’t mean everything went smooth. In fact there were 

many trouble spots along the way, and there were times at 

which the government could not respond to the extent that some 

people expected. But nevertheless our government, through the 

Ministry of Corrections and Public Safety, through the PDAP 

[provincial disaster assistance program] program which was 

tested sorely as a result of all the flood episodes around the 

province this summer, that all came together in an outstanding 

way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very proud of the work that 

was done by the ministry, by the PDAP staff, and by the 

community leadership. 

 

Now Maple Creek was most hard hit. But the community of 

Richmound experienced some flooding. Burstall also 

experienced some flooding, not overland flooding but seepage, 

high water tables that impacted so many basements in those 

communities. The tiny community of Golden Prairie had some 

issues. There was the odd basement in Sceptre. Even in the 

community of Leader. So the impact was felt right around my 

constituency, and PDAP was there in almost every instance to 

provide support and assistance. 

 

Now there are so many changes that were made to the PDAP 

program as a result of the experiences of these various 

communities. I was going to detail them all, but I don’t have 

time tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I want to contrast, I 

guess, the response of our government in this crisis to what 

people had experienced previously because we had from time to 

time experienced tornados and those types of natural disasters, 

where claims under PDAP took 18 months to be even heard, 

basically, to be adjusted for paperwork and the process to 

unfold. And in the case of the flood, you know, we had the 

minister on the ground and the Premier there in the community 

and cheques were issued within just a matter of few short days, 

initial cheques, to allow people to get started. 

 

Deductibles were improved. The ceilings for claims were raised 

dramatically. We even had changes to the program that allowed 

some people to be covered that were always excluded 

previously. Hutterite colonies were never ever covered by the 

PDAP program previously. Those changes are now being made. 

So some of those very significant and crucial changes were part 

of this year’s experience. And I’m glad to be part of a 

government that was that responsive to the needs, the very real 

needs of communities that were hurting. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s those kinds of responses, 

those kinds of reactions to crises that really identify the nature 

and the soul of the government that is in a position to respond. I 

mean if you want to wash your hands of things, you can say, 

these are the rules. We’re not changing them. See you around. 

But if in fact, if in fact you respond to the needs, you address 

the problems, you are completely understanding of the 

problems facing the communities that are so affected, that I 

think speaks to the nature of the government and their concern 

for the very people who have elected us. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about where we’re 

at this year because you may have heard that there’s a lot of 

snow around the province. Well I don’t think there’s any part of 

the province that has more snow than the Cypress Hills area. In 

fact this year is probably going to be pretty close to a record for 

snowfall, and there’s a lot of concern in the Cypress Hills area 

about a repeat of the flooding circumstances that devastated so 

many areas last year. And as part of the concern, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, our government once again has responded proactively 

by setting aside $22 million for communities that may be 

impacted by these flood conditions again. And many 

communities around the province, including the community of 

Maple Creek, are taking advantage of some of this funding to 

take proactive initiatives to help alleviate the impact of any 

flood that might come. 

 

So once again you’ve got a government who understands the 

issue and who has responded, and that’s why I am proud to be 

part of the Saskatchewan Party government and to be able to 

speak on behalf of this very important budgetary document that 

will address those kind of concerns for people right where they 

live, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We had an opportunity in my office to call a number of people 

in the month of February. So many individuals had phoned our 

office to talk to us about their concerns with the flood impact 

and the PDAP program and the adjustments that were being 

done. So in the month of February, I asked my office and the 

three people I identified earlier as being my constituency 

assistants to call every one of those people back — every 

person who called my office about flood-related concerns. And 

as it turned out . . . We did up a spreadsheet. As it turned out, 

there was virtually not a single person who had any criticism of 

the PDAP program or the officials in the PDAP program with 

whom they had talked. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that is a 

tremendous record, given the kinds of devastating impacts some 

individuals and communities experienced. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I did a media interview with the radio 

station in Shaunavon today, and I was asked, what is the single 

thing about this budget that sticks out in your mind? And 

without having to think for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

responded, I think this budget is the most broadly popular 

document that we could have provided. And the reason is that 

we have addressed so many issues that were an irritant to so 

many different people. But not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we have offered broad-based tax relief across the piece in this 

budget. 

 

And I just want to identify some of the areas that are most 

significant. We increased the exemptions, the basic exemptions 

for individuals, by another $1,000 each. That’s for the spousal 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7025 

and for the personal basic exemption category. And we 

increased the exemption for dependent children by $500 each. 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by themselves those numbers aren’t 

all that impressive, but when you consider how much 

movement has happened in those exemptions over the three 

years of our government, we now are in the very envious 

position of being the jurisdiction with the highest exemptions 

across the piece. There is no province in the country of Canada 

that has a better track record on that area of taxation. So that 

translates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, into a family of four being able 

to earn $45,550 before they pay 1 cent in provincial tax. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is so impressive — having moved 

from very far down the pack to the very head of the pack in 

three short years, over four budgets — that I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are really quite astounded that that’s been 

accomplished in such a short time frame. But what’s really nice 

about it is that this is representative of where we are as a 

province and where we as a government have been able to bring 

this province in the area of taxation. 

 

It’s nice to know that we’re no longer the poor cousin to 

Alberta. We’re no longer bringing up the rear in so many 

different areas of endeavour. We are actually leading the nation, 

and in this category, we are the undisputed leader. And that 

makes me very happy. 

 

But not only have we got the best record on taxation for 

individuals and families; we’ve also been able to remove more 

than 110,000 low-income earners from the tax rolls entirely. 

What other jurisdiction could say that, as a percentage of their 

taxpaying population? I don’t think anybody can match that 

record. And for us to be able as a government to share the 

prosperity of this province with the most disadvantaged, the 

low-income workers, the people who are in most need of 

assistance at that level, for us to be able to do that is a real 

benefit to our society. And I don’t think that we should 

underestimate the value of that kind of endeavour. 

 

We have had $420 million in tax cuts and enhanced benefits 

provided to the people of Saskatchewan through the 

Saskatchewan Party budgets since 2007, and that’s a 

remarkable record. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also moved to improve the taxation 

position of small businesses. We’ve got a reduction in the 

small-business tax rate. We cut it in more than half. It was 4.5 

per cent; we’ve moved that to 2 per cent. That now becomes the 

third lowest tax rate in the nation, and this puts our businesses 

in a much more competitive position and encourages them to 

expand their businesses and to hire new employees. 

 

But we didn’t stop there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We met our 

promise on the education portion of property tax. We have 

made dramatic improvements in the taxable portion for property 

owners and landowners, especially in the agricultural sector, by 

keeping our promise that we made four years ago. So the 

education property tax will now be reduced by a further $55.6 

million and that does fulfill our promise to provide tax relief on 

the education portion of the assessment. So we’ve got, over the 

years, $158.6 million of education property tax relief in total. 

Now for agricultural producers, that’s an additional $31.3 

million this year, dropping the mill rate from 7.03 to 3.91. 

We’ve got a reduction of comparable value in the commercial 

property sector. And in the residential property sector, the mill 

rate will decline from 10.08 to 9.51. 

 

We’ve seen these very deliberate undertakings to benefit the 

people of this province. So when I hear the NDP say, what did 

you do with the money or who’s benefiting, I can tell you 

categorically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan are benefiting in many, many different ways. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a great night to be talking about the 

highlights of this budget. There’s far too many and way too 

much material. But I’m not going to stop just yet because I do 

want to talk about debt repayment. You know, this is a debate, 

and it frankly . . . It’s a debate about opinions, not too much 

fact. And I’d like to just add my own bit of opinion to this 

debate. 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleague from Cannington 

was talking about the $2.3 billion that the NDP says was in the 

bank account when the government changed, and where’d the 

money go? Well the money went straight to paying down 

General Revenue Fund debt. That’s where it went. Now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that group of men and women, for 16 years, 

have developed a political legacy based on what they said was 

the Devine debt. It was the worst possible thing that could 

afflict this province, if you listen to them speak. That is what 

they have built their political reputation on. 

 

Now that the Saskatchewan Party is paying off that debt, 

suddenly it’s not such a bad thing. We can’t be spending our 

money on debt repayment. We’re wasting our money. You 

can’t have it both ways. It couldn’t have been the worst possible 

thing that could afflict this government, if you want it for 

political purposes, but when the debt is being repaid, suddenly 

it’s not a bad thing any more. I don’t quite understand how they 

can get around that particular conundrum because it’s logically 

incompatible. And that argument just is fallacious. It’s either 

debt is either a good thing or it’s either a bad thing. You can’t 

have it both ways. 

 

But one thing I have discovered, having been around the 

political horn for a few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the way the 

NDP get around that is the following: NDP debt is good debt; 

debt by anybody else is bad debt. Definitionally that’s how they 

get to their argument. If they generate the debt, it was a good 

thing. And I’ve had this discussion with NDPers in my coffee 

shop who say, if it’s a Crown debt it’s a good debt because it’s 

self-sustaining. But if it’s a General Revenue Fund debt, it’s not 

a good debt because that was a Devine problem. 

 

Well today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, General Revenue Fund debt is 

down. And if there’s any increase in Crown debt it’s got to be 

self-sustainable, by their own definition. It’s Crown debt. It’s 

self-sustaining. And in this case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if Crown 

debt is going up as they assert, it would be to replace the aging 

infrastructure that they refused to address in their 16 years of 

government tenure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have farmers whose crops are catching 

on fire when telephone poles, when power poles collapse in the 



7026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

field because those poles, even though they’ve been paying an 

infrastructure surcharge for who knows how many decades, 

even though they’ve been paying that surcharge, none of those 

poles have been replaced. Those poles have to be replaced. 

They aren’t free. They come at a cost. And when you have to 

renew the infrastructure that has been left to decay for so many 

years, then there’s going to be a cost associated with it. 

 

And one other thing I’d like to add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

if in fact the NDP ever get a chance to institute their plan to 

make 50 per cent of Saskatchewan’s power needs renewable, if 

people think the cost of energy today is expensive, they haven’t 

seen anything yet because every kilowatt of renewable energy 

will come at an expensive, high cost because there has to be 

something behind it to guarantee that power. And so the cost 

really becomes a double cost. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’m getting the hook. You know, if 

I was on stage, the stage director would be there with a cane to 

pull me off. And I think that we are nearing the time when I 

need to defer and let somebody else have the floor. This budget, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the finest budget document I have seen 

in the 12 years I’ve been in this House. I am proud to support 

the budget. I will be voting against the amendment. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

join into the discussion this evening on the budget document. 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into my remarks I would like to make 

a few comments. I would like to recognize my wife and 

daughter who are at home, and I feel very blessed and thankful 

for their support and the gift of having a child, and it’s certainly 

a special thing to see a little one grow and develop. I’d like to 

thank my parents as well for their ongoing support and the way 

that they have been an encouragement over the years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my good friend, Linsay, who 

helps me out in many political endeavours but more importantly 

is a good friend and an encouragement. As other MLAs have 

mentioned, of course our CAs do a tremendous amount of work 

and provide support and friendship to us. To Donna, Ruben, and 

Bev who help out in the office, I want to say thank you to them. 

 

And constituents, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a pleasure to meet 

constituents and to talk with them, whether that’s on the 

doorstep, whether that’s in an office, or whether that’s online or 

through social media, Mr. Speaker, it’s always a pleasure to get 

to know constituents. 

 

I should also thank caucus staff, Mr. Speaker. They work long 

hours and we don’t say thank you enough to these individuals 

but they are here working on our behalf and for the people of 

Saskatchewan on both sides of the House. 

 

And the last person, but not the least person, I would like to say 

a hello and a thank you to is my grandma, Ferne Vincent. I 

know she’s in Outlook and watches the legislative channel 

faithfully when session is on and I want to say hello to 

grandma. With those remarks, Mr. Speaker . . . I see that the 

Justice minister also wants to say hello to my grandma and I’m 

sure my grandma appreciates that. 

Budgets, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at them, they are 

fundamentally about trust. When we’re looking at the 

expenditures that are made in a variety of fields, billions of 

dollars being spent, many zeros, Mr. Speaker, it’s easy to lose 

track of the large issues. But when you think about a budget, 

Mr. Speaker, it is fundamentally about trust. 

 

It’s the trust that the people of a province place in a government 

to act in their best interest, to promote and advance their 

interests, and to take actions that support everyone in the 

province. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, what we often can tell from the actions of 

a government, Mr. Speaker, is its true colours when it comes 

down to specific issues and specific circumstances. I think it’s 

in these instances where we can see the true colours of a 

government. When billions of dollars are being spent, of course 

every government is going to get some things right, Mr. 

Speaker, but they’re also going to miss certain things. But it’s in 

the specific events and occasions and sometimes when we have 

a discussion on a particular item in this Assembly is when the 

true colours of a government do come through. 

 

And the issue that I would like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, a bit 

when we talk about the true colours of this government is the 

takeover attempt that was supported by members opposite with 

respect to St. Peter’s College, a private institution, taking over 

Carlton Trail Regional College, a public institution. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, it’s an important story to talk about. And 

it’s an important story for the people of Saskatchewan to know 

about because it demonstrates the lack of transparency the 

members opposite have when it comes to finances and it 

demonstrates a lack of openness with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some time ago back in committee in May of 

2010, I had the opportunity to discuss with the minister and talk 

about some of what was appearing on the ground, some 

problems with respect to what appeared to be a takeover attempt 

by a private educational institution to a public institution. And, 

Mr. Speaker, there were many concerns that were raised at that 

time through committee, through question period, through 

individuals coming to the Assembly, where individuals were 

concerned about the process in which the members opposite 

were pursuing this plan to collapse Carlton Trail Regional 

College and allocate the public funding that it receives into a 

private system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite, especially the minister at 

the time, brushed off these concerns and said that they were not 

accurate. But, Mr. Speaker, that approach of brushing off those 

concerns flew in the face of overwhelming evidence that the 

ministry’s involvement and the minister’s involvement and 

involvement by members opposite with this takeover had been 

there from the very beginning and, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite were very involved in this process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a joint board was appointed, a joint board from 

both organizations to discuss a merger. Now when a merger or 

a takeover may occur, if two groups want to come together, Mr. 

Speaker, they ought to be doing so autonomously with clear 

thinking and sound advice. Mr. Speaker, despite the minister’s 

brushing off of these concerns, he appointed a joint board. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7027 

There was also, Mr. Speaker, on this joint board, a ministry 

official. There was actually someone from the ministry sitting 

on this board. I assume, because I know civil servants are good 

at what they do and pass on information, that individual was 

getting information back to the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also had the minister approving the siphoning 

of public dollars from Carlton Trail under the public umbrella 

to St. Peter’s. This was done, Mr. Speaker, through the approval 

to pay for the CEO’s [chief executive officer] salary, the joint 

CEO, through public dollars. Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, 

we also saw a huge amount of public resources being funnelled 

to the private college, Mr. Speaker, in order to grease the 

wheels for this takeover. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amount of public funding that was sent to St. 

Peter’s College, a private institution, was $60,000 per student 

for building projects. Mr. Speaker, $60,000 at one institution. 

The U of R [University of Regina], in the same window of time 

with respect to receiving funding per student for the available 

dollars, was 1,430. The U of S [University of Saskatchewan] as 

a comparison, 1,354. SIAST, Mr. Speaker, facing certainly 

challenges with space, especially in Saskatoon, 1,317. And, Mr. 

Speaker, Briercrest, an example of a private institution like St. 

Peter’s, received $112. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as information has come out about this 

merger and how it has gone off the rails and how members 

opposite have been supporting it from the very beginning, it 

was clear, Mr. Speaker, that there were a number of problems 

that came forward. There was the fact that public dollars paid 

for a $1,000 Sask Party membership in an elite Enterprise Club 

that the CEO attended. And we can only assume that significant 

lobbying occurred because based on the amount of funding — 

$60,000 versus about $1,300 for other institutions — it appears 

the Enterprise membership connection was certainly beneficial 

for the CEO who has since been fired from the minister. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, there’s other problems that have, that have 

been brought to the minister’s attention: a missing Sony 

television as one example, double claims for reimbursement for 

travel. And, Mr. Speaker, there were instances where members 

opposite were alerted to concerns with the process and with 

concerns around ethics and governance at Carlton Trail. We 

know of at least two emails that went to the minister’s office. 

This was not enough to alert red flags. And, Mr. Speaker, so for 

now, for members opposite to suggest that they did not know 

what was going on, to suggest that this was a total surprise to 

them, to me, Mr. Speaker, is not believable. There are too many 

points of contact for members opposite to be alerted to 

problems. And so now, Mr. Speaker, what we see is an attempt 

by the minister and members opposite to blame others, to blame 

everyone else except the individual looking back them in the 

mirror. We know that they appointed the joint CEO. We know 

that they appointed the board with Sask Party insiders. I think 

the former Finance minister might know about that. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And now we see, Mr. Speaker, the minister desperately 

attempting to blame others as opposed to taking responsibility. 

That minister . . . but it’s not only the one minister, Mr. 

Speaker. While members on the front bench and the benches 

behind have been happy for the minister to be taking heat on 

this issue, I think there’s also tension between members or 

among members on this issue. And I think, Mr. Speaker, there 

are other members who certainly were alerted to red flags and 

should have acted. I think members opposite, especially those in 

the area who had conversations and interactions with people on 

a daily basis, I think for them to claim that no one talked to 

them about concerns with the merger, that no one talked to 

them about some of the things that may have been going on, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite had a decision in 

mind, had a course that they had charted already, and were 

plowing straight ahead. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt, given her 

connections in the community and her connections to the board, 

had many opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to hear what was going 

on. I also think the member from Silver Springs, Mr. Speaker, 

had conversations with individuals when they were alerted to 

problems. I think also, Mr. Speaker, the member from Batoche 

also had conversations with individuals and was alerted to 

problems. I don’t know about the Minister of Justice. I know 

that the file has now been referred to his ministry, and he’s 

claiming that he hasn’t seen anything, but I don’t know. I think 

the Minister for Social Services also may have had individuals 

who spoke to her about problems and these concerns. 

 

And they laugh now, Mr. Speaker, because that is the approach 

that they’re taking, one of blaming and one of simply shrugging 

off any sort of criticism. And that is the approach that they have 

taken in this process all along, despite the fact that their 

fingerprints have been involved in this process throughout. 

 

Now members opposite don’t like this, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 

like this conversation because for them, Mr. Speaker, they 

recognize that there are problems. And now they’re actively 

engaged in a process of dragging their heels with respect to 

getting to the bottom of this ordeal. Under much pressure, they 

finally agreed to the fact that a forensic audit ought to occur, 

Mr. Speaker, when instead of being clear with timelines, with 

expectations, Mr. Speaker, they are more than happy, more than 

happy to slow walk this along, Mr. Speaker, hoping that the 

problems that could be found will not cause problems for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when we see this one example of a 

government that was more than happy to collapse a public 

college and roll it into a private institution, Mr. Speaker, I think 

it demonstrates the members opposite can’t be trusted with 

finances. I think it shows a disregard for public dollars and a 

proper control and oversight of those dollars. I think also, Mr. 

Speaker, that it shows that they do not always act in the best 

interest of the public. And I say, Mr. Speaker, with respect to a 

large amount of public dollars flowing to private institutions, 

when compared to other public, compared to public institutions 

being funded in a much lower level, Mr. Speaker, I think that is 

yet another concern. 

 

And then when problems are exposed in the open, Mr. Speaker, 

instead of owning the problems and admitting that they have 

been involved from the very beginning, what we see is the 

blame game, blame game. We see an approach of deny, deny, 

deny on every opportunity. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

you know, the Minister of Advanced Education can comment 

on a colour of tie, and sadly that’s the level of debate that this 



7028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

issue has spiralled downwards to when dealing with him on this 

topic, Mr. Speaker. Instead of honestly talking about the issues 

about public accountability, the minister would prefer to talk 

about colours of ties. And I think that’s a sad commentary, Mr. 

Speaker, but it is very fitting with respect to the process that this 

merger has unfolded and also fitting as an indicator with respect 

to the type of proper foresight and thoughtful consideration that 

a merger such as this should have received. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that story that I shared sets the stage and 

describes how, when it comes to issues of public finances and 

public trust, members have demonstrated that they are more 

interested in other motives as opposed to the interests of the 

public. 

 

When looking at the budget, as I said, Mr. Speaker, when any 

government spends a budget the size of Saskatchewan’s, there 

are going to be things that are positive in there and that are an 

encouragement to Saskatchewan people. There will be 

programs that have been started or continued. And I think that 

that is a good thing. But budgets, Mr. Speaker, also have 

instances where there are concerns or problems. 

 

In my critic area, my one critic area of Advanced Education, 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen that education tuition for 

post-secondary students has steadily climbed over the past 

years. And I know for students that is a concern. The 3 per cent 

increase that is slated for this coming year, Mr. Speaker, is not 

necessarily a 3 per cent increase evenly across the board, where 

it is quite possible that some colleges will be affected more so 

than others. And so I know for many post-secondary students, 

tuition is a real problem. Tied directly to tuition is the issue of 

affordability and rents, affordability for all aspects of life. And I 

know that’s an additional pressure that students feel. 

 

When we think of our educational institutions, specifically at 

the university in Regina, and we think of the graduate 

programs, I know this budget . . . and without extending the 

benefit of the graduate retention program to master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates, I identify that as another area where, Mr. Speaker, 

where I think more could be done to assist those who are most 

highly educated in our society. 

 

In the area of education, Mr. Speaker, well there have been 

some things that are appropriate and right in this budget. There 

are some problems that members before me have identified. The 

member from Nutana talked about a real shortage in this 

province of early learning child care spots and how that is a 

pressure for many families. And while there are certain steps in 

this budget to address that, Mr. Speaker, we know when the 

budget . . . We know that any steps that are being made, Mr. 

Speaker, that the need is very great and that must be taken into 

consideration when decisions are being made. The YWCA 

[Young Women’s Christian Association] released a report 

saying that we were last in the country with respect to regulated 

child care spaces. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, a few members before me have 

identified the issue of the $5 million beer subsidy for off-sale 

for the retailer selling, Mr. Speaker, and I think when we look at 

the $5 million for that and how that may have helped more 

child care spaces or any number of the issues, certainly is a 

concern. And I’m not certain, Mr. Speaker, that with that $5 

million subsidy for beer that, you know, an individual’s 

six-pack of Pilsner will actually be cheaper when they pick it 

up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, another area where there’s a shortfall in this 

budget with respect to education is the failure of the 

government to live up to its promise to provide a long-term and 

stable, predictable funding for education, a formula for 

education funding here in the province. Despite making changes 

to the education property tax system and promising school 

boards . . . We’ve seen a situation now where the School Boards 

Association says they are operating in a state of limbo and not 

being able to do the long-term planning that is required and that 

they are so good at doing. 

 

We can also think, Mr. Speaker, how the budget has not 

addressed needs for teachers and educational professionals, a 

lack of recognition from earlier statements made by the 

previous Education minister with respect to reductions in EAs 

[educational assistants] that should occur. No clear statement 

that that is an improper thing. And we also see, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation has characterized 

this budget as having a lack of imagination and certainly not 

addressing needs for teachers in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there are a number of issues, I know time is 

limited on this topic and I know that other members want to 

speak on this budget. I will say, Mr. Speaker, that this budget is 

about trust, I think demonstrated by the St. Peter’s College and 

Carlton Trail merger takeover that was backed by the minister 

and members opposite. I think that gave a clear example. The 

members can’t be trusted on financial matters and on openness 

and transparency. I think that clouds this budget and I think it 

clouds the decisions that are being made, because it’s 

characteristic of an overall approach that this government has 

taken, as opposed to being open and transparent. They have 

sought an approach of secrecy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this budget doesn’t do enough for 

university students. I think this budget doesn’t do enough for 

early learning spots. I don’t think this budget does enough in 

meeting the promises that were made by members opposite with 

respect to funding the education system. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I will conclude my remarks, and I will not be 

supporting the government’s motion but I will be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that. I’m 

pleased tonight to join in the budget debate for the budget that 

was released this year. But first I’d like to say some thank yous, 

as many other members have. I’d certainly like to take this 

opportunity to thank my wife for her incredible support. She’s 

always there for me when I need her. And certainly we do 

spend a lot of time apart, and I know that’s not the easiest thing 

in the world. So I’d like to thank her for her patience in my 

chosen field of work. 

 

I’d also like to thank my constituency assistants. They do an 

amazing job, both in the constituency office and in helping 

many other people in the community. They volunteer for a 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7029 

number of different activities related to community 

development, and I’d like to thank them for their dedication 

both to the work that they do in the constituency office and 

outside. So thanks, Rose and Caroline, for that. 

 

I’d like to thank my family, like many other members have, 

because they are incredibly supportive. They work very hard 

and make sacrifices for me to do this job. And that goes right 

down to my nieces who have birthdays delayed so that their 

uncle can attend when he’s back from the legislature. So I 

appreciate that. And certainly I do bring them a big gift on 

occasion, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to thank the members of my 

indoor soccer team who will have just completed the semifinal 

tonight. I’m not sure if we won or not, but if we did, I’m 

looking forward to playing in the league final on Friday night 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the folks in Prince Albert have weighed in on this budget, 

and I’ve heard from many of them. And they talk about this 

budget and ask whether or not it’s something that they can 

believe. Is this a believable document, Mr. Speaker? And so I 

would ask the members of the government if this is a credible 

budget. 

 

Because there have been promises made to the city of Prince 

Albert by the Premier, by this government over the last, well 

over four years because it was in the run-up to the election, Mr. 

Speaker, and we see those promises unfunded. We see that the 

government has had record revenues for the last number of 

years. But they still, with record revenues and, incredible as the 

taxpayers federation believes, about $8 billion more than they 

should have been spending, they still don’t have enough money 

to keep their promises to the city of Prince Albert. And so that’s 

sad, Mr. Speaker. So they’re asking me if you can believe this 

budget. 

 

Did they keep the promise to provide funding for a second 

bridge, Mr. Speaker? No, they did not. The Premier took his 

occasion to stand on the bridge for a photo op with the paper 

with then Mayor Jim Stiglitz and say that Prince Albert should 

have a second bridge. Is there any money in four years for a 

second bridge? None, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He promised in the run-up to the election that there would be 

airport improvements if the Saskatchewan Party government 

was elected. Have we seen a dime of provincial money for 

airport improvements, Mr. Speaker? Not a dime. 

 

They promised two years ago a long-term care facility for 

seniors in Prince Albert, and they have not built one bed of the 

long-term care facility that was promised to the people of 

Prince Albert over two years ago. 

 

Now the seniors’ centre in Prince Albert that they were 

supposed to have funded with these record revenues, but chose 

not to, is called Pineview Terrace, Mr. Speaker, Pineview 

Terrace Lodge. And it’s an aging facility with a bunch of 

wonderful people who stay there, and they deserve a better 

facility, Mr. Speaker. They deserve it. And certainly they’re 

questioning why this government would choose the residents of 

Pine Grove over the residents of Pineview Terrace. It’s 

inexplicable to them that they would do that. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Now another place where you might ask, can you believe this 

budget document, can you believe anything that’s in here, Mr. 

Speaker, relates to housing. Now this housing issue has been a 

pretty amazing one this last couple of weeks if you followed it, 

Mr. Speaker. Because if you look at their different budget 

documents, for the same program, for the same amount of 

money, a paltry amount, they say that it’s going to first build 

300 homes. And in another budget document from the same 

year, handed out at the same time, it says that they’re going to 

build 350 homes with this money. And then in a flyer that goes 

around to every mailbox in Saskatchewan, that flyer says that 

with the exact same money, they’re going to build 650 units, 

Mr. Speaker. So how is it that in their own budget document 

they can’t figure out . . . It’s not an auction sale, Mr. Speaker. 

This is not an auction sale to see where the highest bid ends. 

But yet we see, just this week, a week after the budget is 

brought down, the members opposite come out with a scheme 

for housing. 

 

They come out with a scheme for housing because in their own 

budget they’ve got $5.1 million for beer to reduce the cost, not 

for the people of Saskatchewan but for vendors. They’ve got 

$5.1 million for beer and $1.7 million for actual housing. Three 

times as much for beer as for housing, Mr. Speaker. So you 

have to ask yourself, have they had a plan for housing? We’ve 

been certainly raising the issue for three years. And certainly 

the response has been absent if there’s been any at all. And it’s 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve got three times as much 

money for beer discounts as they do for housing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, their housing program that they just 

announced this week, the week after the budget comes out, they 

couldn’t get it ready for the budget because the napkin that 

they’d written it on got lost. However they have a housing 

program where the price of housing is not cheaper. It’s not any 

less expensive for people. 

 

So only the Saskatchewan Party government could provide $5.1 

million for beer and not make beer cheaper for Saskatchewan 

residents. Only the Saskatchewan Party government could say 

that they are going to provide $230 million for housing and not 

make housing any cheaper for Saskatchewan residents. Only 

this Saskatchewan Party government could have math that’s 

that inaccurate and that bad, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now another story that you have to ask yourself whether or not 

this document is believable, they have sent around in that same 

flyer that I had referenced earlier a comment that the public 

debt of Saskatchewan is going down. That’s what they say, Mr. 

Speaker. But here we have the 2011 and ’12 budget summary, 

and what does it say on page 61, Mr. Speaker? What does it 

say? It says that by 2015 the total debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan is going to increase by $2.5 billion, $2.5 billion. 

And so what they’ve done is they’ve shifted money from the 

GRF, the debt from the GRF, and applied it to the Crowns. 

They’re hiding all of the debt that they can hide in the Crown 

corporations of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And one of the speakers tonight from the Saskatchewan Party, 

the member from Cypress Hills, says that the reason that you 

move debt from the GRF to the Crowns is because Crown debt 



7030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2011 

is self-sustaining. That’s what he said. But he doesn’t 

recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are the 

people that pay the bills for the Crown corporations in 

Saskatchewan. It’s hard to imagine that debt is self-sustaining 

when it’s every person in Saskatchewan who owns a piece of 

those Crown corporations and is forced to pay bills in those 

Crown corporations and certainly pay for the debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s in the GRF or in the 

Crown corporations in the province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s another reason, another sad reason that this budget 

document is not to be believed. 

 

Now if you look at where you believe that the government 

priorities should be, certainly if you make any passing reference 

even to the demographics in the province of Saskatchewan, we 

have before us a tremendous opportunity with the Aboriginal 

population. Certainly the constituency of Prince Albert 

Northcote is blessed to have an extremely young population and 

a high percentage of Aboriginal people living in Prince Albert 

Northcote. And we’re blessed with those people, Mr. Speaker, 

and they need an opportunity. They need opportunities in the 

modern economy of Saskatchewan. And what has happened 

over the last year, Mr. Speaker? What has happened? The 

employment of Aboriginal people has gone down by 10 per 

cent, 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And one of the province’s 

leading economists has called the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal employment record an economic 

disaster. And so you would think, Mr. Speaker, that you would 

do something to address Aboriginal employment in the budget, 

but there is a woeful response, a woeful response to something 

that has been called an economic disaster. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you have to ask yourself, even with record 

revenues, even with record revenues, is the budget this year and 

budgets from previous years, are we on a sustainable trajectory? 

Because in spite of the fact that there are record revenues, 

spending has outstripped those revenues. The spending in the 

province of Saskatchewan . . . Mr. Speaker, these people, the 

members of the Saskatchewan party government, will call 

themselves conservatives. But they are absolutely not fiscal 

conservatives because if you look at spending in the province of 

Saskatchewan over the last four years, it has increased by 40 

per cent. This budget is another step in the incredible increase 

in the budget, year over year in the province of Saskatchewan, 

up 40 per cent from what it was in 2007. 

 

So, again, Mr. Speaker, the budget is not believable. It’s not 

credible. And you have to ask yourself, well in terms of the 

housing announcements, in terms of the numbers in the budget 

where there is not one dime set aside for a contract with 

teachers, where there is no money set aside for health care 

workers and the contract that they’re negotiating right now, are 

the totals in this document believable? 

 

Well I would argue that this budget is no different than the 

announcements that they’ve had on carbon capture and storage, 

where they announced a grandiose scheme. The Premier agreed 

with the Governor of Montana, who said that it was one of the 

best things to happen since going to the moon. And what 

happened to that, Mr. Speaker? It blew up. 

 

The government announced that they were going to start 

nuclear power in Saskatchewan, that there was going to be a 

nuclear power plant built in Saskatchewan. That blew up. Then 

they said that they were going to go after the federal 

government for nuclear isotopes and they were sure that that 

was going to work. That didn’t work. 

 

Then they said that we should have a domed stadium in 

Saskatchewan, and that didn’t work. They promised again, Mr. 

Speaker, long-term care facilities, 13 long-term care facilities 

for Saskatchewan. That hasn’t happened. 

 

They promised last year, about 370 days ago, that there would 

be a housing program called Headstart housing and, Mr. 

Speaker, the program was reannounced yesterday by the 

Minister of Social Services and her announcement was ruled 

out of order by the Speaker because it was something that was a 

reannouncement from a year ago and was not allowed in the 

legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, this is their answer to a housing 

crisis in the province of Saskatchewan. So it is hard to believe, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the other . . . Not only is housing in a crisis, Mr. 

Speaker, but health care in Saskatchewan is also in a crisis and 

certainly that’s no more true than in rural Saskatchewan. 

They’ve closed hospitals in Spiritwood and Big River and they 

have no plan of reopening. There’s certainly nothing in this 

budget that would make you believe that they’re addressing the 

health care concerns of the people in rural Saskatchewan. And 

it’s gotten so desperate, Mr. Speaker, that there are many, many 

RMs [rural municipalities], communities, towns who are raising 

money and increasing taxes for doctor recruitment. It was 

another program that was announced a number of years ago by 

this government that is smouldering on the ground and burning. 

Like carbon capture, nuclear power isotopes, domed stadium, 

the doctor recruitment strategy is a failure. 

 

And what makes me say that, Mr. Speaker, I’m referring to a 

letter that was sent by a councillor in the town of Arcola. And 

remember that this is a part of the constituency where their own 

government member said that the constituents of Cannington 

could either choose highways or health care. And unfortunately 

somebody must have had an Enterprise membership and chose 

highways because health care is in a shambles. 

 

The Moose Mountain Health Care Recruitment corporation is 

an operation that is attempting to recruit physicians to that area, 

Mr. Speaker. And the member, the councillor from the town of 

Arcola who wrote this letter, is a part of the committee. And she 

has been working diligently to find a strategy in order to recruit 

doctors to their area. And, Mr. Speaker, what does she say 

about the health care strategy? What does she say about what 

the Saskatchewan Party government has done for rural health 

care in her community? She says this. She says that we must 

remain vigilant in our recruitment and fundraising efforts. We 

cannot count on the health region or the government to provide 

us with health care. 

 

So that’s the feeling of the people from the town of Arcola, Mr. 

Speaker. The government, we cannot count on the government 

to provide us with health care. Mr. Speaker, in the province of 

Saskatchewan where medicare was invented and had been 

nurtured and built under the NDP, we have a situation where in 

rural Saskatchewan today they’re saying that we cannot count 

on the government to provide us with health care. 



March 29, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7031 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many reasons that this budget 

fails. It fails on housing. It fails on health care. It fails because it 

doesn’t provide for seniors in the city of Prince Albert. There 

are many of whom who will be hurt by a broken promise from 

this government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are, because of these and many other 

reasons — because the residents of the constituency of 

Cannington are forced to choose between highways and health 

care, because the long-term care patients and patrons in the city 

of Prince Albert, the government chose for them to support Pine 

Grove over Pineview, and because this government chose beer 

over housing in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — I 

cannot support this budget, and I will be supporting the 

amendment this year. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The time now being 

10:30, this Assembly stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7003 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7005 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7008 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7013 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7017 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7020 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7023 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7026 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7028 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7013 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


