




















































Hansard: April 19, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 51A  TUESDAY, APRIL 19, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7327 

 April 19, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you, it‟s an honour for me to be able to introduce 

some very, very special guests that have joined us in the 

Assembly today, significantly on the floor of the Assembly, but 

I notice some of their friends and family members and support 

networks are seated in the galleries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the rites of spring in this particular 

institution is the presentation, the vesting of the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. This is what we celebrate today. 

 

Earlier today there was the investiture of nine Saskatchewan 

heroes at Government House with the Volunteer Medal. Mr. 

Speaker, we talk a lot in this place about our natural resources, 

and so we should. They are plenty, and we produce them in 

prolific quantities to a world that needs them. But of course our 

best resource has always been, and remains today and will be in 

the future, our people. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have the highest rate of volunteerism in 

the country, and that builds communities and improves quality 

of life. And we honour those who do that each and every day, 

significantly with the nine that are representing the rest of the 

volunteers across the province and who themselves are leaders 

in terms of volunteerism in the province. 

 

So it was an honour to join the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition and the Provincial Secretary. I know we‟re going to 

be able to meet each one individually with the help of 

individual members of the House. We welcome them today to 

their Legislative Assembly, and in so welcoming them we say, 

on behalf of a grateful province, thank you for all you do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to join with the Premier in welcoming all of the recipients 

of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal and their family and 

friends that have joined us here in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this ceremony not only recognizes these nine 

individuals this year for all the work that they have contributed, 

but I think it also reminds us — each and every one of us — 

just how much our province appreciates and relies on, in many 

cases, the work of volunteers throughout the communities. And 

while none of these volunteers took on the projects, or in some 

cases the many projects that they‟ve been involved in over the 

years, they didn‟t take them on for accolades or appreciation of 

a community. It was a job that they felt needed to be done and 

they just went ahead with that wonderful Saskatchewan spirit 

and took on the role and got the job done. And I would like to 

join with the Premier and all of my colleagues and say a sincere 

thank you, because each and every one of us have benefited 

from the work that you have done in improving your 

community and the province as a whole. So thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my privilege to introduce 

Mrs. Lexie Culham from the constituency of Cypress Hills, 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mr. David Delday from the constituency of Kindersley, who 

today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 

introduce Mr. Maurice Filson from the constituency of Regina 

South, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my privilege to introduce Helen Hellegards-MacFarlane 

from the constituency of Canora-Pelly, who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

privilege to introduce Mr. Krishan Kapila from the constituency 

of Regina Wascana Plains, who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s my privilege to introduce Mr. Emil Leibel from 

the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone, who today received 

the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my privilege to introduce 

Mrs. Jean Mahoney from the constituency of Regina Douglas 

Park, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mrs. Betty Lou Palko from the constituency of Carrot River 

Valley, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 



7328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

privilege to introduce Mr. Albin Zubot from the constituency of 

Cypress Hills, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I am proud to welcome the members of 

the Saskatchewan Association for Community Living Sibling 

Network to their legislature. Will you give us a wave? The 

Sibling Network is a program offered by the Association for 

Community Living to provide support to teens and young 

adults who have a brother or a sister with an intellectual 

disability. 

 

Many of the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] had 

an opportunity to have breakfast with these young people this 

morning, and I thank you very much for sharing your personal 

stories with us. I know you‟ve made a big impact on us, and I 

know you called us MLAs which is fine — the other word for 

MLA, but that‟s great. 

 

And I would like to introduce those in attendance. We have 

Lexie Busse from Simpson, Megan Rutherford from Saskatoon, 

Allie Sheldon from Saskatoon, Emily Schaan from Saskatoon, 

Luke Zakretski from Alvena, Nic Willoby from White City, 

Alexis Bennett from Delisle, and Feather McKee. All of these 

young people are between the ages of 12 and 18 and all of them 

are leaders in their family and in their community. 

 

I also want to welcome two more people accompanying the 

Sibling Network. We have Judy Hannah, who is the Chair of 

the Disability Income Support Coalition, and Lynn Schaan, 

who is the Association for Community Living Family Network 

coordinator. Judy and Lynn have done a great deal of work on 

behalf of the people with disabilities in this province and their 

advocacy is crucial to our efforts to promote the equality of 

people. 

 

So I‟d ask everyone in this legislature to please welcome these 

people to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join the 

minister in welcoming the group here today who presented so 

touchingly their stories this morning to the MLAs and brought 

all of us into their experiences. I welcome them here to the 

legislature and ask that members join me in doing that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the Assembly, I‟d like to introduce some 

grade 10 students from Collège Mathieu in Gravelbourg. 

They‟re visiting today, accompanied by their teacher, Raymond 

Michaud, and I‟d like to introduce the four students that are 

here, Mr. Speaker. There‟s Jessica Auger, McKayla Bevans, 

Renée Punga, and Natasha Reimer. 

 

I will be meeting with these students after, and I‟m sure they‟ll 

have some pretty good questions for me after question period. 

So I‟d like to ask all members of the Assembly to please join 

me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 

I‟d like to introduce a group from the Lajord Colony School 

from Lajord, Saskatchewan. 

 

I don‟t get a lot of visitors from Lajord, maybe because there‟s 

not a lot of people in Lajord. But I would like to introduce 27 

kindergarten to grade 10 students. They‟re accompanied by 

their teacher, Samantha McIntosh, and also an assistant, 

educational assistant Chea Henderson. Adult leaders — which I 

think they‟re so well behaved they don‟t need these many adult 

leaders; I‟m sure they‟re very well behaved — but also with 

them is Diane Hofer, Abigail Hofer, Naomi Hofer, Marilyn 

Hofer, and Cheryl Hofer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope to meet with them later on after question 

period. I don‟t always have a lot of time after question period. 

There‟s other people want to ask me questions. But if we have 

the time today, Mr. Speaker, I hope to be able to have a quick 

visit with them and explain perhaps what they saw in this 

Legislative Assembly. So I‟d like all members to welcome 

them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

honour today to introduce to you and through you to members 

of the Legislative Assembly a couple of constituents of mine 

seated in your gallery. They are Fred Kress who is a long-time 

constituency assistant of mine and an even longer time friend of 

mine, so I want to welcome Fred. With Fred today is another 

constituent of mine, Charlene Sullivan. And I look forward to 

seeing both of these two fine people right after question period. 

So please help me welcome Fred and Charlene. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Great. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 

To you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I‟d 

like to have two sets of welcome. 

 

The first set to students, graduate students at the 

Johnson-Shoyama school who are here for a lecture that‟ll be 

held later tonight. And in no particular order from both the 

University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan: 

Jessica Miazyk, Nick Dubé, Kacey Keene, Kristen Ward Diaz, 

Diana Payton, Azhar Zhumatayeva, Sara McPhee-Knowles, 

Jordan Teichgrab, Dustin Rodgers, Nyankomo Marwa, Lucy 

Zhang, Linda Chemmettut, Wainewright Noble, Obeyaa 

Ampofo-Addo, Jeff Martin, Carla Leuschen, Andrew Coffin, 

and Justin Redekop. 

 

Again they‟re here for the Tansley Lecture that will be held 

later tonight, where Mr. Mel Cappe is going to be speaking here 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7329 

in Regina. We‟re delighted to have these students not just 

simply studying in Saskatchewan but hoping that they‟ll aim 

their careers in Saskatchewan because we know through them 

that we will have a very bright future indeed. I wonder if 

everyone would join me in welcoming these graduate students 

to their legislature. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well I‟d like to welcome Dr. 

Arvind Gupta and his team from MITACS, that is the 

Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex 

Systems. These are partners that we have and have worked 

together for some time to help focus on graduate students 

combining and collecting their efforts in helping small- and 

medium-sized businesses across Saskatchewan help to thrive 

and prosper in these increasingly competitive times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming Dr. Gupta and his team here to the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming the guests that the minister had 

mentioned, to Dr. Gupta and the individuals with him. We do 

want to say a special thank you to the Assembly and to the grad 

students in the Johnson-Shoyama school. We do thank them 

that they are here today, and we look forward to the 

contributions they will make to Saskatchewan and to Canada in 

the years to come. And we know that they will be very well 

prepared through the grad studies that they are pursuing at this 

time. And I look forward to meeting with some of them tonight 

at the lecture. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these guests as well. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake, 

the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s my pleasure to recognize today my godmother, Peggy 

Klassen, joining us today from Regina, and her mother, Jean 

Stimpson, a long-time friend of my grandparents in Hudson 

Bay. So thank you so much for being here and look forward to 

seeing you after. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who are 

facing concerns and the issues of surging rents that are simply 

making living in Saskatchewan unaffordable. And the petition 

also recognizes that a majority of Canadians now live in 

provinces with rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, 

British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also refers to a report that was put out by the 

Calgary School of Public Policy with a quote included that 

says, and I quote: 

The greatest attraction of second-generation rent control is 

the protection it offers sitting tenants against a severe 

deterioration of housing affordability caused by high rent 

increases. In effect it protects against economic eviction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens in Pilot 

Butte, Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of maintaining quality health care 

services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding areas; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding areas will also not serve the needs of the 

residents; and 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the 

communities of Tisdale, Domremy, Wakaw, Saskatoon, 

Vanscoy, Crystal Springs, Cudworth, Osler, Clavet, and Prince 

Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of Northern Trappers Association 

Co-operative. The fur industry has much potential for our 

northern trappers. It is a way to educate and empower our 

northern youth and to connect them with their culture. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



7330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to recognize that Northern 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association Co-operative 

maintains the traditional values of hunting, trapping, and 

also brings in millions of dollars to the provincial 

economy every year from the proceeds of fur harvesting 

combined with the economic spinoffs to the tourism sector 

and to the local economy; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Sask Party government to 

immediately show their support for the Northern 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association Co-operative by 

providing additional funding to assist in developing a 

value-added and marketing strategy that will enhance the 

current income levels available to their members. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am here to present a 

petition concerning the need for hospice and palliative care here 

in Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to enhance the quality of life for 

those facing advancing illness, death, and bereavement; 

that a publicly funded and administered hospice and 

palliative care system including residential hospices would 

increase end-of-life care options for Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the residents of Saskatchewan are owners of a 1,000-year 

supply of this strategic resource and that those owners deserve 

to receive the maximum benefit of that resource. Mr. Speaker, 

additionally, the CEO [chief executive officer] of one of the 

major potash companies in the province said that there is a new 

norm for potash and for the shareholders of the potash company 

moving forward. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan‟s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

those resources and additional potash royalty revenues for 

needed investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the names on the petition today are signed by 

good folks from Wolseley, Moosomin, Balcarres, Whitewood, 

and the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 would have on human 

rights law if enacted. The petition reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Moose Jaw, 

Swift Current, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to the record that 

includes an increasing of debt and running of deficits at times 

of record highs in revenues. They note that we are the only 

province not to comply with public sector accounting standards 

and out of line with the rest of Canada in doing so. They note 

that we‟ve increased debt in this province under the Sask Party 

for three consecutive years to the tune of over $1.3 billion and 

this year alone, Mr. Speaker, with a debt increase of $548 

million, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by concerned residents 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7331 

of Humboldt and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Siblings Connect Through 

Association of Community Living 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I had the 

honour of attending the Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living MLA breakfast here at the legislature along 

with many of our colleagues here in the legislature. This year‟s 

theme was about siblings between the ages of 11 and 17 who 

have a brother or sister with a disability. The message offered 

by these young people is one of inclusion and relationship 

building. Events and the programming provided by SACL 

[Saskatchewan Association of Community Living] provide 

helpful opportunities for young people to connect with those 

who understand what they are going through with a sibling with 

a disability. 

 

In Adam Schaan‟s story in the book Life Landscapes, Adam 

writes about his brother Daniel, their experiences together, and 

how connective groups like SACL are important. I quote 

Adam: 

 

It‟s a common experience that links us, something a bit 

different than the experience of our friends and other 

people who don‟t know someone with a disability. 

Regardless of our other differences like where we live, our 

culture, how old we are, or the education we have, we are 

all sharing the same bond of having a sibling with a 

disability. 

 

At this morning‟s breakfast, a young girl mentioned how upset 

she gets when another child uses the R word. Mr. Speaker, 

there was legislation brought forward by the member from 

Saskatoon Centre yesterday to remove this type of hurtful 

language from government usage. I know all those who 

attended this morning‟s breakfast would approve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in celebrating this 

wonderful event and all of these inspiring brothers and sisters 

who are in the gallery today, who shared their experiences with 

us in such a touching manner. Congratulations to Lynn Schaan, 

the puppeteers, and SACL for bringing us into their experience. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recipients 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today Lieutenant 

Governor Dr. Gordon Barnhart presented nine citizens with the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal at Government House in 

Regina. This medal recognizes outstanding volunteer service or 

exceptional community involvement throughout the province. 

 

These nine extraordinary citizens are to be celebrated for their 

service and leadership. Mr. Speaker, this House congratulates 

these nine volunteers on this well-deserved honour, and we 

thank them for their remarkable contributions to our province 

and our communities. 

 

The 2010 recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal are 

Lexie Culham from Cabri, David Delday from Kindersley, 

Maurice Filson from Regina, Helen Hellegards-MacFarlane 

from Kamsack, Krishan Kapila from Regina, Emil Leibel from 

Balgonie, Jean Mahoney from Regina, Betty Lou Palko from 

Hudson Bay, Albin Zubot from Burstall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recipients are selected by the Saskatchewan 

Honours Advisory Council from nominations submitted by the 

public. Including these nine new recipients, the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal has been presented to 139 outstanding 

individuals since 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to have the highest rate 

of volunteerism in Canada. These nine exceptional individuals 

should inspire us all to become more involved in our 

communities. Volunteerism is truly the backbone of a 

benevolent society where people care for each other and who 

work together toward the common good. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Jane Roberts Celebrates 103rd Birthday 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on April the 14th I attended the 

103rd birthday celebrations for Ms. Jane A. Roberts of Stanley 

Mission. The ceremonies were also attended by Prince Albert 

Grand Council Grand Chief Ron Michel, Vice-chief Brian 

Hardlotte, and along with Chief Tammy Cook-Searson of Lac 

La Ronge Indian Band, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] Chief Guy Lonechild, and past chief of FSIN 

Lawrence Joseph. These and other dignitaries joined in singing 

“Happy Birthday” to Ms. Roberts. 

 

Ms. Jane A. Roberts speaks and understands the Woodland 

Cree language only, for she never went to school. She never 

married, she never smoked or chewed tobacco, she never 

consumed alcohol. She lived a traditional Woodland Cree 

lifestyle for most of her life, lived off the land. Living the 

traditional lifestyle probably contributed to her long life. Before 

she was 95 years old, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Roberts was never sick 

nor ever saw the inside of a hospital. Due to the recent health 

conditions however, Mr. Speaker, she now resides at Stanley 

Mission Elders Haven. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing a happy 

birthday to Ms. Jane A. Roberts, and many, many more years to 

come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Child Abuse Prevention Month 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Child 

Abuse Prevention Month in Canada. Mr. Speaker, regardless of 

race, culture, or country, children are viewed as sacrosanct. 

Children are the future of our world. On the Serengeti in Africa, 

tribesmen greet one another by asking, how are the children? 



7332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

To most of us the idea of abusing a child emotionally, 

physically, or sexually causes our stomachs to turn. We would 

rather not hear the realities of the darkness that exists on our 

Earth. One of the most common . . . One of my first encounters 

with child abuse as a police officer was attending a call where a 

violent fight had occurred. After defusing the situation, I found 

a two-year-old girl clad only in a very soiled diaper cowering 

and shaking in a dark corner of the basement. When I picked 

her up, she reminded me of a kitten that clings to you when you 

hold it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other victims include the 11-year-old girl that‟s 

sent out to be victimized by prostitution to support her mother‟s 

drug habit, the 10-year-old that is victimized online by sexual 

predators. Mr. Speaker, there are many organizations that work 

to protect our children, both volunteer organizations and 

professionals. Mr. Speaker, I thank them for their steadfast 

work. As legislators we owe it to the children of this province 

to protect them and to keep their rights upheld. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Poetry is Dangerous Stuff 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, April is National Poetry Month in 

Canada and is a time when publishers, booksellers, literary 

organizations, libraries, schools, poets, and readers around the 

country band together to celebrate poetry and its vital place in 

Canadian culture. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this April we 

lost award-winning Saskatchewan poet, arts advocate, and 

passionate volunteer Gary Hyland of Moose Jaw. On his 

website, Hyland advised young, aspiring writers to read poetry: 

“Poetry is dangerous stuff. It‟s designed to shake up your mind. 

Read enough of it and you will become that dangerous entity, 

the thinking individual.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will do just that. The Work of Snow by Gary 

Hyland. 

 

Forgetting is folded into snow, 

the letting go of chronicles. 

In the heaping whiteness, 

flake by flake, faces grow pale 

the way these plains forget 

trees, or the old woman 

her first lover. The sights of crimes 

trampled black, are cleaned. 

Blood flows onto snow, fades under 

glaze and wanes in May to water. 

There is always a last bout of sleet 

then sun and once again 

she begins to garden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, poetry and politics are about hope for the future. 

Let us celebrate poetry in April and all year long. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Railcar Staging Facility Planned Near Lanigan 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I rise today to congratulate Canpotex for their tremendous 

announcement to develop a new railcar maintenance and 

staging facility here in Saskatchewan. Construction of this 

facility is expected to start next month with completion around 

fall of 2012. Mr. Speaker, Canpotex is the exclusive 

international marketing agency of Saskatchewan‟s three potash 

companies which are Agrium, Mosaic, and the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Canpotex operates approximately 5,000 railcars, and with these 

railcars, they export to terminals on the West Coast 

approximately 1600 kilometres away. The location of this 

facility will be 12 kilometres southwest of Lanigan in the rural 

municipality of Usborne and will cost approximately $55 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the announcement of this facility will bring with it 

20 great new permanent jobs as well as 40 new jobs during the 

construction phase. Mr. Speaker, potash is a key component to 

the success of Saskatchewan‟s growing economy, contributing 

thousands of jobs to our province. This announcement shows 

that the government‟s potash policies are working to move the 

industry forward. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is thrilled with Canpotex‟s 

plans to build a new railcar maintenance and staging facility by 

the town of Lanigan. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me 

in congratulating Canpotex. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Day Programs and Assisted Living Housing 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

emphasize the need for provincial support for new day 

programming facilities for people with intellectual and physical 

challenges in The Battlefords. 

 

A proposal put together jointly by the Battlefords Trade and 

Education Centre and the Battlefords Residential Services Inc. 

when fully implemented would see a single facility become the 

home to two day programs and the development of 

much-needed additional assisted living housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, currently BTEC [Battlefords Trade and Education 

Centre] operates its day programming out of the old Armoury 

Building built almost 100 years ago in 1912. Additional 

programming is done at the Vida McDonald Centre which 

opened in 1981, and neither facility fully supports the needs of 

BTEC clients. BRSI [Battlefords Residential Services Inc.] 

operates its day program out of Innovation House, one of the 

organization‟s residential homes in the city. 

 

The joint study suggests a new building could be built to better 

meet the needs of both operating day programs, and Innovation 

House could be renovated or replaced to provide additional 

housing to meet BRSI client needs. The joint study is extensive. 

There was considerable consultation throughout The 

Battlefords with families, agencies, and supportive 

organizations. 

 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7333 

Mr. Speaker, the community is watching closely for provincial 

recognition that these programs are beneficial, have value, and 

deserve to move forward at this time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Security of Health Information 

 

Mr. Yates: — Last month thousands of health files were found 

in a Regina dumpster, Mr. Speaker. People‟s private medical 

information was on display for anybody who wanted to look at 

it, Mr. Speaker. Now we find out from the Privacy 

Commissioner that there have been four similar breaches in the 

last month, Mr. Speaker. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

a responsibility to protect the private health information of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. They are failing, Mr. 

Speaker, when there have been five breaches in less than one 

month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is he doing to protect 

people‟s private health information from these abuses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this situation is absolutely unacceptable. I said that the 

last time we saw a breach. It‟s absolutely unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. We have been working closely with the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, with the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association to make sure that this doesn‟t continue on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner has sent a letter to all trustees to make sure that 

they understand the legislation, they understand the penalties, 

Mr. Speaker. I myself have sent a letter through the SMA 

[Saskatchewan Medical Association] to all physicians, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure they know the magnitude of this offence 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister is trying to 

respond to the question that was presented. Allow the minister 

to give his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve sent a letter to the 

SMA and to all physicians to make sure that they know the 

magnitude of this offence. Mr. Speaker, investigations are 

ongoing into these breaches. Mr. Speaker, we want to get to the 

bottom of it. We want to find the trustee that breached this 

legislation. The legislation is very clear, Mr. Speaker, and once 

we are able to determine who would be responsible, the 

corrective measures, the corrective penalties will be enforced, 

Mr. Speaker. First we have to find the guilty party and, Mr. 

Speaker, measures will be taken. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, less than a month ago, we had this 

minister say the exact same answer in this Assembly. And since 

he so eloquently told everybody they couldn‟t do it, we‟ve have 

four more breaches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, words are not good enough. The words of this 

minister have not stopped the breaches, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner has said, and I quote, “It‟s 

important that there be serious consequences for those who 

breach the Act.”There needs to be more than words, Mr. 

Speaker. Can the minister tell us what his government is doing 

to prevent this from ever happening again in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, first of all we want to 

ensure and make sure that all trustees that are in possession of 

personal medical records understand the legislation and 

understand the proper disposal of personal information. 

Obviously that hasn‟t been the case. There have been breaches, 

Mr. Speaker. Because of those breaches, we are investigating, 

and if and when we find the guilty party that breached the 

legislation, corrective punishment will be taken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they holler from the other side, if and when. 

Breaches took place under that government and not a charge 

was ever laid, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we find the 

guilty party, Mr. Speaker, corrective measures will be taken. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the real problem is this government 

doesn‟t back up the concerns they indicate are important. A 

month ago or less than a month ago, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

said that it was totally unacceptable for people to face up to 100 

per cent rent increases. What did he do? He had the power to do 

something. He did nothing. 

 

A month ago, Mr. Speaker, a month ago, Mr. Speaker, we heard 

from this very minister that it was totally unacceptable for 

people‟s health files to be dealt with in this manner. Mr. 

Speaker, what‟s he done? Since then, there‟ve been four more 

breaches. Mr. Speaker, why is the minister not willing to take 

the steps necessary to ensure the protection of people‟s personal 

health information in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are really two 

issues here. First of all, we want to make sure that all trustees 

that are in possession of personal information, health 

information, Mr. Speaker, know the legislation. Mr. Speaker, 

they need to understand the legislation. That‟s why the Privacy 

Commissioner has sent a letter, and that‟s why we, through the 

Ministry of Health, as the Minister of Health, have sent a letter, 

Mr. Speaker. We need to make sure they understand the 

legislation. If they breach that legislation, they also need to 

know the punishments that lay in front of them. Mr. Speaker, 

that is clearly defined in both the Privacy Commissioner and 

my letter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it curious though, Mr. Speaker, they‟re so inflamed about 



7334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

these breaches now. When they were in government, the same 

breaches happened, and not one charge laid under that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in my last answer, we are doing 

everything in our power to get to the bottom of this, including 

the last one that happened on budget day, when the member 

opposite was inside the dumpster himself handling the 

evidence, Mr. Speaker. How concerned was he at that point, 

Mr. Speaker? We‟ll get to the bottom of this and, Mr. Speaker, 

when we find the guilty party, Mr. Speaker, punishment will be 

laid. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I was helping the Privacy 

Commissioner clean up their mess. But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

because the government didn‟t respond when they were called, 

Mr. Speaker. They didn‟t respond. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can talk 

about they‟ll do everything they can to deal with this issue. The 

Privacy Commissioner has asked many times for additional 

funding for his office, Mr. Speaker. The Privacy 

Commissioner‟s asked for additional funding. It hasn‟t got it 

from this government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there needs to 

be adequate funding. Mr. Speaker, there needs to be adequate 

resources put in place, and there needs to be penalties, Mr. 

Speaker, for those who violate these rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is long on talk and short on doing 

anything about it, Mr. Speaker. Will the government commit 

today for additional resources for the Office of the Privacy 

Commissioner, Mr. Speaker? And will they commit to 

prosecute those who are responsible for these violations of 

these breaches? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the sense of outrage that 

we all felt when we saw the member opposite from Dewdney 

climbing in and out of a dumpster was something that was felt 

all away across the province. Absolutely unacceptable to have 

members of the public, members of the legislature climbing in 

and out, handling people‟s most confidential files. Mr. Speaker, 

something that was absolutely unacceptable. Mr. Speaker, I can 

tell you that we have on a term basis, supplied to the Privacy 

Commissioner two extra term positions . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the practice of this 

government is to take this type of thing serious. Nothing 

happened when those members are in opposition. In addition to 

the two members that we have, two additional people that we 

have provided for that office, we have in addition to that made 

an arrangement through the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry 

of Health to ensure that investigative and prosecutorial 

resources are supplied. 

It is absolutely unacceptable to have this type of thing take 

place. The fines for this involve periods of incarceration and 

fines that are in the tens of thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

Under their administration, there was never a prosecution. We 

will ensure that where a prosecution is appropriate, that a 

prosecution will take place. 

 

But the sense of outrage that the public felt when they saw the 

member opposite climbing in and out of a dumpster is 

something that is shared by each and every member in this 

House, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to ensure that we take 

every adequate and appropriate step. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Coverage for Dental Surgery 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Charlene Sullivan is in 

the gallery today looking for the help that the Minister of 

Health promised her a year ago. She‟s unable to wear any type 

of dentures due to multiple allergies. According to her dentist, 

“The only treatment possible to restore masticular function is 

implant-retained prosthesis.” 

 

In 2009 I wrote the minister on Charlene‟s behalf. I raised the 

issue in the House with the Premier on March 24th, 2010 and 

my colleague raised it again May 11th, 2010 to the minister. 

Correspondence, questions in the House, and a subsequent 

meeting in the minister‟s office led to the minister promising 

Charlene to change the dental policy so Charlene and others 

would get the coverage and surgery needed. 

 

To the Minister of Health: when will you honour your promise 

to Charlene and cover the dental surgery she so desperately 

needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I just ask the member to direct the questions 

through the Chair. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m aware of the case that the member opposite 

mentioned. In fact I did meet with that person and the 

individual in my office. We looked at the dental implant 

program, what we cover through the Ministry of Health. There 

were some adjustments made, Mr. Speaker. Those adjustments 

came into force. We looked at, you know, what was done in 

other provinces. We feel that we‟re positioned very well when 

we compare it to other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes were never made under a previous 

government. We‟ve made the changes to compensate those, Mr. 

Speaker, that have had surgery done. And in the case, the one 

that I remember, was due to cancer, and implants were covered 

in that case, Mr. Speaker. So we have changed the policy to suit 

those individuals, Mr. Speaker. It falls in line with other 

provinces. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, on July 16th, 2010, Charlene 

received a letter from the minister explaining the minister‟s 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7335 

decision to cover the dental implants in exceptional 

circumstances. The letter described what was needed for 

coverage and how to apply for the coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Charlene was so sure she was getting her needed 

dental surgery, she wrote thank you letters — one to the 

minister and one to me. Mine says, “I don‟t have my implants 

yet, but I‟m on the list!!” Two exclamation marks behind it, Mr. 

Speaker. The minister promised in his own office in front of 

witnesses, plural, and again in a letter to Charlene to pay for the 

dental implant surgery. To the minister: when will you honour 

your promise to Charlene? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we changed the policy 

to cover certain categories, certain circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

We also knew that it didn‟t cover all, Mr. Speaker. It didn‟t 

cover all as far as there are many different examples of why 

people would need dental implants, Mr. Speaker, and we 

realized that the changes that we made would not cover all of 

those circumstances. But what we did do was look at what is 

covered in other provinces. We‟ve strengthened the policy that 

the Ministry of Health works under. We‟ve strengthened it 

severely, Mr. Speaker, compared to what was left under the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I understand that for some of them, it‟s not good enough. 

We‟ve improved it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in this particular 

case, I‟m not familiar right now with all the particulars, Mr. 

Speaker. I do remember meeting with them. We‟ll look into the 

case again, Mr. Speaker, but we have changed the policy to 

make it far more inclusive than any policy ever was under the 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So my question to the 

minister is, why would he on May 11th, in his own office in 

front of witnesses, promise Charlene Sullivan she would get her 

coverage for her dental surgery? And why would one of his 

staff members call Charlene on June 24th, in her house, excited 

because Charlene was going to qualify under the new policy? 

Why did the minister lie to Charlene Sullivan? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member is well 

aware of the rules, long-standing rules, and I ask the member to 

withdraw that comment about the minister lying and apologize 

to the Assembly. 

 

I ask the member to withdraw and apologize. I ask the member 

to, final time, to withdraw and apologize. I recognize the 

member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, when Charlene Sullivan gets her 

surgery . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the member to 

withdraw the comment and apologize. I ask the member to 

withdraw and apologize. 

 

I name you, Kim Trew, and ask you to leave. 

 

Next question. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Provision of Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people in 

Kamsack and area are angry. They want answers and they want 

them now. They‟re being told that they are losing their 

emergency room, their emergency room services and in-patient 

services. Mr. Speaker, they‟re being told it‟s “a temporary 

service interruption” that is supposedly going to last only six 

months until September. But, Mr. Speaker, we are already 

being told that beds, equipment, and staff are soon to be moved 

out of the hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he guarantee today that 

emergency room services and in-patient services will be back in 

the Kamsack Hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re certainly aware of the situation in Kamsack. It 

definitely concerns us. We have been talking with the Sunrise 

Health Region, Mr. Speaker. The Sunrise Health Region has 

been talking to the community of Kamsack. Mr. Speaker, we 

have, we know that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there are a 

couple of positions that have been recruited that will be here in 

the fall, Mr. Speaker. In the interim, the health region is 

working very closely with the community and the SMA to try 

and have locums that will be there sooner so that the service 

can be up and running sooner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I can guarantee you that this facility is important within the 

Sunrise Health Region, within this province. When the 

physicians are, Mr. Speaker, brought on board, the services, 

emergency services, in-patient services will be restored. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Albert Konowalchuk, his wife 

Cheryl, and their son Edward are here in the Assembly today 

because they want answers from the minister and the Premier. 

They want to know what‟s going to happen to their hospital. 

Mr. Speaker, Edward has acquired brain injury and is on a 

number of medications. He needs access to a hospital and a 

doctor on a regular basis. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what 

does he have to say to the Konowalchuks? Where are they 

supposed to take Edward when he needs health care now? 

 



7336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we‟re working 

hard to make sure that we have the proper complements across 

this province and in Kamsack as well. In the interim, when the 

locum is trying to be recruited into that area, Mr. Speaker, it is 

the responsibility for the health region to look at where services 

can be provided in other jurisdictions. Mr. Speaker, they 

checked into Canora, also into Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, so those 

services that members around the Kamsack area need will be 

provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but it seems awfully curious that the members 

opposite are so concerned about the Kamsack closure when in 

2001; 2005, December 6th; January 2007; 2006, June 5th, 

2006; November 9th, 2006; December 6th, 2006; and March 

1st, 2007, all under their watch, services were discontinued, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — So, Mr. Speaker, that exempts the minister from 

taking responsibility for what‟s happening today in Kamsack? 

Nobody is listening to that, Mr. Speaker. They want to know 

what he‟s going to do now for Kamsack. The people in the 

audience, they want to know now. 

 

And the Kamsack Hospital doesn‟t just serve the people of 

Kamsack. It looks after people from the First Nations reserves 

of Cote, Keeseekoose, Key First Nation, and as many as 4,000 

campers that go to the Duck Mountain Provincial Park through 

the summer. It‟s the responsibility of the government to assure 

that these people have access to quality and timely health care, 

and the government is failing to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can he give a $71,000 raise to 

the CEO of Regina Health Region, $100,000 raise to the 

Saskatoon Region Health CEO, and a 60 per cent raise to the 

Prince Albert CEO and look the people of Kamsack in the eye 

and say, I can‟t do anything for you? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re working closely 

with all the health regions around this province. That‟s why 

we‟ve increased their funding by $250 million in this past 

budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is a far cry, when that 

member herself put out a press release, so proud of the fact that 

only 25 health regions were running a deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s their record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our record is increased medical seats. Our record 

is increased residency positions . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask the members to allow 

the minister to respond to the question they‟ve asked. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our record is increased 

medical students. It‟s increased residency positions, Mr. 

Speaker. And in three years of this government, it‟s increased 

the amount of doctors in this province by 228. I‟ll put that 

record up against any year of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ll even put it up against the year that they closed the 

hospitals in Invermay, Norquay, and Langenburg, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s the record of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Tendering of Government Contracts 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education 

admitted last night that the Sask Party government delivered a 

contract for modular units to a business in the Premier‟s own 

riding. This $4.4 million contract was not properly tendered. 

The Sask Party put out a tender for some child care modular 

units and received some bids. But then they changed the project 

significantly, and they did not tender the new project. 

Businesses who didn‟t bid on the original project for a variety 

of reasons are upset that they didn‟t get a chance to bid on the 

new project. 

 

To the minister: why did the government just hand over a $4.4 

million contract to the Swift Current company? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re quite excited that 

our province is growing. And with that growth quite frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, is more families coming to our province. And we 

are seeing more students in our province, which is quite 

exciting particularly in specific communities. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re trying to backfill a huge infrastructure problem 

that we have within our province as well as trying to backfill 

the lack of daycare spaces. 

 

With all that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we decided to try 

innovation instead of procrastination, which is what we saw 

under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. And there was a tender put out for 

modular units. There were four bids that came in, Mr. Speaker, 

and Modus, which is an Alberta company that happens to have 

a manufacturer in Swift Current, was the winner of that bid, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, innovation does not equal the 

absence of accountability and the absence of transparency, and 

that‟s what we‟ve seen under this government. Mr. Speaker, the 

Ministry of Education has never sole sourced a contract before, 

and the minister admitted last night that they probably never 

will again. This was a special one-off deal for a Swift Current 

company. 

 

An official admitted in committee last night: “We are currently 

in a process of looking at the Modus relocatables to assess the 

appropriateness of them.” Surely the appropriateness of the 

modular unit should have been assessed before dumping 4.4 

million into this untendered contract. Had the minister actually 

done her homework and talked to school boards, she would 

have learned that these particular modular units cost at least 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7337 

$75,000 more per unit. Mr. Speaker, overpaying for 31 units by 

$75,000 is a waste of over 2.3 million taxpayers‟ dollars. 

 

To the minister: why did they deliver an untendered contract to 

this company without assessing the appropriateness of the 

modular units, especially when those units are so much more 

expensive for school boards and the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I know the member 

opposite wants to continue to say it was untendered. We have 

the names. He‟s aware of the other bids, the bidders‟ names, so 

he knows . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now another member 

chanted it was for child daycare. Child daycare or instructional 

space is interchangeable, Mr. Speaker. So some use it for child 

daycare. Some use the units for instructional space. It‟s 

interchangeable, Mr. Speaker. These units service both for the 

schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes there is question that we have right now that 

they may be about 75,000 more expensive than some of the 

contractors that are building relocatable units. But the issue that 

we had at the time and decisions that school divisions were able 

to make was in expediency. One of these units can be ready 

within 21 to 30 days. 

 

There is issues out there. We know that there are shortages in 

trades. There has been many situations where it‟s been difficult 

to find the tradespeople for different infrastructure projects 

around our province. This was ready within 21 to 30 days, Mr. 

Speaker. They could have the classroom. So expediency was 

extremely important when we looked at this project. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they changed the parameters and 

the scope of the project, and there should have been a new 

tender. And the minister knows it. It‟s interesting that the Sask 

Party government can‟t deliver a new education funding 

formula, it refuses to deliver a fair offer to teachers, but it sure 

knows how to deliver untendered contracts. 

 

After the mess of the 1980s, changes were made to make the 

tendering process transparent and accountable, but apparently 

the government has forgotten all of those lessons. The reality is 

that school boards can purchase modular units for a lot less than 

these units cost, but the Sask Party government pressed ahead 

and delivered a $4.4 million contract that was not properly 

tendered. No wonder many school boards and construction 

companies are frustrated by this deal in Swift Current. 

 

To the minister: what does she have to say to the companies 

that didn‟t get a chance to bid on the actual project that went 

ahead, and what does she have to say to school boards that have 

seen their costs increase substantially because of this special 

one-off deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to repeat once 

again: it was tendered. He is well aware of the number, or the 

companies, that put a bid on that tender. I will also repeat yet 

again, the units are interchangeable, Mr. Speaker. Some are 

being used for pre-K [pre-kindergarten] space, some are being 

used for child care space, and some are being used for 

instructional space, Mr. Speaker. 

 

School divisions had a choice. There was a school division that 

did not want to use this type of unit for their relocatables and 

they took the alternative. Mr. Speaker, we gave the school 

divisions that choice. We also gave them this option if they 

were under pressure that they needed something immediately 

because this was ready in 21 to 30 days. 

 

[14:30] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes 

d’actes criminels 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 172, 

The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill 172, The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 

2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 

2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 



7338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m instructed by 

the Standing Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 154, The Provincial Court 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. This is a bilingual Bill to 

be passed without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

154, The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 154, The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 165, The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

165, The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7339 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 165, The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 164, The Police 

Amendment Act, 2011 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister Responsible for 

Corrections has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 164, The Police 

Amendment Act, 2011 with amendment, and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections that the amendments be now read a 

first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may now proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing that 

Bill No. 164, The Police Amendment Act, 2011 with 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 170 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is introducing an amendment to 



7340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

The Corporation Capital Tax Act to introduce a new bracketed 

rate structure for small financial institutions in Saskatchewan. 

 

The province has reviewed the impact of small financial 

institutions exceeding the current lower tax rate threshold of 

$1.5 billion in taxable capital and the significant increase in tax 

payable that results from crossing over the threshold and 

becoming subject to the higher rate of tax on their entire 

amount of taxable capital. 

 

The introduction of a new bracketed tax structure for small 

financial institutions will allow them to continue to expand and 

provide quality financial services without being unfairly 

penalized as a result of crossing over the $1.5 billion threshold. 

With this change, small financial institutions will continue to be 

subject to the lower tax rate of 0.7 per cent on the first 1.5 

billion of their taxable capital and will be subject to the higher 

rate of 3.25 per cent only on their taxable capital in excess of 

$1.5 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 170, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Finance that The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. To which committee does this Bill 

. . . Oh, pardon me. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee does this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 171 — The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise and move second reading of 

Bill No. 171, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2). 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 2008, our government delivered the 

largest personal income tax cut in Saskatchewan history. We 

raised the basic and spousal personal tax exemptions by $4,000. 

We raised the exemption for dependent children by $2,000, and 

we introduced the Saskatchewan low-income tax credit to 

ensure that lower and moderate income individuals and families 

share in Saskatchewan‟s economic prosperity. These measures 

provide almost $300 million in annual tax savings to 

Saskatchewan residents, and remove 92,000 Saskatchewan 

residents from the provincial income tax roll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is building on these income tax 

reductions in the 2011-12 budget. We are increasing the basic 

and spousal exemptions by another $1,000 effective January 1, 

2011, and we are increasing the exemption for dependent 

children by $500 to $5,514 per child, also effective January 1, 

2011. When you combine these increases with the 

Saskatchewan low-income tax credit, Mr. Speaker, a family of 

four in Saskatchewan will not pay tax on their first $45,550 of 

combined income. That‟s the highest income threshold in 

Canada. In other words, Mr. Speaker, in other words, Mr. 

Speaker, that family can now earn more tax-free income in 

Saskatchewan than any place in Canada. This tax reduction, 

together with the previous reductions introduced by our 

government, means that a family of four with $50,000 income 

will save $2,447 in income taxes this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It also means, Mr. Speaker, that a further annual income tax 

savings of $60 million for Saskatchewan residents and another 

22,000 people coming off the income tax roll. In four years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have eliminated provincial income tax for 

approximately 114,000 Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, 

the income tax reduction measures undertaken by our 

government since 2007 have reduced Saskatchewan income 

taxes by $420 million annually. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget also announced that the small-business 

corporate income tax rate is being cut more than half from 4.5 

per cent to 2 per cent effective July 1st, 2011. This tax 

reduction will provide Saskatchewan small businesses with $80 

million in annual tax savings and gives them the third lowest 

rate in the country and the lowest in the new West. Mr. 

Speaker, we believe this improvement in the tax 

competitiveness of our small-business sector makes 

Saskatchewan the best place in Canada to start a new business 

or expand an existing business. 

 

In conjunction with the reduction to the small-business tax rate, 

the budget announced that Saskatchewan‟s dividend tax credit 

rate for dividends from small businesses is also being reduced 

to maintain integration between the corporate and personal 

income tax systems. The current rate of 6 per cent will be 

reduced to 5 per cent for 2011 taxation year and to 4 per cent 

for 2012 and subsequent taxation years. 

 

There are three additional amendments in the Bill that are more 

technical in nature. First, the newly legislated amounts for the 

personal income tax exemptions will apply for the 2011 

taxation year. The indexation provisions of the Act are being 

amended to prevent these amounts from being indexed for 2011 

and then to reapply indexation starting in 2012. 

 

The remaining two amendments are technical clarifications that 

have been requested by the Canada Revenue Agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7341 

amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 171, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

(No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

[14:45] 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to address 

The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act, the Bill No. 

167. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a fairly short Bill, Mr. Speaker, and 

if one looks at the second reading speech of the minister that 

introduced it, a Bill that almost has no practical effect 

whatsoever, but it‟s generally supportive of shortline railways. 

 

And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, and I don‟t think there‟s 

anything particularly controversial about support for shortline 

railways in this Assembly or within the province of 

Saskatchewan, but the reason that I say that about the minister‟s 

second reading speech and I tend, Mr. Speaker, to take second 

reading speeches fairly seriously, and in some cases I think 

more seriously than the ministers that give them. But the speech 

. . . As a matter of fact at one point — and I don‟t mean to 

comment on a Speaker‟s order; I don‟t think I am — but at one 

point the Speaker seems to be under the impression that it‟s a 

ministerial statement, and that was an understandable 

impression for the Speaker to have at the time because it 

certainly sounded like a ministerial statement and less like a 

second reading speech. 

 

The minister outlined that the Bill would give the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation the legislative authority to undertake 

shortline sustainability grant program, develop other initiatives 

in the future, and better position the corporation to respond to 

the needs of rural Saskatchewan, broadening the authority of 

the grain car commission and allowing it to be more active in 

assisting the shortline rail industry in the province. And after 

that, the minister doesn‟t say much more except shortline rail, 

shortline rail. 

 

And at the point where the Speaker‟s under the impression it‟s a 

ministerial statement, the minister is speaking about votes in 

estimates of Highways and Infrastructure, allocations for the 

Saskatchewan grain corporation, and funding increases. And 

it‟s either at that point a budget speech or a ministerial 

statement, but doesn‟t sound very much like a second reading 

speech. 

 

He proceeds after that to go on in a very ministerial-statement 

way that he‟s directed the Saskatchewan grain corporation to 

use its resources and expertise to look at new and innovative 

ways to provide assistance to the Saskatchewan shortline rail 

industry. We can assume that the Bill is at least partly a step in 

that direction, and that‟s what the minister says, and then talks 

about consulting with stakeholders. 

 

Now this is reminiscent of other legislation that‟s before the 

House now where the government is marketing one idea, and 

legislation addresses something either different or, in this case, 

narrower than the broader marketing. In this particular case, 

Mr. Speaker, and I think in the other case I‟m thinking of, we 

don‟t have any problem with the principles being marketed. But 

it‟s our duty to look at the legislation that‟s actually brought 

before the House and what its actual intents and effects are and 

whether those intents and effects are identical or similar or even 

coherently compatible with the broader ideas that are being 

marketed by the government as perhaps being the Bill, being 

the legislation that‟s being proposed, whether or not in fact 

there is a lot of similarity or connection between the two. 

 

And in this respect, the minister . . . And I think this is 

relatively unusual for a second reading speech. We‟re in the 

second reading debate, and I‟m responding, in part at least, to 

the minister‟s comments on the Bill. The minister decides to 

read letters that are supportive of not the Bill specifically but of 

the support for shortline railways. 

 

So the implication in the second reading speech by the minister, 

the implication is that the Bill itself has the support of the 

stakeholders who provide these letters to the minister or to the 

ministry. And perhaps that is the case. And I would think that it 

probably is, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s not clear, at least in a couple 

cases. There‟s three letters here. In a couple cases, it‟s not 

entirely clear that the stakeholders are addressing all aspects of 

the Bill as much as they are addressing what they would like 

the government to do or they would like, put it more accurately, 

what results they would like to see from government action, 

Mr. Speaker. And that result is a greater viability for shortline 

railways and the beneficial effects that that could have for 

producers. 

 



7342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

And certainly one of the letters is from the Saskatchewan 

Shortline Railway Association. And they would certainly like 

to see greater support for shortline railways, and any legislation 

that enabled them to be more financially viable they would be 

supportive of. And I expect they would be supportive of this 

Bill whether or not they were consulted specifically on the 

aspects of this Bill before it was introduced in the House or not. 

 

The other correspondence is from the Association of Rural 

Municipalities and from the Agricultural Producers 

Association. And that is interesting, not because I wouldn‟t 

think the Agricultural Producers Association would not be 

supportive of support for the shortline railways, but that 

legislative support arguably is still there. 

 

In the explanatory notes that the ministry and the minister 

provided along with the Bill, it‟s quite clear that amongst the 

few changes to the current legislative framework that are being 

made by this Bill. The first is a wording change to clarify the 

commodities other than agricultural products are being hauled 

here. So that section of the Bill or that subsection of the Bill 

doesn‟t make any difference to agricultural producers. They‟re 

already covered by the legislation. And the legislation is being 

expanded to cover other commodities other than agricultural 

products, which tends towards the general statement of intent in 

the Bill which is that it‟s for the benefit of the railway industry, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of my colleagues have commented, some of my 

colleagues have commented on the choice of language there 

because it‟s clear that the legislation before is dealing with 

transportation issues confronting agricultural producers in the 

province. And that was why the grain corporation exists. That‟s 

why it did exist, and that‟s why there was a legislative regime 

to allow for support of shortline railway to assist agricultural 

producers. 

 

Now the intent of this legislation, as set out in the Bill, is to 

support the railway industry with the assumption — and I guess 

I might discuss that in a little bit of detail — the consumption 

of that is good for producers and not just agricultural producers. 

So I guess it‟s a significant change in the wording but also sort 

of in the intent of who‟s being served here. And it has been 

seen in the past by the government who brought in the original 

legislation. It has been seen by the past that shortline rail 

industry was there to serve agricultural producers, and the 

legislation and the corporation were there to serve agricultural 

producers. 

 

Now in part, this legislation makes an interesting change that 

the corporation exists not to serve agricultural producers, 

certainly not directly. Perhaps indirectly would be the intent of 

the government, but not directly. Directly, the interests that it is 

to be served is the railway industry, Mr. Speaker, and there‟s a 

grand history of that in this country, Mr. Speaker, a grand 

history of that. Arguably, arguably where our neighbour to the 

South was founded a revolution, perhaps re-founded by civil 

war, it‟s been the national narrative, the story of Canada, myth 

— not in the sense of something that‟s not true, but myth in 

something that‟s larger than just a mere story or mere history, 

Mr. Speaker — that the country of Canada was formed, at least 

as we know it and particularly as we know it in the West, by the 

railway, a railway that linked Eastern Canada with the port in 

British Columbia and allowed for settlement of the Prairies and 

the national strategy of the first Government of Canada, the 

Macdonald Government of Canada, that resources from, and 

particularly in those days, Mr. Speaker, wheat and other grains, 

resources from Western Canada would feed manufacturing in 

Eastern Canada. 

 

The balance has shifted, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s shifted because 

of the value of resources in part. And so although this is still a 

resource economy in the Western Canada, whether it‟s as much 

the servant of an eastern manufacturing economy in Eastern 

Canada I think is far, far, far more in doubt. 

 

But it‟s the culture of our country, not just the history of our 

country, that the railway formed what Canada was to become 

. . . and Pierre Berton‟s books obviously but also Gordon 

Lightfoot‟s railway trilogy. I mean the railway is very much of 

what we are and what binds us together. 

 

And even with the shifts with the end of the Crow rate, Mr. 

Speaker, the importance of a railway to westerners is still there. 

It‟s been an uneasy relationship, Mr. Speaker, and I‟d comment 

on that briefly. It‟s been an uneasy relationship, but certainly a 

vital and an important one all this time. And I think, I know it 

was much commented on at the time when the Crow rate 

disappeared, and the minister comments on it in his second 

reading speech that one of the reasons for supporting shortline 

railway and the vital reasons for supporting a shortline railway 

is to take traffic off the highways. 

 

And Minister of Highways and Infrastructure who introduced 

the Bill in the second reading speech, he‟s also the minister not 

only of Infrastructure and responsible for the Grain Car 

Corporation and the introducer of this Bill, but of course he‟s 

the Highways minister maybe first and foremost. And he notes 

in his second reading speech that the “. . . more product moving 

on rail [to quote the minister], that means less wear and tear on 

provincial highways.” And that was a significant argument by 

provincial governments at the time the Crowsnest rate was 

disappearing as to the expense that was being downloaded, 

again nationally and from the railway, onto the provinces. And 

of course, that‟s history, Mr. Speaker, as so much of our uneasy 

relationship with the railway is history. 

 

But the story of rail transportation and particularly rail 

transportation for commodities is far from over as this 

legislation and the legislation that it amends certainly stands 

witness to and appreciates. 

 

The part of the Bill that the opposition finds more problematic 

than the parts of the Bill that arguably only strengthen the Grain 

Car Corporation for the ultimate, I hope, ultimate benefit of 

producers in the province, whether they‟re agriculture 

producers or otherwise . . . The support for the shortline rail 

industry that‟s expressed by the minister in his second reading 

speech, whether that‟s really effectively carried out by these 

amendments or not is another question, but that support I don‟t 

think is controversial on this side of the House. And I don‟t 

think anything I‟ve said suggests that it might be. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And the ability of the corporation to purchase assets for the 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7343 

benefit of the rail industry, we‟re actually saying, Mr. Speaker, 

we do, we do wonder about the wording. That‟s a little bit of a 

concern. 

 

People of Canada have for over 100 years done a lot for support 

of the rail industry, Mr. Speaker, and sometimes we felt we 

were getting a return for that, and sometimes we felt that we 

were not. And a lot of politics and divisive history goes into 

that relationship. But that‟s what our hope is and that these 

assets that we purchased by the Grain Car Corporation will be a 

benefit not just for the rail industry, although that‟s the wording 

that the government has decided to use, but for the people who 

are served by the railway industry and particularly by shortline 

railways. 

 

There‟s a corresponding provision, subsection 12(e) that 

provides the corporation can dispose of assets acquired as a 

result of changes from the subsection 12(d) allowing the 

purchase assets . . . So if these assets are replacements, then 

what is being replaced can be sold, or when these assets should 

be sold so other assets can be purchased that better serve the 

corporation, they can be disposed of. So we see those as mere 

provisions and not necessarily controversial in themselves 

either. 

 

The part of the Bill that has been problematic for the 

opposition, I think, if you‟ve listened to any of my colleagues‟ 

remarks carefully, is the ability of the Grain Car Corporation to 

borrow money. And: 

 

subject to any orders or directives of the Treasury Board, 

[that is the committee of cabinet ministers] provide 

financial assistance by way of grant, loan, guarantee or 

other similar means to persons for the purpose of allowing 

those persons to acquire railway rolling stock, plant, 

equipment or other assets that will benefit the railway 

industry; 

 

Well that‟s, I guess, other than the sort of the broad, expansive 

next section, to allow the corporation to do anything necessary 

or conducive to meeting its objects and purposes, which is very 

broad and vague, I suppose it‟s that section that causes us the 

most questions, raises the most concerns, and which we will 

need to explore further. To a certain extent, it appears the Grain 

Car Corporation becomes an agency of the Treasury Board to 

borrow money or guarantee money. 

 

And there‟s been quite a bit of debate in this Legislative 

Assembly recently about government guarantees and even the 

difficulty getting ministers to admit that they exist, and what I 

think one minister of the Crown called creative financing at one 

point. And this is problematic because it‟s reminiscent for many 

of us of the type of debt that was accumulated in different 

places, different ways, off the regular books by the Devine 

government back in the 1980s. 

 

And the debt, although it would be the debt of, carried by the 

Grain Car Corporation, is not necessarily a debt for the benefit 

of the Grain Car Corporation. These are grants, loans, or 

guarantees to persons for the purpose of allowing those persons 

to acquire railway rolling stock. 

 

So the Grain Car Corporation, as I read it, will be acquiring 

debt, public debt, to allow, I assume, corporations because they 

are persons, private corporations, publicly traded corporations, 

to allow those persons to acquire railway rolling stock, plant, or 

equipment for the benefit of the railway industry. I mean if 

those are railway companies, then I assume it would be for their 

benefit to have the government loan, or the Crown corporation 

loan, the Grain Car Corporation loan to allow them to acquire 

railway rolling stock, plant, and equipment that will benefit the 

industry. 

 

The opposition would have liked to see more comfort that these 

would be agriculture producers that would be receiving this 

benefit, that the language in the legislation would not be as 

expansive as it is both in allowing debt to accumulate and loans 

to accumulate, and off the operating books of the government, 

and also a bit more specific about who would benefit from these 

loans or grants. 

 

And the whole language of the Act about benefiting the railway 

industry and its move from support of shortline rail lines in 

support of agriculture producers is all somewhat troubling. And 

I know that I have colleagues who have considerable more 

expertise and knowledge about these matters and this industry 

than I do who will want to enter into this debate, and to allow 

them to do so, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on the Bill No. 167. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to join the debate on Bill No. 

155, The Natural Resources Amendment Act and just to, I 

guess, share a view. And I want to share some discussions that 

have taken place and concerns that may be out there. 

 

We see this piece of legislation, and it‟s going to make some 

amendments. And any time you amend I guess a Bill, people 

are asking questions and want to know what exactly is going to 

happen. 

 

We have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we do 

our job and on behalf of the people that bring the concerns 

forward. And when legislation is brought forward, we have to 

make sure that we ask the right questions. We make sure as best 

possible that we can to ensure that their concerns and the 

questions they have are answered. And we have to make sure 

we ask these questions before this goes to committee or 

wherever it‟s going to end up as the law. 

 

But I just want to . . . We see some of the proposed changes that 



7344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

they‟re making to this Bill, the amendment, and there‟s 

different areas of concern and the role the advisory council will 

play. When you look at funds, and I think any time you‟re 

looking at dollars and you‟re allowing a different way, people 

want to make sure that, what role will this council have, or a 

committee? There‟s a lot of questions. What exactly is going to 

change? And I think people want to be very clear what those 

changes and how those changes will impact on anybody that 

was using this legislation I guess to cover them off to do the 

work, the good work that they do on behalf of the province. 

 

But any time you make any type of a change to legislation, I 

think there are different agencies and people that use the 

legislation. They want to make sure that this legislation is 

taking care of what they need to be taken care of, to make sure 

it doesn‟t take away from them without consulting them; it 

doesn‟t add powers to individuals without consulting. So we‟ve 

got to make sure a lot of questions will be asked. And I know 

we‟re going to get an opportunity to debate this Bill and ask 

questions about it and make sure we‟re very clear. And I think 

we want to be very clear on any changes we make to 

legislation. 

 

And you know, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, a lot of 

people have concern right away when you even talk about that 

because there‟s so many different areas that are impacted. Land, 

and people will look at it that way. Will this impact land? Will 

it impact traditional land, treaty land, homeland of the Métis? 

Will it affect municipalities? Will it affect protected lands? 

There‟s a lot of different issues come into play and 

organizations that want to make clear that process. And will it 

affect farm land? Will it affect the trappers? 

 

So there‟s a lot of questions, and I will go through them when 

we talk about this because we have to be very, very cautious. 

Because we‟ve seen this government, the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve seen the way they‟re 

willing to change regulations without consulting First Nations, 

Métis. We‟ve seen what they‟ve done with trappers on some of 

the regulations and legislation that has been passed through this 

House, that they have not spent the time to make sure. 

 

And you could sit there and say, oh yes, we consulted; we 

talked to a few people and they really like it. Well yes, because 

they may be benefiting from it. But to truly go back and ask the 

government and ask the official opposition to make sure that 

legislation that affects them, truly that those individuals had an 

opportunity to share their views, some of their stories, their 

ideas, and how will it impact them. 

 

And whether they‟re traditional land users, whether it‟s 

regulations for hunting and fishing . . . And I have to be honest. 

I‟ve had a lot of trappers and a lot of northern people very 

concerned when regulations are changed and when a 

government says, oh we consulted you; oh yes, yes, they were 

consulted. And you find out later, no they weren‟t. You may 

have gone out and reached to one person, but you sure did not 

do the process that we call consultation to First Nations and 

Métis when you‟ve changed . . . and trappers, when you‟ve 

changed some of the regulations. So there are concerns out 

there right now and I know that for a fact. 

 

You know, we see some of the departments and the ministries 

changing the regulations, and they‟ve been given that power. 

When you do that and you don‟t consult First Nations, Métis, 

the trappers, whether it be farmers, whether it‟s citizens, 

whether it‟s workers, any time you‟re going to change 

something and the government says, oh now don‟t you worry; 

trust us, we‟re going to take care . . . I think alarm bells go off 

with many people because they‟ve seen exactly what this 

government‟s willing to do without following the duty to 

consult. And that is very clear from First Nations and the Métis. 

 

We‟ve had large groups, we‟ve had individuals share their 

concern, frustration, leaders from communities very concerned. 

Any time you start messing around with regulations without 

consulting or any changes you‟re going to make to protected 

lands, we‟ve seen the pattern that the Sask Party government‟s 

willing to do without consulting. The pattern‟s there. So people 

aren‟t making this up and we don‟t have to fearmonger and 

create anything. It‟s the reality. People see it and they‟re not 

happy with it, and they‟ve seen the way they‟ve been treated. 

 

And I‟ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they‟re very concerned. 

Any time that there is changes, they want to make sure they 

understand them. And they‟re asking their representatives to 

make sure they speak for them and make sure that those 

concerns come forward. So I go back to looking at Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, and we want to make 

sure. We‟re not exactly sure what all will be changed and what 

amendments they‟re asking and who will it impact in the end. 

And I mean we can make word changes; we can make small 

adjustments to legislation. But then sometimes, I guess, in the 

end there may be changes to regulations that affect . . . And that 

process will go further and can cause a lot of grief for some 

individuals. Maybe for some it won‟t. 

 

But I know people are very concerned, and back home they 

want to make sure that, whatever pieces of legislation come 

through here, that they want to make sure the government 

understands that before you change regulations that will impact 

First Nations, Métis, traditional land users, I know the farmers 

. . . There‟s a lot of different land users, a lot of different people 

who rely on legislation and rules. And I guess that‟s how our 

citizens get to, you know, to follow and know what opportunity 

is there for them, and it‟s through legislation that‟s passed here. 

And let‟s make it very clear: they are concerned. 

 

And again I‟m going back to this because I think it‟s very 

important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We‟ve seen legislation passed, 

protected lands, that there was quite a concern. So when I look 

at Bills like this, Bill 155, and you look at different Bills that 

have come forward, and we‟ve had the opportunity to debate 

and talk, but the people really feel sometimes that their 

government is not hearing them, and they voice their concerns. 

And I know they voice their concerns to their MLAs, whether 

they‟re government or opposition. 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, individuals want to make 

sure that there‟s protection for them. And when you‟re making 

changes, and I mean right away you say, the natural resources 

amendment, people right away want to know exactly in detail, 

and they want to make sure what exactly are we changing. 

What is the proposed changes we‟re trying to make here? 

 

[15:15] 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7345 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know for a fact that back home the 

trappers, they live off the land, they utilize the land, and when 

that land is . . . When we pass any legislation here that affects 

them, they‟re very concerned. And when we take, we change 

regulations, rules, legislation, and a government does that 

without consulting them, they feel offended. They feel insulted. 

And let me make it very clear, and I‟ve talked on different Bills 

and about that. 

 

You know, you look at the, you know, the court system and the 

challenges that have gone on, Supreme Court of Canada ruling 

has made it very clear, very clear that First Nations and Métis, 

the Aboriginal people must be consulted when legislation‟s 

going to be affecting them. 

 

And I don‟t know if this change, and I don‟t see in . . . And 

maybe that‟s what needs to be tightened up, that we have to 

ensure that legislation affecting First Nations, Métis, any time 

organizations that have a legal grounds to stand on to say 

they‟re concerned about change you‟re going to make, that that 

should actually, there should be a process in place that makes 

sure that the trappers, the land, the people that will be impacted 

by any land or any policies, regulations that will affect them, 

that we‟ve truly reached out. And sometimes they‟re minor. 

And sometimes, you know, legislation comes in here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we know that it‟s good for Saskatchewan 

and it‟s the right thing to do. And I know that we have 

co-operated and on both sides will co-operate. And the 

co-operation is fine to some point. 

 

But sometimes there have been situations where legislation‟s 

been passed that has not been good for the people out there, 

whether they‟re First Nations, Métis, Saskatchewan residents. 

And oh, you think about the protected lands. You think about 

the human rights. You look at that legislation and some of the 

concerns, I mean the organizations and group that come 

forward, and they‟re very concerned about some of the changes. 

 

So when I look at Bill 155, The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, it‟s very concerning to me, and I know to individuals out 

there. How will this impact them? And what are the changes? 

And I want to make sure what comes after this when you 

change legislation? Will regulations be changed without 

consulting? And we‟ve seen some of the changes, that some of 

the Bills come forward, when you look at the fine print, that all 

of a sudden the ministry and the minister have a lot of authority 

over everyone else. And that‟s very concerning. 

 

So you want to look at each piece of legislation and make sure 

we‟re doing the right thing, that people, their concerns are 

addressed, whether it‟s the traditional land user, the person 

hunting, fishing. We know there‟s many people, the anglers; we 

look at outfitters. There‟s a lot of individuals that want to have 

their say. And they want to make sure that people that — you 

know, the protected lands — there‟s different organizations that 

want to make sure that we‟re doing all we can to protect the 

lands and protect the resources. 

 

And any time you want to make amendments to that natural 

resources, I think people are really . . . They pay attention. And 

sometimes we think, oh I don‟t think people are paying 

attention. I want to let the Sask Party members over there know 

that yes, people pay attention. And they‟re looking at some of 

the stuff that has gone on, you know, and different Bills — Bill 

5, Bill 6, Bill 43. You look at Bill 80. You look at the human 

rights protection. I mean some of those Bills are very 

concerning to individuals, the legislation that this government 

is willing to pass and push through. You look at the photo ID 

[identification]. There‟s quite concerns that people have with all 

this. 

 

Why are these Bills coming forward? You know, are Bills 

brought here, Mr. Deputy Speaker because individuals are . . . 

lots of concern out there and the government wants to respond. 

I understand that. But sometimes when you find it hard, you see 

that well there‟s nobody coming forward, not one individual, 

and you see a government trying to push, you start questioning 

yourself, and you start looking at every Bill that comes forward. 

 

And you‟ve got to make sure that, on behalf of the people of 

our province, we‟re doing what we need to do. We‟re asked to 

be here, and we‟re asked to do our best. And I think we all try 

to do that, and we‟ll work hard. 

 

But I want to make sure, you know, any time you bring 

something like this, you know, and especially when you talk 

about the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, here‟s a fund, 

and there‟s a lot of organizations I guess that maybe access that 

money or Saskatchewan residents benefit from the good work 

that they‟re doing, different organizations do. Nobody‟s 

questioning the good work that some of these organizations do 

that utilize some of the funds. I think they do a great job. They 

try their best. And you‟ll have different organizations out there 

that represent our province well. And they‟re truly ambassadors 

of their organizations, and they work hard. 

 

Same with the trappers. They want to do the right thing with the 

land. They‟re truly stewards of the land. They know exactly 

what‟s going on when they‟re harvesting and they‟re trapping, 

they‟re fishing, they‟re hunting. That‟s a lifestyle, and it‟s a 

very proud lifestyle. And we had the trappers here yesterday 

making their voice known and making sure that their concerns 

and some of the challenges they‟re facing. 

 

So when I look at Bills like Bill 155, and I‟ve referred to that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s important to make sure we have 

discussion. But we better make sure we use comparisons to 

other Bills that have come forward, and some of the Bills that 

have had amendments, and some of the legislation that this 

government, the Sask Party government‟s willing to push 

through. It‟s concerning, and I know people are very concerned 

back home. They want to make sure that any type of Bill or 

whether its amendments, that we go through and who will it 

impact and how will it impact on their traditional land. How 

will it impact? 

 

I guess the farmers are worried. Residents of our province who 

live in our municipalities are worried. How does legislation 

impact them? And there‟s so many different things and laws, 

and they have to trust their government and they want to trust 

their government. But sometimes, you know, they feel let 

down, and sometimes they‟re angry when you talk to them. 

Individuals feel betrayed, and they‟ll say, well you‟re not taking 

care of our best interests. How come, how come you pass such 

laws? Yet there are laws that, you know, make sense and they 

are there to protect individuals and Saskatchewan residents and 



7346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

people who visit here. 

 

You know the outfitters, we look at them. And there‟s many 

outfitters out there, and they try to work with the local trappers. 

And you know, they have to have those discussions. But if you 

don‟t consult them when you‟re passing legislation, yes I think 

you have to talk to the outfitters to make sure how are they 

impacted and what impact will this have. Will it have any 

impact on them? I don‟t know if anyone has done that, and 

sometimes I think it doesn‟t happen. A person gets busy, and 

off they go doing their legislation. So you have to wonder 

sometimes why this legislation‟s coming forward. What‟s the 

basis on it? 

 

But then you go back to talking about the Métis. And I‟ll talk 

about them. Have they been consulted? And it isn‟t just the 

leadership. You can‟t write a letter and say, oh we wrote a letter 

to that organization and they were consulted. That is not what it 

is. 

 

And I‟ll make it very clear. Traditional land users, people in our 

province, make it very clear, they were supposed to be 

consulted. And I‟ll be honest with you, the track record of the 

Sask Party hasn‟t been very good when it comes into the area of 

the duty to consult. And on many files I look at that and many 

different ones, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that hasn‟t been done. So 

when I look at Bill 155, The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, it‟s very concerning. 

 

But I also want to say we know that we‟re going to have an 

opportunity to debate this. And I know many people want to 

have a chance to debate it. My colleagues want to make sure 

they go through it, and we‟re going to look at it. And everybody 

has their different areas that they want to talk about the Bill. 

And some of my colleagues have brought out some good 

points, and some of them will bring out the good points, and 

we‟ll ask some good questions. And, you know, it makes a 

person think a little bit about what exactly are we trying to do 

here. 

 

And sometimes they‟re simple little amendments, but 

sometimes they have great impact on other individuals in our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when you see those 

challenges happening and you see that happening, it‟s 

concerning. And individuals want just to make sure that we‟re 

asking the right questions debating the Bill, that we‟re making 

sure Saskatchewan residents, the best interests of them, is taken 

care of. 

 

And I‟ll speak very highly for trappers. I‟ll speak highly for the 

fishermen out there. I‟ll speak highly for the outfitters. And I 

say it this way: they want to make sure that their concerns, 

when legislation and regulations are going to impact them, they 

want to make sure their voice is heard. And they want to send 

the message to the government: before you change legislation, 

regulations, consult them in a meaningful way with respect, 

providing them the resources they need to make sure that 

legislation that‟s impacting them that they have that opportunity 

and expertise to have a look at it. So using the ministries to 

work with them, to make sure that we‟re reaching out, and that 

is true leadership. 

 

And you know, when I talk about leaders, we have many 

leaders in our province, different organizations, and they do an 

excellent job speaking up for the individuals that they represent 

and the people that they speak for at many tables. They have 

issues and concerns. They want to make sure, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that all their issues are being addressed when any time 

we bring legislation. 

 

But I just want to go back and kind of use an example of when 

we change legislation that impacts a lot of our First Nations, the 

Métis, our farmers. We look at outfitters. We look at 

municipalities. You know, a lot of legislation has been amended 

and new legislation that‟s come forward, some of it very good 

legislation. But we have to make sure that we‟re doing our job 

the people ask us to do, making sure their issues, their concerns 

are addressed. 

 

And I want to make sure to the trappers back home and in this 

province — not only in northern Saskatchewan, we have 

trappers in southern Saskatchewan — I want to make it very 

clear, we have First Nations in northern Saskatchewan, lots. We 

have lots of First Nations in the South. Our Métis citizens in 

Saskatchewan, we have a lot of them living in the North and in 

the South. Just want to make it very clear, we as residents want 

to have a province to be proud of. We want legislation that 

takes care of us, protects us, protects our children, our 

grandchildren. We want to make sure that whatever legislation 

comes forward that it has a purpose and the right purpose, that 

it isn‟t used as a tool to inflict any type of demands, pressure on 

individuals. 

 

And we have to make sure that as an opposition, and I take that 

very serious and I know my colleagues who have spoke on this 

floor take it very serious, the role that we play, holding that 

Sask Party government accountable for the legislation that 

they‟re bringing forward, for the job they‟re doing. They‟re in 

power; they‟re there. Yes, I understand that. But we will hold 

them to account. The people have asked us to do that. And 

that‟s why we‟re called the official opposition, to make sure 

that we do the right job to hold them accountable because the 

Saskatchewan citizens expect nothing less than that, to hold this 

government accountable. And we will do that. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I look at some of the other 

areas of these amendments that, you know, they‟re proposing. 

They look fine. There may be some word changes. They‟re 

going to, you know, change some of the actual I guess 

definitions, and we‟ll see where the definitions are changed. 

But you know, overall we want to make sure that any impact 

that this legislation will have, 155, the natural resource 

amendment . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, we talked about 

that. That‟s very, very clear. And that‟s a good point. 

 

That duty to consult is very important, like I said earlier. And I 

guess I want to reflect on that. The Supreme Court of Canada 

made it very clear, very clear that First Nations and Métis must, 

must — didn‟t say may — must be consulted, have to be 

consulted. You shouldn‟t be doing any legislation impacting 

their rights, traditional rights of Aboriginal people of Canada. 

So that protection is there. And I want to stress that very clearly 

because I think sometimes it‟s not taking . . . Or maybe it is 

taken for granted and it shouldn‟t be. That‟s very clear. That 

was a very clear ruling. I believe it was a unanimous decision 

about human rights and protection of Aboriginal people, the 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7347 

duty to consult and accommodate. 

 

So when you look at that type of ruling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it‟s very clear. And I have to be honest, I think the government 

of the day has not always honoured that, and I think will be 

held and the voters will hold them to account for that. And I 

think the voters have to hold them to account to that. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I could go on and 

showing examples of other Bills that we have passed and you 

know, the human rights one, Bill, that‟s coming forward and 

we‟re debating it. And it‟s bringing forward by this 

government, you sometimes wonder where did it come from? 

 

And you know, and I‟m shocked that the Justice minister would 

bring such a Bill forward, that you know, you take legislation or 

you take the tribunal that was there and that process and how it 

worked. And I think there was things that they could have done 

to adjust, to adjust that and to make it easier and maybe to 

speed the system up. But a government chose not to look at 

other options. It just brings forward one way — this is what we 

want. Because I think at the end of the day, they didn‟t like 

some of the rulings the tribunal brought forward that found in 

favour of certain individuals. So I have to . . . 

 

And I think people are wondering why. And when you see, you 

know, the Amnesty International, and you see different 

organizations making comments about these type of Bills and 

changes, that we‟re going backwards. It‟s pretty sad and you 

see a government pushing ahead with it. So people are very 

cautious, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Bill 155, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, and I just use that as an example, people are 

very concerned. So if you‟re willing to deal with human rights, 

what else is in this Bill? 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I know we‟re going to go through it and people will go 

through it and my colleagues will go through it word for word, 

sentence for sentence. And we‟ll make sure, and we‟re going to 

do our job. We‟re going to make sure we talk this thing right 

through and you know, we‟ll debate it well. We‟ll make sure 

that we uncover everything. And we use examples, and like I 

said, the human rights one, to see that legislation. The Bill for 

photo ID, look at the different Bills that are brought forward. 

And you know, it‟s pretty sad to see. There‟s a government, and 

I think a government that‟s scared of the people, so it wants to 

take away some of the powers from the people. And I think 

that‟s a sad day when you see a government trying to take away 

the power of the people. 

 

So we live in a democratic society where people have fought 

and my grandfather, you know, fought. He gave up a lot for the 

democratic process that I can have and my grandkids can have 

and his grandkids will have, his great . . . He did an honour, his 

brothers did that honour, many people have done that honour. 

And to see some of the things going on that this current 

government has brought forward, it‟s a shameful and it‟s a 

pretty sad day for some of the legislation that‟s coming through 

here. 

 

So when I talk about Bill 155, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to be 

very clear. We want to make sure we go through every little 

sentence, wording, and I know my colleagues and myself would 

do that. I know people out there watching want to make sure 

we‟re doing our job and, you know, we will. We‟ll make sure 

that we ask the questions. We‟ll make sure that we ask the 

questions. And at the end of the day, hopefully we have 

uncovered anything that may be of concern to Saskatchewan 

residents, to First Nations, the Métis, to the outfitters, to the 

farmers, to our trappers, to our fishermen. 

 

The fishers out there want to make sure their voice . . . and they 

want to see things changing. And they‟ve seen some of the stuff 

that this current government has done, has not been in the best 

interests of the fishers, has not been in the best, I guess, benefit 

for them as an industry. We see some of the promises and the 

commitments, and then we see that turn away and we see hope. 

And then we see the hope lost, all because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this government decides to pick winners and losers. 

And that‟s a sad day for some of the industries out there. When 

a government gets to pick winners and loser, who benefits? 

Their friends. 

 

So I mean this legislation, we‟re not sure how it will impact, 

but I‟ll tell you, Bill 155, The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act may have some huge impact on Saskatchewan residents, 

may not. But we‟re going to make sure we debate it. We‟re 

going to make sure we ask the questions, and we‟re going to 

show the people that we‟ve done our work on this side, holding 

that Sask Party government account. 

 

So at this time, I know other individuals, my colleagues, would 

like to speak on the Bill, and there‟ll be more wanting to bring 

their information forward, and they‟ll have questions on it. So 

at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m prepared to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to make a few comments on the Bill No. 161, The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an important, important Bill that is 

before us in the legislature. This Bill is about the right to vote, 

right to vote, have a democratic vote — the type of vote that 

impacts directly on us in our daily lives and is fundamental to 

our society, to the people here in Saskatchewan. It is a right that 

we have fought for, that many people in fact have, through 



7348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

wars, died for, and it is important to all of us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that we get something so crucial as voting that we get 

that right. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill was introduced by the Minister of 

Justice. And just to quote some of the things that he was saying 

and which I thought I would bring forward here, because I was 

not too sure in his choice of words when he said that he did not 

think, as he puts it, the minister did not think that this would 

disenfranchise voters. Then he went on to say, if you plan your 

affairs, you should have no difficulty in voting. This, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, almost sounded like a funeral to me, that 

somehow you had to plan your affairs before you would have to 

vote. He went on to say, but if you think you‟re going to go out 

at five minutes before election time without anything, you‟re 

not likely going to be able to vote. 

 

Now perhaps that wasn‟t, he didn‟t really put a lot of thought 

into those words. But if you look at the way we vote in 

Saskatchewan, many times I‟ve gone — prior to being in this 

Assembly, whether it be in the federal or in the provincial 

elections — and went to my polling station, walked in, they had 

my name. I said who I was. I got a ballot, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

went, and I voted. And many people, many people that is the 

standard. That is what they understand when it comes to voting, 

and they would go and vote. 

 

And this Bill about bringing in photo ID and in terms of the 

way the minister has laid it out — of what we would now have 

to be putting our affairs in order before we go to vote — is of 

concern, is of concern not only to me but to the opposition in 

the legislature here, that he simply says that this will not 

disenfranchise voters, I‟m not so certain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

For example if anyone was to go — thinking that they have the 

same, that had voted perhaps for any number of years, perhaps 

20 years or more that they voted a certain way, gone to the 

same polling station — go in there and then find that, well, they 

didn‟t bring their wallet or they didn‟t bring some ID or perhaps 

they don‟t have the ID or they didn‟t need the ID before . . . 

Perhaps there was some reason why they came at 10 minutes 

before the closing of the poll, and now they would not be able 

to vote. 

 

Now this is of concern because anything that does not allow 

people to vote, I believe, would be undemocratic. Also when 

you say it . . . I‟m not sure. Perhaps the minister would not say 

it in the same way, would use different words. But to say if you 

plan your affairs you should have no difficulty in voting — and 

this is sort of a huge thing that one must undertake before going 

to the polling station — somehow does not sort of conform 

with ideas of going in and exercising your right to vote. 

 

It is your right. It is the citizen‟s right, not the government‟s 

right. This is the citizen‟s right to go and vote and not the 

government to try and make it more difficult or to work with 

disenfranchising the right to vote. 

 

Now this would be not . . . There are more things around this, 

more things with this minister in terms of the Bill 160, for 

example. This minister has brought in the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code amendment, saying that this will also 

make things easier, that this will also be good, that it‟ll allow 

for a smooth system, for people to bring their concerns before 

the human rights board and the commissioner and that this 

would allow for a smoother system to dealing with issues or 

cases that people have. Again the minister here said that he was 

trying to make the system run more efficiently, more smoothly. 

But we are finding and we are hearing from concerned people 

that in fact they did not understand what the minister was 

bringing forward in Bill 160. They are very concerned as to 

what they were told about how Bill 160 would assist them and 

now what, in terms of the law, upon closer inspection of what 

Bill 160 actually says. 

 

So isn‟t it kind of interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we now 

have this same minister putting forward or talking about a Bill, 

Bill 161, The Election Amendment Act, and saying that in fact 

this is for efficiency, that it is time that we move ahead. Again 

are we moving ahead, or what are we doing? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are in the midst of a federal election in 

our country, and one of the things that has arisen because . . . 

We have had concerns in terms of people voting in not only, 

you know, in our provincial but in our federal elections. And 

one of the things that has occurred in the federal election is vote 

mobs. And so there is an article on “Vote mobs‟ shake up 

election”, and this one was posted on April 6th by Amber 

Hildebrandt, the CBC [Canadian Broadcast Corporation] news. 

And basically if I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just read in from 

the article here: 

 

Students insist the “vote mobs” are strictly non-partisan 

and are not intended as protest. Instead, the goal is to 

counter a belief that youth are not politically engaged — 

and to make politicians take notice of their young 

constituents. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

“We‟re using this as our platform to say: „Hey! Pay 

attention to us! We have an opinion and we are going to 

vote,” says Jessica McCormick, director of external affairs 

at the Memorial University of Newfoundland Students‟ 

Union, which is planning a vote mob this weekend. 

 

Inspiration [Mr. Deputy Speaker] for the first vote mob in 

Guelph came from CBC comedian Rick Mercer‟s recent 

rant calling on young people to “do the unexpected” and 

vote, says Johnson. Voter turnout among youth is 

consistently dismal. In the 2008 federal election, only 37 

per cent of voters aged 18 to 24 cast a ballot. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is something that we should 

be looking at and promoting young people or whatever way 

people can move to vote. Instead what we are doing is saying in 

fact that what we should do is to plan your affairs before 

coming to the polling station. 

 

And again further on, this is concerting, if in fact not 

disconcerting, that we would be looking at this without a full 

consultation, without some consultations in a full report on the 

shortfalls within our voting system before we would proceed 

with these. Now again there are many reasons why we have to 

take a closer look at this Bill. 

 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7349 

And as I‟ve pointed out, Bill 160, the Human Rights Code 

amendment Act, again here we have a similar situation. The 

minister‟s saying that this will make things run more smoothly, 

that people will have their cases. There will be no waiting 

times. 

 

But the Human Rights Commissioner will be making the 

decisions around this issue, be making the decisions. Solely it‟ll 

be up to him to decide which cases go forward, where there are 

appeals, where there is to be any cases that go forward to the 

courts. It‟ll be up to that commissioner to decide on mediation. 

And I guess at first glance, where people were having their 

cases delayed for sometimes one, two years or more, this would 

seem appealing. Upon closer examination, what we find is that 

not . . . The question, is this putting too much power in the 

hands of one person, one person over at the Human Rights 

Commission? And what are the controls, or what do we have? 

For example, we agree or we have faith in one commissioner 

and then lose that faith in the new appointment. 

 

As much as our human rights is important to all of us, so is our 

right to vote, to exercise our democratic right to vote. And I 

would again want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is not only 

our human rights that we should be concerned about, but it is 

actually a human right that we have, that we have the right to 

vote. We have fought hard for that, and we should always 

understand that it is us as a citizen that that is our right. It isn‟t 

the government that should be playing with that right and 

telling us. It should be the citizens who say to the government 

that this is what we should be doing. 

 

So in that . . . And we have many over the last number of years 

that the Sask Party government has been in power, we have 

many examples of lack of consultation, The Wildlife Habitat 

Act, where again there was time and again that we stood here 

almost in disbelief, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as every week 

somebody would come in and say that they were not consulted 

by the minister at the time bringing in that. There were many 

people very disappointed at what happened there, but the 

government seemed to push through this legislation. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Again here, even today in question period, we had the minister 

saying that in fact that they did not, that they had tendered 

appropriately for the Modus. And in fact what is occurring is 

questionable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, questionable in terms of 

what they are doing and just trying to ram things through. And 

that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is very undemocratic in terms 

of what is occurring. So it is a concern. 

 

When we look at this minister, with the track record that he is 

establishing, bringing forward a Bill on voting and saying that 

this is what we believe should be happening, and we have 

nothing. No consultation on this; no report. There were no 

perhaps committees struck to actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

deal with this whole issue, to deal with it in such a fashion that 

a report perhaps did come back to this Legislative Assembly 

outlining to all of us what some of the things that we should be 

looking at, we should not only be looking at but perhaps doing, 

so that as in terms of the vote mobs, we could be encouraging 

young people to vote and not in fact discouraging them because 

they are, they haven‟t planned their affairs prior to going to 

vote. A curious choice of words there by the minister again, to 

talk about, to talk about voting. Voting should be a serious 

matter, but not, not on the level of perhaps of planning a funeral 

or something, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don‟t think that we should 

be looking at it in that fashion. 

 

Again, so now I‟ve spoken about one group and perhaps we, 

you know, in terms of students, being quite a number of years 

ago a student myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the thing about that, 

the excitement of being able to vote. Not necessarily having 

perhaps the ID necessary, perhaps thinking I can simply go in 

and vote, registering, because the enumerator came around and 

I was signed up and I, at that point in time that‟s all I had to do, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I felt then I could go and vote. 

 

And now we‟re asking something more of young people who 

want to become engaged. But I think it is things like these that, 

that disengage them, disenfranchise people when they have to 

think, well do I have everything? Am I going to be missing 

something? You know, well maybe, you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, maybe it‟s too much. Maybe, you know, we‟ll just 

skip it this time. And I‟m not certain that, that what was missed 

. . . Or I‟m certain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was missed here 

was the whole issue of making it easier to vote, encouraging 

people to vote, encouraging people to become involved in the 

political process because it impacts on their daily lives, and 

giving them that kind of opportunity as opposed to raising some 

barriers here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to why they can‟t, would 

not be allowed to vote. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is only in terms of the youth. 

There are another group that I am very concerned about is the 

seniors, the seniors in our province who have built this 

province, who through no faults of their own might be 

somewhat disabled in different ways, who have also, as I 

mentioned, go on to vote, voted in a fashion that they have done 

for numbers of years, now to find that they have to . . . that 

things might change. That when they go now, they might be, 

they will have to bring some identification. Again, if it‟s a 

picture ID makes it more difficult, but they will have to come 

with some identification. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they might 

come and say, well I‟ve voted here for 30 years, and I want to 

vote. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they would not now be allowed 

to vote. And is that right? How is that encouraging the political 

process? How is that making things better? 

 

And this all comes back down to because of thinking we know 

what is right as opposed to what this government, Sask Party 

government has continually failed, is to consult the people of 

this province. And sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I do 

want to say this again — sometimes they will tell us they 

consulted, and in fact we find out that they didn‟t consult. 

 

And it is starting to appear in this minister‟s case that in fact he 

is saying that he had people onside, and people are now 

dropping offside because the legislation under the human rights 

amendment was not explained to these people, and they are 

now saying, well we didn‟t realize that that might be the 

impact. And yet the minister here again stood up in this House 

in front of all of us and said, look at all the people I have 

supporting this Bill. And that‟s on the record too, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And that will be interesting to see what starts 

happening on that piece. 



7350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

So again here we have a minister who did not consult. What did 

he do to, what necessitated these changes? Who was it that 

brought forward concerns regarding this? Was there voter 

fraud, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What was it that drove the changes 

in this Bill to have the minister here particularly stand up and 

say, we need these changes because it is to make the voting and 

participation in our political system, to improve that political 

participation in our system if we make these changes? And we 

see nothing of the sort here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I see nothing 

in the material before me that there was any of that done, other 

than the minister‟s words to plan your affairs, and you will have 

no difficult in voting. 

 

I had gone though a number of elections and I actually perhaps, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe there was something wrong in the 

way that I looked at this, that I didn‟t plan my affairs. I knew 

my plan to the extent that I knew the voting time, and I knew 

when I had to get down and vote. But I surely, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, other than I should be concentrating on the policies of 

the parties who are running and asking for my vote that I was 

planning my affairs, but I was not planning my affairs in a way 

that I would somehow have to take time to determine that I 

would be allowed to vote. 

 

And that is a problem because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this I 

believe will disenfranchise a number of people. And there are 

challenges to this type of legislation across the country. And as 

opposed to just simply going forward and ramming through and 

trying to get this Bill through, we should have been thinking 

about that and thinking about those legal challenges and saying 

perhaps we should wait. What will happen to our legislation if 

the legal challenge is successful? Where are we at? And people 

are raising concerns right across the country about having to do 

this. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again actually in the Bill itself, 

various sections are repealed and amended but the basic point 

here where in 65(1), “On entering the polling place, a voter 

shall give his or her name to the deputy returning officer.” 

 

And then, “If the poll clerk determines that a voter‟s name 

appears on the voters‟ list, the voter, before being given a ballot 

. . . and voting, shall,” and then it says, “provide the deputy 

returning officer with the satisfactory evidence of the voter‟s 

identify and ordinary residence required pursuant to section 

72.1.” 

 

This leads me to also raise issues about people who do not have 

a permanent residence. Perhaps we have . . . Well we know that 

there are a great number of homeless people who this impacts 

who we are disenfranchising because of the residency. How are 

we reaching out to the people who perhaps find themselves, if I 

may use the term, couch surfing? How do we reach out to 

people who do not have a permanent residence? Where was the 

attempt to reach out and say, you have a right to vote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

And I want to say again, it is the right of people, the citizens of 

this province. That is their right. It‟s not the government‟s right 

to hand out and decide and determine and to put conditions on. 

It‟s the people‟s right to vote. And that has to be guarded, 

particularly here in this Legislative Assembly. We have to be 

guarding that right because it is a very important right, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. That right is a right that has been fought for 

and we have had to . . . People have died for that right. And as 

we look out, look out across . . . It doesn‟t take much to turn on 

the TV to hear about all the people right across the world 

fighting for rights, rights to be represented, rights to choose 

their leaders, rights to choose their governments. People are 

striving for democracy throughout the world. 

 

We are seen as leaders, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We should take 

that role seriously. We should not take it lightly. We should be 

concerned about that role, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it is 

important. It is important because we must guard that right, the 

right of the citizen to vote. 

 

Perhaps some do not appreciate that or perhaps they just simply 

don‟t like that, that somebody can pass judgment on the things 

that we do, whether it‟s in this Legislative Assembly or whether 

it‟s in the capitals across the country or in Ottawa, but it is an 

important right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we should not take it 

very lightly that we would make changes, would make changes 

to our voting procedures, to our voting rights, without some 

careful thought and careful study. 

 

And I don‟t see any of that here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I see 

nothing, in fact, here that would lead me to believe that there 

were consultations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I do not see anything 

here that would show me reasons why perhaps there was some 

voting fraud or stuffed ballot boxes or all the kinds of things 

that we hear about. Where were those concerns? I don‟t see any 

of them here. Nothing is being raised here that would lead to 

the changes that are being requested. Who was it that . . . 

Again, who was it that was consulted? I guess on this issue if 

no one was consulted, at least the Justice minister, in this case, 

would not have to be concerned that we would be raising issues 

as to who exactly he consulted. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is again the opposition‟s responsibility, 

it‟s our responsibility to look at this legislation. And there is a 

lot here to look at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot here for us to 

review. But I think the points I made earlier, the points I made 

earlier are of concern. They are of concern to me because of the 

way that this same minister handled the human rights 

amendment, amendments in previously. 

 

And they are of concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because when 

you come here in this Legislative Assembly and you say that 

you have supporters, that you have supporters in the gallery 

who accept or who are supporting your legislation that you are 

putting forward, and then we hear on this side that in fact: one, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it was not explained; two, that they 

didn‟t know the consequences of that and that they were simply 

told that this would be an expedited process or at least a process 

where many cases could be heard and mediated. 

 

But no one took the time to explain clearly all of the things in 

that Bill, and it‟s a sad day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s a sad day 

when people then come and say, well we didn‟t know that and 

here we were in the Legislative Assembly, in their Legislative 

Assembly, sitting there and saying, we support this Bill. It 

doesn‟t do us a lot of good. It doesn‟t bring forward a lot of 

confidence or respect, I would even say, for this place when 

that sort of thing occurs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a sad day 

for this legislature. And it doesn‟t lead to the kind of confidence 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7351 

that people need to have in their legislature, legislators to do the 

job that is required to have this province move forward. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are but just some comments on 

this Bill. I again think that in the minister‟s speech that he gave 

in bringing forward the Bill, he tried to allay some fears by 

saying that there would be all sorts of things done, particularly, 

he said, in the regulations, that there would be laid out in the 

regulations a number of ways that people could vote. 

 

But that leads to no comfort for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nor of 

comfort for the people of Saskatchewan, when it comes to 

looking at this Bill and believing that somehow in regulations 

that he will cover off all the concerns for people in terms of 

when they come to vote, that they will be able to vote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And not at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Because something as important as voting should, I would say, 

not be left even to the whim of regulations, the whim of a 

government in power, but should be here to be debated, should 

be debated and should be discussed in this Assembly so that we 

all understand what the rules are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No one 

should be making up rules behind closed doors on how we 

exercise that most valuable of democratic institutions, the right 

to vote. The citizen‟s right to vote is number one, and we have 

to guard that, and we have to be very careful before thinking of 

making any changes to that right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So the regulations, the part on the regulations — and there are 

changes in the Act which have been made to allow for that, to 

give Executive Council the right to make these changes — we 

are uncertain, I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how soon those 

will be made. But again I think, just a concern that this is too 

important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, too important not to have that 

full list and expanded list or the regulations on how people will 

be, what ID will be used, what ID will be acceptable when 

people arrive to vote. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would still challenge, I would still 

challenge that across this whole province that perhaps we 

would think that people are tuned in here and watching us to 

debate this or perhaps tuned in to watching the minister propose 

this Bill, but I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there would 

be a large group of people out there who will not be aware of 

this legislative change. They will not be aware of this 

legislative change, and this is going to cause difficulties. This is 

going to cause difficulties and disenfranchise people who will 

arrive at the polls, not knowing that they have to come . . . 

because for a number of years, a great number of years, they 

have voted and have gone to the polls without having to get 

their affairs in order, as the minister has outlined here. 

 

It‟s a very strange choice of words indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that you would phone up somebody in Davidson at the nursing 

home and say, we want you to get your affairs in order because 

you‟re going to go to vote. I‟m not sure what I would think if 

somebody phoned me and said that to me, you know. That‟s a 

very, very unique choice of words. And it would be a very 

interesting phone call to receive in a nursing home in Davidson 

and say, you should get your affairs in order before you get to 

go to vote. I would almost be alarmed, I would think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, at that. 

 

But be that as it may, before we make those kinds of important 

changes to this very important right, the right to vote, we 

should be doing a number of consultations. We should be 

asking questions about why is this being challenged in the 

courts. Why would we want to go forward on something like 

this when other places are saying there are difficulties with 

that? If we‟re going to strike out, it‟s not like we are going into 

new areas, but it is a concern. It is very much a concern, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we have started on this path, and it looks 

like the government is bent on putting in this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have talked about encouraging our 

youth to vote. We‟ve talked about seniors voting. We‟ve talked 

about people who are homeless. We talked about people who 

do not have a permanent residence, who are changing 

residences. All of this, all of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, adds to 

the difficulty in voting. And this does not address that for those 

people who we are trying to bring in to vote. 

 

Again, the youth in our country, in our province, we should 

being doing everything to encourage them to vote. And I don‟t 

see this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as helping that. Perhaps not 

everybody has to be a Rick Mercer to come up with some ideas 

or that the students can take some ideas and formulate a plan as 

to how they would vote, but it is that kind of, it is that kind of 

creativity, that kind of innovation that we should be striving for, 

that we should be looking at when we change legislation to 

make people in fact . . . What about a unique idea of making 

legislation that would make people want to vote, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? That‟s what we should be discussing and looking 

around the world, perhaps there are other places, other countries 

that have had made changes and see what their rates of 

participation are. Because the healthy democracy is one where 

all the citizens participate, where we hear all the voices, those 

that we agree with and particularly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 

the voices that we do not agree with. 

 

And that‟s the difficult part about governing, that is the difficult 

part about being whether it‟s in opposition or government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is hearing voices that are contrary to our views 

and in some way addressing their concerns, be it through 

debate, discussion, or coming to a compromise, or in fact 

acknowledging that one or the other party is in fact right on the 

issue and moving forward. And that is the way that we have 

proceeded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I would say that we should 

continue to proceed that way. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is important. They should be 

commended, these youth in our universities, as the case is here, 

for making the attempt to energize, energize our youth and our 

country. Energize them so that they could, would come out and 

vote, so that they would become involved in the political 

process. 

 

In that release that I spoke of earlier that was . . . Just to show 

you the ingenuity here of the students, Monday‟s vote mob at 

the University of Guelph, also dubbed a surprise party by 

organizers, inspired organizers at about half a dozen 

universities across the country to create similar events over the 

next week. 

 



7352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

At least 200 attended the gathering in Guelph outside a 

Conservative Party campaign event. A YouTube video shows 

young people running out of the bush and then unfurling a 

banner that says, surprise, we are voting. Controversy arose 

after at least one participant was reportedly not allowed inside 

the campaign event because he was believed to be a protestor. 

 

It is this kind of action, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this kind of event, 

and if that is what young people do in terms of one way of 

generating enthusiasm, we should not be condemning that. We 

should be attempting to, in all cases, understand what is going 

on here and encouraging that. And we should be looking at that 

and taking that into account when we make changes. 

 

And there was some issues where people voted at the 

university, and there was controversy in this last . . . in the 

federal election that‟s passing, whether or not we count those 

ballots. And there were challenges made and my understanding 

is that they were in fact going to accept that vote, those votes 

and those ballots. So very interesting kind of situation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that‟s what we should be looking at. We 

should be looking at promoting, in that case, perhaps we need 

to look at different polling stations. 

 

We should be saying to people that you should vote. You 

should vote. And looking at the various things that are 

happening around the country, happening around the world, if I 

may say, that show where people — through various actions, 

events, or whatever — are coming out to vote. Where are these 

places where the vote is high, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And what 

are they doing to make that happen? That is what we should be 

looking at, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Instead what we have here in this legislature is a Bill being put 

forward, 161. We also have the 162 where they are in fact 

foisting on the municipalities and school boards the same 

regulations, the same legal implications of when and of ID 

voting. And I wonder what consultation was done with the 

municipalities. 

 

And it raises an interesting point because even, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is not to call one meeting and say to people, well we 

are going to make these changes and just move ahead. Because 

the kind of situation that is developing around Bill 160, we 

don‟t need more of Bill 160, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the kind of 

situation that‟s developing where people are saying, we were 

told this is what the Bill was about but we didn‟t understand all 

the implications. 

 

And so perhaps that‟s what‟s happening here with the 

municipalities. Perhaps they, were they asked? Where‟s their 

consultation? Are they ready to move ahead on this issue? Or 

are they going to say, there were some unintended 

consequences that are now occurring and perhaps we should 

have had more study, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just so that it‟s crystal clear, just so that 

it‟s crystal clear the concerns that I have raised here, the 

concerns that I have raised, again the minister‟s words: if you 

plan your affairs, you should have no difficulty in voting. That 

is the start. And that‟s a concern in terms, as I‟ve mentioned, of 

somebody receiving a phone call and saying, plan your affairs 

because you have to go and vote. 

Another concern that I have, was there consultation? What is 

driving the changes here? What is driving the changes? There is 

nothing that was put forward before this Assembly, nothing in 

the minister‟s remarks when he introduced the Bill to say that 

here is what happened, here is what we have had. We have had 

trouble with voting. We have had concerns with voting. We are 

trying to encourage more voting. None of those things were 

talked about. We simply said that we were going to encumber 

people a bit when they arrive to the polling station that there 

will be some hoops that they will have to now jump through 

before they can vote. And how is that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

how is that being helpful? 

 

Further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, further on this, on an issue that is 

as important, that is as important as the citizen‟s right to vote, 

what consultations with the general public were held on this? 

Set aside that there were none, that we did not hear about any 

concerns that were raised, what consultations, direct 

consultations were held about this issue in this province? 

 

The minister will say, well this is in existence in some fashion 

in other provinces. It‟s existent at the federal level in some way. 

But the question that we also have to deal with is, this has also 

been challenged in the courts. This has been challenged in the 

courts, and what did the minister do to look into that? What did 

he do in terms of, he did not speak about anything or tell us 

anything in terms of that there were concerns in other 

provinces, that he simply said this was being done. But what 

about the concerns that people had? Why has this ended up in 

the courts? Why has this ended up in the courts? 

 

And I believe that the Civil Liberties Association is also 

involved where they have taken on these issues. And they‟ve 

taken on these issues, and we can‟t say enough about those 

people who this impacts directly — our young people, our 

seniors, people who perhaps are homeless, people who perhaps, 

as I used, couch surf, people who perhaps do not have a 

permanent residency. These are people, these are residents, we 

have to . . . We are judged, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of times 

by how we treat the most vulnerable or the most disaffected in 

our society. That is how we‟re judged. Not perhaps 

immediately as we make decisions, but over time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we‟re judged by that. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And it is a concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look and 

we‟re trying to, particularly I would think the seniors who have 

voted in a particular manner, who have voted over time, who 

have voted in a manner where they simply arrived at the poll. 

They perhaps voted at the same poll for a number of years and 

their names are there. People know them. And this time it‟ll be 

different, and the only thing that I suppose people will be 

telling them, you should have gotten your affairs together 

before you came to vote. A very curious, curious again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, choice of words regarding an issue that is so 

important to all of us. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Municipal Affairs minister also 

chimed in on this as I mentioned before in 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act. He also said that the 

photo ID will apply, but he did talk a bit about consultations. 

We did not hear anything in the Justice minister‟s speech about 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7353 

that, about the consultations that he had done. Again the 

municipal minister did talk a bit about that. 

 

Again the only thing the Justice minister could do to allay any 

of the fears or concerns that were raised here was that there 

would be a list of other allowable forms of ID, will be 

developed. And again he did mention here: after consultation 

with various groups and set out regulations after the Bill was 

passed. So the consultations at the time had not even been done, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. These consultations, according to the 

minister, had not even been occurred or done, but he was 

considering consulting people after the Bill would be passed. 

 

And I think that shows a little lack of respect for the legislative 

process here to not include but simply to say . . . not include 

what those consultations, the results of consultations would be 

prior to introducing the Bill so that the minister should perhaps 

. . . not should have but should . . . gone out and consulted and 

brought forward his report, brought forward the concerns that 

were raised, brought forward if he was moving on ID, brought 

forward a list from those consultations of how this would work. 

 

But instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe he‟s got it all 

backwards here. He‟s putting the Bill in, and then he says that 

lists of other allowable forms of ID will be developed after 

consultations with various groups. There‟s no mention of which 

groups this would be, who is it that he‟s going consult. I‟m not 

certain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether those consultations have 

started as of yet, whether they will only be done in Regina 

perhaps, whether they‟ll be travelling to rural Saskatchewan. 

There is nothing here that indicates what he will be doing. 

 

Again the only thing that the minister . . . And we talked about 

nursing homes or long-term care homes, Mr. Speaker. And he 

did mention there would be a lesser onus on them. But again, I 

don‟t know how you would say to somebody in a nursing home 

that you should get your affairs in order because you have to go 

and vote. Rather ominous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have made a number of comments. I 

will need to review this Bill further and see what other concerns 

we have. It is again, as I mentioned, unfortunate that we do not, 

that there were no consultations held before on this Bill. It‟s 

unfortunate that after the Bill is passed that the minister had 

indicated to us that he will do consultations on an expanded ID, 

develop forms or whatever ID would be acceptable. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the sort of thing that we are simply 

being asked to accept, that we accept that there will be 

consultations. Again there‟s been nothing outlined here. There‟s 

been nothing indicated to us of how this would work. It is very, 

as an overall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very, very disappointing in 

the manner in which this Bill has been handled. It doesn‟t leave 

us with a lot of confidence on this very important, very 

important right — the right of citizens to vote — that we have, 

that the ministry has looked at this in the best possible way. 

 

But being that as it may, Mr. Speaker, at this time I know that 

there‟s others that wish to speak on this and I will be taking my 

place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

you know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has introduced 

what I consider to be two controversial Bills into this Assembly 

— amendments to the Human Rights Code and now we have 

the amendment to The Election Act. Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Justice has argued that this is about having more rights for 

people when it comes to Human Rights Code. And he has 

argued that this is about ensuring, in the case of The Election 

Act, that people who have a right of citizenship need to offer up 

some sort of voting identification in order to cast their ballot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been voting in every provincial and federal 

election since I turned 18. I voted in every municipal election 

since I turned 18. I voted for a school board since I turned 18. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting. This is the first 

federal election, because I went to the returning officer, where I 

had to show a piece of voter ID in order to cast my ballot for 

the next Government of Canada. And why is that? Well it‟s 

because the Harper government changed the legislation, and it‟s 

no longer good enough to go with your card that, from 

Elections Canada, that has your name and your voter number 

for your poll and your address and your city you live in or the 

town you live in and your postal code. That‟s no longer good 

enough. What you now have to do is you not only go with your 

little card, but you have to have a piece of voter ID in order to 

cast your vote, which in my view is a democratic right of every 

citizen in this country. But that‟s not what we‟re going to have. 

 

Now the members over there argue, oh the Government of 

Canada has this requirement. Oh, the Government of — I think 

it‟s — British Columbia, has this requirement. The Government 

of Ontario has this requirement. The Government of Quebec 

has this requirement. And so because all these other 

governments have it, we want to do it too. 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, when I was a little kid, my 

mother would say to me, well just because someone jumps off 

the bridge, does that mean you should jump off the bridge? I‟m 

sure all of us had that particular little nugget told to us when we 

were using all kinds of excuses for why we did what we did. So 

this doesn‟t hold a lot of water with me as to why we need this 

particular legislation — because the Government of Canada 

does it, because Quebec does it, because Ontario does it, and 

because British Columbia does it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, and I also understand that British Columbia, 

the BC civil rights association is challenging this particular 

piece of legislation because it‟s their view that it will dispossess 

Canadian citizens of their right to vote because of the need, the 

requirement for some form of identification. 

 

And what‟s particularly troubling about this piece of legislation 

is that it‟s not clear at all what the government is going to do in 

terms of regulations because what kind of identification you 

need is going to be laid out in the regulations. And that really 

isn‟t subject to any kind of public scrutiny. At least when it 

comes to this piece of legislation, the government has to bring 

the legislation to the Assembly. The Assembly gets to debate 

the legislation. The Assembly gets to vote on the legislation. 

The Assembly gets to ask questions about the legislation. 

 

But when it comes to regulations, that is the purview of the 



7354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

government, and they will scrutinize the regulations. They‟ll 

have officials draft the regulations. They will have cabinet 

approve the regulations, and then those regulations will be 

gazetted. Well I think when it comes to fundamental rights, it 

seems to me when we‟re talking about our rights as Canadian 

citizens, our right to vote, that this should clearly be laid out in 

the legislation in order for the people who have been elected by 

the citizens of our province to debate how this voter ID is in 

essence going to come into existence. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s my view, it‟s my view that the right to 

vote affects our everyday life. The right to choose a school 

board trustee, the right to choose my RM [rural municipality] 

councillor or my reeve or my mayor or my city councillor, my 

right to choose my member of the legislature, my right to 

choose my MP [Member of Parliament] should not be impeded 

because the Government of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party 

Government of Saskatchewan has decided that, in order for me 

to exercise my fundamental right as a Canadian citizen, I‟m 

going to have to turn up at the polls with some sort of 

identification that verifies who I am. 

 

My card, even though the scrutineers come along, even though 

I file income taxes — at the bottom of my income tax form I 

say whether or not my name can be given to Elections Canada 

— even though when I went to vote at the returning office last 

Friday, what happened? The person who was taking my 

information goes onto a computer screen, looks me up and what 

poll I‟m at, sees my name, sees my address, sees my city that I 

live in, and is able to verify my postal code. And you know, 

Mr. Speaker, it was ridiculous. It was ridiculous because I had 

my voting card with me, not unlike what other people do when 

they go off to the polls to vote. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s my view, it‟s my view . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh, how would they would know it was me, 

Mr. Speaker? Now that is quite funny because here‟s what 

happened. When you go to a poll on election day . . . What I 

have to say to the member from Biggar . . . Let‟s just take 

Biggar. Let‟s take Biggar. Everybody knows everybody in 

Biggar. Let‟s take the poll of Biggar. 

 

And let‟s see, you know, Mrs. Jones has lived down the street 

for the last 90 years. She gets herself to the poll, and under their 

legislation she‟s going to have to take her ID with her in order 

to vote. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can just see it all now. Mrs. Jones or Mrs. 

Brown has been voting for the last — let‟s say — 75 years. 

She‟s been going off to the polls to vote. Let‟s say she‟s been 

voting for 70 years, and she goes off to the poll. Everybody‟s 

sitting at the polls. Whether it‟s the returning officer or the 

scrutineers from the Conservative Party, the Liberal Party, and 

the NDP — they all know who Mrs. Jones or Mrs. Brown is. 

She‟s going to be asked to provide her identification, but she 

didn‟t bring her purse or, you know, she doesn‟t have her ID on 

her. And she doesn‟t have a driver‟s licence perhaps. Maybe 

she has a social insurance number. She doesn‟t have photo ID. 

 

And what she‟s going to have to do is — what? What is she 

going to have to do? — she‟s going to go home and then maybe 

come back because according to the legislation she‟s going to 

have to have a piece of identification. And Mrs. Jones, what if 

she‟s a rural elector? Maybe she‟s driven 25 miles in order to 

get to the polls because she‟s been doing it this way for 

decades. She‟s been going to the polls for decades. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Everybody knows who she is. She knows who‟s sitting at the 

poll. She knows that Amy is representing the Conservatives. 

She knows that Frank‟s representing the NDP, and she knows 

that Mildred is representing the Liberals. And they all know 

each other, and they all say hello to each other. And they go to 

church together. Maybe they‟re part of the Catholic Women‟s 

League or the United Church league. You know, they all know 

each other. They‟ve known each other for decades, Mr. 

Speaker. But this is how ridiculous this particular piece of 

legislation is. 

 

Now the members opposite have said or the Minister of Justice 

told us that there haven‟t been any problems. There has been no 

problems with voter fraud. There‟s no specific incident of voter 

fraud. But he says he wants to enhance the integrity of the 

system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, here we have a government that came to power in 

2007. Did they tell us that we‟d all have to have voter 

identification in 2007? No. Did they have a specific incident 

that caused the government to bring in this particular 

amendment to The Election Act? No. So why is it, why is it that 

they are introducing voter identification? 

 

We don‟t have voter identification in Alberta. We don‟t have 

voter identification in Manitoba. We don‟t have voter 

identification in Newfoundland and New Brunswick and Nova 

Scotia and PEI [Prince Edward Island]. We don‟t have voter 

identification in the Northwest Territories or the Yukon or 

Nunavut. No, no, we don‟t have that. But, you know, it‟s sort of 

. . . I‟ll get back to what my mother used to say to me. Just 

because someone else jumps off the bridge — meaning Ontario, 

British Columbia, Quebec, and the Government of Canada — 

well we‟re going to go over the bridge too. Oh what a 

ridiculous, ridiculous argument, Mr. Speaker. It‟s ridiculous. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government says oh, well you know 

everybody has some form of identification. Well let‟s just think 

about that. How many members of the legislature have had a 

constituent that‟s come into their office, they require some form 

of identification in order to, you know, maybe get into a 

subsidized house or to collect income assistance . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — I have. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Have you had it? I have too. But these are 

low-income people. They don‟t have a driver‟s licence. They 

don‟t have a birth certificate. They‟ve lost their social insurance 

number. I mean we‟re talking about people who are articulate 

but they are low-income. Now what do they have to do? How 

much do they have to pay in order to get their birth certificate? 

How much do they have to pay? Does anyone know over there? 

Does anybody know? How long does it take to get it? Does 

anybody know that over there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Exactly. They never get it. 

 

I have assisted people in trying to get a birth certificate, and it 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7355 

takes months. It takes months. And what does it cost? I believe 

the cost is $40. Well you know, if I‟m choosing between food 

and that escalating rent because we don‟t have rent control and 

maybe just living, am I going to spend $40 to get my birth 

certificate that I lost? Am I going to spend money to get a new 

photo ID or a new driver‟s licence? And the reality is that 

people aren‟t. 

 

Now the members . . . I heard the members earlier say, well we 

had this whole thing in the last federal election. Well one of the 

things that I know is that you, if you didn‟t have your 

identification, you could have someone vouch for you. 

Someone who lived in the poll could vouch for you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They can do that here too. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — They say, they can do that here too. Well 

where is it in the legislation? It is not in the legislation. In order 

to vote under the Saskatchewan legislation that these rocket 

scientists have introduced into the Assembly, you have to have 

some form of identification in order to vote, according to the 

Bill that has been introduced by the members opposite. 

 

So it‟s no longer good enough . . . Even in the federal situation 

up until recently, you could have someone who could vouch for 

you, an elector, someone who might be your neighbour, to take 

you to the polls and say, yes, I‟ve known Sally for 50 years; 

they live next door. They‟re at 833 Main Street. I know them. 

That is not what the members opposite are proposing. 

 

Now let‟s get on to First Nations people. There are some First 

Nations people that do not have identification. There are 

low-income . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, the member 

talks about Meadow Lake. Well we‟ll see how Meadow Lake 

all turns out. We will see. I can hardly wait. They‟ve been, you 

know, they‟ve been sort of wanting that one for some time, but 

we‟ll see how that turns out. What the members opposite don‟t 

know is that the party found it, and members from the 

campaign of our present leader found it, and they dealt with it. 

That is the truth, Mr. Speaker. That is the truth. 

 

Now oh, well they laugh their little heads off. You know, that‟s 

typical, typical conservative. You know, it‟s been interesting to 

watch the Prime Minister in the debates where he out-and-out 

lied to the people of this country, and then we saw the Leader 

of the NDP, the Leader of the Liberal Party basically say, Prime 

Minister, you‟re lying. And you know, we‟re not supposed to 

use that word in here to describe other members, but I think 

there have been several occasions when there have been big 

stretches of the truth, and the spin has spun and spun and spun. 

 

But we will see what happens in Meadow Lake. We will see 

what happens in Meadow Lake. And I‟m sure that there will be 

members of the opposition that may want to offer some 

semblance of an apology when we see what happens there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we have a situation where 

this government, the Sask Party government, you know, really 

doesn‟t defend human rights. They don‟t really want people to 

vote, but only maybe some people — their people. They know, 

they know that there are people who, you know — and you 

look at the record — there are people that don‟t support their 

government. 

 

We know that there are a lot of First Nations and Métis people. 

I think we have six First Nations and Métis candidates . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Eight. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Eight, pardon me. Eight that are running on 

the NDP ticket in the next provincial election. And we‟re pretty 

proud of that. We‟re pretty proud of that. Eight NDP First 

Nations and Métis people who are running in the next 

provincial election, and we know what this might be about. 

This might be about causing certain groups of citizens in our 

province to not have the ability to exercise their fundamental 

rights. 

 

We know that New Democrats tend to represent inner-city 

neighbourhoods where a lot of people who are disadvantaged, 

and struggle, don‟t necessarily have the appropriate 

government-issued ID in order to exercise their vote. And so, 

you know, I do wonder, I do wonder whether or not this is 

about trying to decrease the number of votes for the New 

Democrats. 

 

We know that it takes months to get a treaty card. We haven‟t 

seen . . . Once again it‟s regulations. It‟s regulations. This 

government‟s going to determine what is fitting to be a piece of 

proper identification in order to exercise a citizen‟s democratic 

right. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have . . . We know that there is 

senior citizens who are at a time in their life where they no 

longer have a driver‟s licence. You know, the question is, is this 

government going to demand photo ID from seniors in order for 

them to vote? Is the government going to send in SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], I guess, to start taking 

pictures of seniors in nursing homes and housing complexes, in 

order that they can exercise their democratic vote? Are they 

going to send SGI on to First Nations areas, inner cities, in 

order that people can exercise their democratic vote? I 

somehow don‟t think that that‟s something that this government 

would be prepared to do, but maybe I‟m wrong. 

 

Maybe that Minister of Justice that is trying to take away 

human rights in this province and the tribunal system — and, 

you know, in order to have a right enforced, we have to now go 

to a QB [Queen‟s Bench] judge — maybe that Minister of 

Justice is something more than what I think he might be. And 

maybe, maybe the Sask Party is going to send in all these SGI 

photographers to take photo ID. I guess we could ask the 

minister in the committee. But I somehow doubt it, Mr. 

Speaker, I somehow doubt it. 

 

Maybe the government‟s going to have SGI go on to our 

post-secondary campuses. Maybe they‟ll take photo ID, but 

maybe they won‟t. But, you know, the question is, how do you 

get a piece of photo ID? What do you have to have in order to 

get a piece of photo ID? I think you need ID to get one of those 

photo IDers. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my main premise — this is 

ridiculous. No one‟s asked for this. It‟s one of those things, well 

the federal government‟s doing it. We all know about Stephen 



7356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

Harper. BC‟s doing it. Ontario‟s doing it. Quebec‟s doing it, so 

therefore we have to do it. And what is the member from 

Moose Jaw saying? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He said that Meadow Lake asked for it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, Meadow Lake. He said Meadow Lake 

asked for it. Well I wonder if the member from Meadow Lake 

asked for it. Is that what you‟re saying? The member from 

Meadow Lake asked for it? And why would that be? 

 

Well the member from Meadow Lake has got a real challenge 

on his hands in the next provincial election. And why is that? 

Because Chief Helen Ben who is a well-respected First Nations 

woman and leader in our province is going to represent the New 

Democratic Party in the next provincial election, which the 

government will call in, I think October 10th or somewhere in 

there, for November 7th. 

 

And what does that member from Meadow Lake want? I guess 

he doesn‟t want First Nations people from Canoe Lake and 

Flying Dust and all of the First Nations areas around Meadow 

Lake to vote because he just wants to get his votes from his pals 

that have ID. Even though . . . You know, but it‟s democracy. 

It‟s democracy, Mr. Speaker. Whether you live on-reserve or 

off-reserve, whether you live in the inner city, whether you are 

drug-addicted, whether you are someone involved as a lawyer 

or a doctor or a preacher or a sex trade worker, it doesn‟t matter 

what you do, Mr. Speaker, your right as a citizen, as a person 

who was born or came to this country, you have a right to vote. 

 

And what the members opposite are doing is they are taking 

away some people‟s right to exercise their democratic right to 

vote for the person of their choice. And we think that is wrong, 

Mr. Speaker. We think that is wrong. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know, we know and the members 

opposite know this, that there‟s an estimate that we have about 

2,200 homeless people in the province of Saskatchewan. These 

are people that don‟t have an address. All you have to do is go 

in to Saskatoon Nutana in the summertime, and we have people 

that are living along the river. They do not have a home. We 

know that there are people that are couch surfing. We know that 

there are people that do not have a place to live, and they go 

from couch to couch to couch. 

 

Now why are they homeless? There are a variety of reasons 

why people are homeless, but for a lot of people they simply 

don‟t have the resources to have their own home . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh go to the food banks, he says. Go to the 

food banks. Well you know, what a ridiculous argument. 

Because you‟re homeless and you use a food bank, you don‟t 

have the right to vote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are people who are 

involved in anti-poverty movements, the social justice 

movement, who would seriously disagree with the members 

opposite. People have a right to vote regardless of their 

circumstances, and they have that right because they are a 

citizen of Canada, Mr. Speaker. They are a citizen of this 

province. 

 

[16:45] 

As I said, there are 2,200 people that are homeless . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well you see, here we go again. You 

know, I really do wonder about a group of men and women that 

just chirp from their seats. I haven‟t heard one of them get up 

on this Bill except the member from — where is he from? — 

Southwest. Southeast. He got up, the Minister of Justice, and he 

said — what did he say to us? — Saskatchewan is not taking 

this step in response to any specific incident, but rather we want 

to, and I quote, “enhance the integrity of the system.” 

 

Now oh, they‟re clapping. Oh, they‟re clapping. They‟re 

clapping. Oh, lookit. The member — just, you know, maybe 

Chad Blenkin wants to know this — the member from Yorkton 

clapped. The member from Biggar clapped. You know, these 

are the talking heads for the Sask Party, but they don‟t have the 

wherewithal to get on their feet and defend this legislation. 

They‟re silent. 

 

You know, some people would say that they don‟t have the 

courage of their convictions. They don‟t have the courage of 

their convictions because they can‟t pull themselves out of this 

lovely chair that we all sit in. I think it‟s worth about $1,600 in 

order to sit in one of these chairs. They‟re leather and lovely. 

They‟ve got the coat of arms. They represent the people of the 

province. Each of us that sits in this chair have been elected by 

the citizens living in our constituency who are 18 years of age 

and older. They come here. They have a microphone, but they 

don‟t have the courage of their convictions. 

 

But they will sit there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh lolly, 

here we got another one. Now who would that be? That would 

be the Minister of Education. And what did we learn from her 

last night? Let‟s talk about her. Let‟s talk about her ministry. 

They never had sole sourcing, certainly not when I was around 

after 1991 because the mess that was down in Education capital 

. . . I remember an MLA who was on that side of the House that 

wanted to have a new school up north of P.A. [Prince Albert]. 

By the time we got to government, it was closed. Brand new 

school closed, and why was that? Because there were no 

students. It was total political interference. 

 

Now I say, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t want to be reminded of 

these days but that was . . . [inaudible] . . . so we got rid of that. 

We got rid of political interference in Education capital. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I find it 

interesting to listen to the member, but I am finding it difficult 

to try and tie some of the most recent comments to the piece of 

legislation we‟re dealing with, Bill No. 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll just tell you about 

how I was going to connect it. So what happened to the member 

of the legislature from up there north of P.A.? What happened 

to him in ‟91? He was defeated by the people of our province. 

He was absolutely defeated because there was so much political 

interference, and that‟s about democracy. 

 

You know, democracy‟s a very, very fragile thing. It‟s a very 

fragile thing. There are people that are coming to this country 

now under our immigrant nominee program that don‟t have the 

right to vote in their country. There are people coming from the 

Philippines and China and Egypt and other parts of the world 



April 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7357 

that do not have the right to vote. They‟re coming under the 

skilled trades class. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They don‟t get here without it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, they don‟t get here without what? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Passports. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh. And you know what? As a citizen of this 

country, I have a right to a passport. I have a right to a passport 

unless — unless, and I‟ve just learned this recently — that in 

the province of Alberta they‟re taking away people‟s passports 

if they don‟t make their maintenance payments, you know. 

Which gets me to this: there are people in this province who 

don‟t make their maintenance payments to support their 

children and they have their driver‟s licence taken away. And in 

the case of Alberta, they are now taking away people‟s 

passports if they don‟t pay their child support. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so here you have a situation where you 

don‟t have a driver‟s licence because you haven‟t made your 

child support payment; you don‟t have your passport because 

you haven‟t made your child support payment in the case of 

Alberta — I‟m not quite sure what the policy of our Sask Party 

government is — but there are circumstances where people 

simply don‟t have identification. 

 

And the government has not spelled out in any kind of detail 

what kind of identification will be required in order to cast your 

ballot in not only a provincial election, but they‟ve also done it 

for municipal elections. And guess what? They weren‟t asked 

to do this by municipalities. I guess they wanted to have a 

consistent application of this nonsensical, nonsensical policy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, there are people who are 

coming to this country. They‟re coming as immigrants. They‟re 

coming because they have the right, they want to become 

Canadian citizens. They want to have the right to vote. 

 

And it‟s my view, if you look at the history of this government 

so far, they‟re making it harder and harder for people to 

exercise their democratic right not only to vote, but we know 

that they‟ve got legislation that makes it more difficult to hold 

protest. We know that they have fundamentally taken away 

many trade unionist rights to withdraw their service in the case 

of a labour dispute. We know that they are changing the way 

we go about enforcing our human rights in this province by 

getting rid of the tribunal system. 

 

And now they want it to make it very hard or much harder for 

the very people whom government historically has failed. And 

I‟m not just talking about a Sask Party government, but I‟m 

talking about all governments regardless of stripe. I think we 

have all failed the disenfranchised First Nations people, Métis 

people, senior citizens, and so on. So, Mr. Speaker, I do have 

great difficulty with this piece of legislation. 

 

Now the government says that they‟re trying to harmonize the 

rules in Saskatchewan to make them more like those in other 

provinces and the federal government. But we know that the 

federal legislation is being challenged, and we know that as 

these kinds of challenges make their way through the various 

court systems, at some stage the Supreme Court of Canada no 

doubt is going to render a decision on this. 

 

We know that in the case of British Columbia, we have a 

coalition of organizations including people with disabilities, 

seniors, renters, and people who are homeless that are 

challenging the B.C. legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s argued that their preference . . . And it 

sounds as though they prefer photo ID. There is no question 

that this is going to lead to some people being disenfranchised. 

And I don‟t think . . . I mean, one of the things I‟ve always 

believed in is you cannot have the tyranny of the majority over 

the rights of a minority. And that‟s called democracy. 

 

You know, people fundamentally, regardless of their station in 

life, have the right to be heard. And they have the right to 

exercise their vote because the vote, at the end of the day, is all 

you really have. And I think that citizens have a right to say we 

want you but not you. I think we have the right to that. And I 

don‟t think a piece of photo ID can take away what I 

fundamentally believe to be my democratic right. And my 

democratic right is to cast my ballot and say I want you and I 

don‟t want you. And what the government is doing is it‟s 

reducing the numbers of people that might say I want you but I 

don‟t want you. And I think that‟s wrong. 

 

Now the members over there say that‟s a good point and maybe 

that‟s what this is all about. This is about disenfranchising 

people who don‟t support them. And there are more and more 

people that don‟t support them. There are more and more 

people. And we know that First Nations and Métis people have 

been extremely disappointed by the members opposite. We 

know that senior citizens are disappointed by the members 

opposite. I mean, senior citizens in this province are seeing 

their activity centres close because of escalating costs of 

utilities. And maybe they want to say we want you but we don‟t 

want you. 

 

We know that the homeless and people who do not have . . . 

who go from house to house to house, you know, they‟re trying 

to get on their feet. You know, you have to have some 

identification in order to get social assistance. You have to have 

it. And so there are people that just go, you know, they go to the 

food banks. They go from friend to friend or riverbank to 

riverbank, or they put their thumb in the air and they go from 

town to town. We know this is happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And if we don‟t know that, Mr. Speaker, then 

we haven‟t been doing our jobs as elected members of the 

legislature. 

 

We also know that because of the escalating costs of rent, that 

people are leaving their address or they‟re moving out and 

trying to find a place elsewhere. And so you don‟t necessarily 

have a change of address. And we know that there are people 

who are eligible to vote but they don‟t live here, they live over 

here, but they haven‟t gone through the process of changing 

their identification. So you know, the question is what happens 

if I‟ve recently moved and I haven‟t yet received my updated 

documentation from the government? What if I‟ve not yet got 

mail from a government agency? Does that mean I don‟t have 

the right to vote? 

 



7358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2011 

I think if someone who is a citizen who has some identification 

knows me and can vouch for me, I think that should be good 

enough . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh the people over there 

are saying, oh spare me. Well you know what? One of the 

things I know about this democratic institution is I have the 

right as an elected member of this legislature to say what I have 

to say about legislation, about the performance of the 

government. That is my right and that is my duty. That is my 

duty. 

 

And my duty for the members opposite is to say this: their 

legislation is going to disenfranchise a number of people who 

are citizens of this country and they have the fundamental right 

to exercise their vote. And what those members opposite are 

doing with this legislation is taking away a fundamental right of 

citizenship in this country. And I believe that. I believe that. 

And I believe that, and I have the right to say it in this House, 

regardless of what they say. Regardless of what they say, that is 

my right. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place. I will adjourn 

debate. I‟ve said what I had to say on this legislature. I was 

going to say I‟ve had enough of the members opposite, but we 

all know we all have those days. But I‟ve said what I have to 

say, and I‟d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn to facilitate committees this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn to facilitate the work of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:59.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7327 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7327 

  McMorris ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7327, 7328 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7327 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7328 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7328 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7329 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7329 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7329 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7329 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7329 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7330 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7330 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7330 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7330 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Siblings Connect Through Association of Community Living 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7331 

 Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recipients 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7331 

 Jane Roberts Celebrates 103rd Birthday 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7331 

 Child Abuse Prevention Month 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7331 

 Poetry is Dangerous Stuff 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7332 

 Railcar Staging Facility Planned Near Lanigan 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7332 

 Day Programs and Assisted Living Housing 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7332 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Security of Health Information 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7333 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7333 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7334 

 Coverage for Dental Surgery 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7334 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7334 

 Provision of Health Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7335 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7335 

 Tendering of Government Contracts 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7336 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7336 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 172 — The Victims of Crime Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur les victimes d’actes criminels 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7337 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7337 

 



 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7338 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7338 

 Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7339 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7339 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7339 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 170 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7339 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7340 

 Bill No. 171 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7340 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7341 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7341 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7343 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7347 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7353 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


