




















































Hansard: April 18, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 18, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7295 

 April 18, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 

statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition has asked for leave to make a personal statement. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Allan Emrys Blakeney 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in 

the Chamber today to pay tribute to one of Saskatchewan’s 

greatest citizens, Allan Emrys Blakeney, a public servant, a 

member of the Assembly, a friend, a distinguished cabinet 

minister, a great party leader, and a premier of extraordinary 

intelligence, principles, vision, and determination. 

 

It was as a young man in Bridgewater, Nova Scotia that Allan 

Blakeney’s keen intelligence began to show itself as he earned 

top marks at high school and then later excelled in law school at 

Dalhousie University in Halifax. He won his native province’s 

Rhodes Scholarship and studies carried him to Oxford 

university from 1947 to 1949. 

 

In 1950, Mr. Speaker, he came to this province to begin a career 

in public service that would span several decades. Beginning at 

the government finance office, he was part of a vibrant and 

progressive ferment the Douglas government had created in 

Saskatchewan’s public service, making it the envy of Canada. 

 

Throughout his later political career, Mr. Speaker, he would 

retain a clear vision of the important public role that civil 

servants play in the development and more importantly in the 

implementation of sound public policy. 

 

He entered political life in 1960, winning the election and 

earning a place at the cabinet table of Tommy Douglas as his 

minister of Education. And later as minister of Health under 

Woodrow Lloyd, he played a crucial role in introducing and 

implementing medicare, our public health care system, which 

Canadians still consider one of our great national treasures. 

 

After a period in opposition, he won the leadership of our party 

in 1970 and became Saskatchewan’s 10th premier in the 

election the following year. He had campaigned, Mr. Speaker, 

on New Deal for People, a pragmatic social democratic policy 

program that was ridiculed by the government of the day when 

it was first introduced to the public. And Blakeney didn’t seem 

to mind the government attacks on the policy. And he said and I 

quote, “When you get the government talking about the 

opposition program, you’re moving things right along.” 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the New Deal for People and all 

the policy initiatives of the Blakeney years were based on 

principled, pragmatic, sensible, social democratic values 

implemented with Blakeney’s characteristic intelligence and 

determination — things like the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan; a home care program which I might add, Mr. 

Speaker, I had the privilege of implementing as my first cabinet 

post under Allan Blakeney; a prescription drug plan; a 

children’s dental plan; a new income support for seniors and 

affordable housing. 

 

And one issue he showed determination in every way, Mr. 

Speaker, was on the issue of resource control, and in particular, 

that of potash. He was willing to take on not only the potash 

companies but also Ottawa in the struggle over who controlled 

that resource and who should benefit from the then-rising price 

of potash. As his government moved to ensure the people of the 

province got a fair return on their resources, potash companies 

ran advertisements threatening to cancel expansions. But 

Blakeney persevered, and in the end his cool and rational 

approach triumphed over that fearmongering and attack ads. 

And the triumph, Mr. Speaker, was not for him, but for the 

vision that he had for the people of Saskatchewan and their 

need to benefit from their resource. 

 

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to quote from Dennis Gruending’s 

work on former Premier Blakeney. And I quote: 

 

Blakeney did see the revenues accruing from potash, 

uranium, and other resources — the foundation for his 

social democratic dream. The government would play a 

major role in creating wealth to be redistributed in health 

care, in education, in social programs, and keeping people 

home and employed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a dream many of us still share today in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Allan Blakeney was a leading political figure not 

only in Saskatchewan but also on the national stage. And he 

played a significant role in the constitutional debate of the 

1970s and 1980s, bringing his intelligence and deep 

understanding of Canadian traditions and institutions to bear on 

the most fundamental political question of the day. Here again 

he acted out of principle to defend the interest of Saskatchewan 

families, arguing before the Supreme Court that Ottawa could 

not act unilaterally in amending the constitution but had to 

consult with all provinces. 

 

Returned to opposition in 1982, Allan Blakeney set out the 

work of renewing the party. And I remember that period all too 

well, Mr. Speaker. I’ll always recall the first meeting of the 

party’s provincial council meeting after the defeat. We all know 

the feeling of having to go through that. And party members 

from across the province came together to talk about the 

campaign. And of course, as always happens, it’s who is to 

blame? Was it the campaign manager? Was it the political 

staff? Was it the candidates themselves? What happened in the 

election? 

 



7296 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

And I recall Premier Blakeney, former premier Blakeney at that 

moment, calmly listening to the debate and argument for about 

an hour — some of you may have been at that council meeting 

— and then quietly going to the mic. And I quote his words, he 

said, “Folks, we went from a majority government to eight 

seats. I think we have to agree that it took nothing less than a 

total team effort.” Allan brought the house down, and the 

council quickly then moved on to looking at the future and the 

work that needed to be done to rebuild the party for the ’86 

election. 

 

Others have said this, and I concur that those years between ’82 

and ’86 were an incredible display of the real leadership of 

Allan Blakeney. And I remember many, many times sitting 

where the now deputy leader sits, and Allan Blakeney at this 

desk while he calmly asked tough questions about the 

government of the day. And the fact that the government of the 

day had 56 seats and we had only eight made that job 

particularly difficult. And day after day I would marvel at his 

knowledge and his dedication, his determination to provide the 

people of Saskatchewan the best possible representation. And 

he rebuilt and renewed the party so well and so quickly that by 

the time the election came in 1986 he surprised everyone when 

he won the popular vote. He elected 26 MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] in that election and set the foundation 

for many years to come. And that was a tribute to Allan 

Blakeney’s hard work and vision. 

 

1986 would be Allan’s final election, Mr. Speaker. After over 

25 years as an elected member, 11 of them as premier, Allan 

Blakeney stepped down as leader in November of 1987. Mr. 

Speaker, tomorrow, April 19, marks the anniversary of Allan 

Blakeney’s first nomination as a CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] candidate in 1960. Over half a 

century have now passed since he first entered this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, and we can all be thankful for the life, the legacy 

of Allan Blakeney, and the many years of public service he 

devoted to the people of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to make a 

statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make a 

personal statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, but for my own read of the 

history of our province and the book that he penned and 

released not too long ago called An Honourable Calling, 

regrettably I didn’t have the chance to know the Hon. Allan 

Blakeney too well, not as well as many in this Assembly. I have 

only my few and too-brief encounters with our 10th premier. 

Here still, I am honoured on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to offer some initial and respectful 

remembrances of those occasions that I had to meet with him, 

and a few brief comments if I may on behalf of this side of the 

House, on his extraordinary leadership skills and the leadership 

that he demonstrated for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on each of my personal encounters, abbreviated as 

they were, I came away with the distinct and lasting impression 

of a man who was at once someone of brilliance and gravitas 

while still so approachable and eminently decent. Were I forced 

to choose a sole descriptor for my first impression, I guess it 

would be, class. This I have heard was not only the first 

impression shared by others, but the enduring and lasting 

memory by those who knew him longest and best. 

 

When Premier Romanow called me on Saturday morning with 

the news, after a time to absorb, I reflected on the matters that I 

had read, that he had written in his own pen from his own story. 

As Health minister in the Lloyd government that extended 

doctor services under medicare in this province, as premier 

through the federal-provincial toing and froing of the ’70s — 

the introduction of the national energy program by Ottawa, and 

even the constitutional challenges of the late 1970s and early 

1980s leading to the Constitution Act, the repatriation of our 

own constitution — he was our steady hand. 

 

His leadership was in every way the manifestation of the 

exquisitely British World War II exhortation, stay calm and 

carry on. We are thankful that he was this kind of leader, Mr. 

Speaker. A leader who had that internal strength, that 

confidence of his own views, and the serenity to do just that — 

to carry on. For we have the medicare we have today because of 

that leadership, and Canada has her own constitution today in 

no small way due to that leadership. And Saskatchewan found 

her national voice because of his steady voice and the 

equanimity of his leadership. 

 

We are thankful, Mr. Speaker, that he was recruited here after 

his gold medal performance at Dalhousie law school. And 

we’re thankful that he stayed though as Dennis Gruending, in 

the same essay referenced by the opposition leader, pointed out 

earlier on after his arrival, he remarked that Regina “wasn’t 

Paris” and that he had no intention of staying here very long. 

 

I wonder today at what moment or during what moments he 

changed his mind, together I’m sure with Anne and his family. 

He himself has offered us a glimpse into that decision point, but 

as we mark his great service today in this Assembly that he 

loved, as we mark his decency and his leadership on this 

occasion, I’d like to think there was something that just told 

him that there was work to be done, great things to be done 

with the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and that was 

the reason that he should stay. 

 

It matters little why he chose to stay, but greatly that he did. 

And the fact that he stayed says a lot about him, and I think it 

says a lot about the province of Saskatchewan. I cannot say 

today, nor would he bid me do so, that I agree with all his 

ardently held views, nor support all that his administration did. 

But based on what I have read and what others have told me 

about him, the fact that we may disagree would not matter so 

much to him as the debate itself, the debate of those competing 

ideas, the intellectual integrity of the arguments that advanced 

them, that in the end each position was advanced in the cause of 

helping others and of building a better Saskatchewan, and 

finally that those arguments were tendered respectfully and 

civilly. 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7297 

Here was a leader who was a credit to his office, who could 

differ without animus, who could disagree without being 

disagreeable. Perhaps the best way to mark his living and 

honour his passing is to make that a test of our own public 

service in this place, the Blakeney test, that we could disagree 

without being disagreeable. That test may also include the 

provisioning of each of our political positions with examples of 

how our own views or policies or principles help people in the 

end. 

 

In his book he wrote this: “All should seek knowledge of truth 

and beauty and should be sensitive to those who suffer.” And 

just on the next page, interestingly, Mr. Speaker, he said this: 

 

We all cross the river Jordan, and all cross it alone. What 

is on the other side will remain a mystery or a product of 

faith. Our path on this side is ours to choose. Our choices 

should be guided primarily by being in the company with 

our fellow humans and all those whose lives we can 

touch. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there’s company in the next life, 

too. And so on Saturday morning, the Hon. Allan Blakeney was 

well met indeed. 

 

To his wife of 52 years and to Hugh and Barbara and Margaret 

and David and all of the family, we know this: for one to serve, 

a family must sacrifice. And we thank them for sharing Mr. 

Blakeney with us. Today and, Mr. Speaker, to Premier Allan 

Blakeney, on behalf of a grateful province, thank you, sir. Rest 

in peace. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition for those words of condolence, and in recognition of 

the exemplary work of the Hon. Allan Blakeney, not only as a 

member of this Legislative Assembly but as a premier of this 

province and his dedication to this province, I would invite the 

members and the guests in the gallery to stand and join with us 

in a moment of silence. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the members and our guests for 

joining with us. 

 

[13:45] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of this House, I’d like to introduce two 

determined young ladies who have a challenge in front of them. 

They’re determined to bring the seat of Prince Albert Northcote 

to the Sask Party side of the House. So I’d introduce — and if 

you’d give a wave — Ms. Victoria Jurgens, candidate for 

Prince Albert Northcote, and Alana Ross, president of 

Northcote constituency. So I’d ask everyone in this House to 

give them a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you some very special guests in 

your gallery: Gloria Mahussier, president of the board of 

directors for the Saskatchewan Association of Community 

Living, and her son Travis — if you can give a wave, Gloria — 

and Shane Haddad, president of the People First of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

These folks are tireless champions of people fighting for respect 

and dignity for all Saskatchewan citizens, and they’re here 

today to watch the introduction of Bill 625, The Saskatchewan 

Respectful Language Act. I ask all members in joining me in 

welcoming them to their House. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce some learners and their supporters participating in 

the Way to Work program. It’s a project focusing on adult basic 

education and essential skills that transfer into the workplace. 

 

In no particular order, I’d like to introduce Delia Akapew, Gail 

Bellegarde, Gilbert Bellegarde, John Bellegarde, Monica 

Bellegarde, Royce Cote, Evin Dubois, Daphney McKay, Jonas 

McNabb, Landon Starr, as well as Nathan Star. And joining 

them are their instructors Sharon Gereaux and Dianne Yuzicapi. 

Other members that are participating in and supportive of this 

project: a stranger to no one in this House, Chief Perry 

Bellegarde, is here; Mark Deiter, Joan Bellegarde, Mechtild 

Morin, Michael Morin, and Kim Fraser-Saddleback from SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these learners and their supporters are vital to the 

bright future that our province has. We appreciate their desire to 

study and succeed in Saskatchewan, making it all the better for 

all of us. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of this 

Assembly to join me in welcoming these learners and their 

supporters to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming these guests to the Assembly. Both 

sides of the House know that adult basic education is so vitally 

important to the future of our province, and to have these 

individuals here today is a true honour. And I hope that the 

debates and the experiences that they have today will benefit 

them as they carry forward the good work they’re doing as 

learners or involved in the leadership of the program, Mr. 

Speaker. So I would join with the minister in welcoming these 

individuals to their Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also 

introduce two guests seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker: 

Kent Peterson and Paige Kezima, president- and 

vice-president-elect of the University of Regina Students’ 

Union. And they’ve come to the Assembly today, as I 



7298 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

understand, to sign the book of condolence of Premier 

Blakeney, recognizing the tremendous contribution he has 

made to learning here in the province. So I’d ask members to 

welcome Kent and Paige to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with the Advanced Education minister and the member 

from Massey Place in particularly welcoming Chief Perry 

Bellegarde, who is chief of Little Bear, I believe, in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Perry and I had an opportunity to work together at Crown 

Investments Corporation after his work as the grand chief here 

in Saskatchewan, and Perry did a fabulous job at CIC, ensuring 

that Crowns start thinking about two things: hiring First 

Nations and Métis people and also sourcing First Nations and 

Métis companies for goods and services in the Crown. 

 

I want to thank Perry for the work that he did at CIC and as a 

public servant and wish him well in his elected position as chief 

of Little Bear, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join with the member opposite in welcoming Chief Perry 

Bellegarde, chief of Little Black Bear located near Goodeve, 

Saskatchewan, within my constituency. 

 

As the member opposite outlined a number of Perry’s 

accomplishments, We are all familiar with the great work he’s 

done on behalf of First Nations people. But there’s one thing 

that perhaps not many people in this Assembly know about, and 

that’s the talented singer that Perry is. I had the opportunity to 

hear and see him perform at the Goodeve homecoming this past 

summer. And I must tell you, Mr. Speaker, he is an 

accomplished entertainer. And I would certainly like to 

welcome him to his Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to take an opportunity to talk about and welcome . . . The 

Northern Trappers Association from northern Saskatchewan are 

here. There’s quite a few of them. And I would like to just 

acknowledge Clifford Ray from Sandy Bay. He is the president 

of the organization. Vice-president is Jonas Bird. He’s an elder 

with La Ronge band, also a very good friend of mine. I would 

like to welcome him here. Secretary Janet Roberts from Stanley 

Mission. 

 

We also have regional board of directors. Paul Sylvestre from 

Birch Narrows is also here. Rose Hegland, north central region 

from La Ronge, is here as well. Also we have Elder Albert Ross 

from Hall Lake, is an elder with Lac La Ronge Indian Band and 

works with this group and gives them advice and leadership. I 

wanted to acknowledge him and thank him. 

 

Fur block 9 is in the Stanley Mission area. And actually the 

chairman of that is Adam O. Charles. Adam O. is from Stanley 

Mission. He lives a traditional lifestyle. He truly traps; he 

fishes. And I just want to acknowledge the wisdom he has for 

the young people in his community and throughout. He shares 

his wisdom, his knowledge. He makes sure that people 

understand. And I just want to take time to acknowledge that. 

 

They’re here today. They want to bring their concerns about the 

fur industry, and they want to make sure that the government 

hears the issues that they’re facing, their industry and their 

culture. 

 

But I also want to acknowledge they’ve had support from 

Prince Albert Grand Council. The vice-chief, Brian Hardlotte, 

is here as well. Brian. Also with him is some of his staff: Robin 

McLeod, who accompanies him and works with him closely. 

And also Leonard Hardlotte, I would like to acknowledge, 

works with him and keeps his, I guess, agenda going. So I’d 

just like to say he does consulting work with him. I just want to 

acknowledge him there. And also Brian Lindskog from La 

Ronge is here accompanying them. He wanted to, from the 

North, wanted to come with them and support them. And it’s 

good to see them here. 

 

I would just like to, at this time, thank them for being here and 

showing their concern. And I want them to know this is your 

House. This is your Assembly. This is your voice, and you’re 

here making sure people hear your voice and your issues and 

things that, I guess, affect the northern Saskatchewan and the 

trapping industry. And I just want to acknowledge you and say 

thank you and welcome to your legislature. I’d ask all members 

to join me and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, the Minister Responsible for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

just want to join with my colleague across the way in 

welcoming our visitors to the Legislative Assembly. I know 

many of them have come from a long distance. And I’ve had 

the opportunity to meet with some of them already prior, a few 

months ago, and I’m looking forward to meeting with them this 

afternoon with a couple of my colleagues. So I’d ask all 

members to again welcome our visitors to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with my colleagues in welcoming and saying ta wow to the 

Legislative Assembly for all the trappers who have travelled 

very far to come here and the leadership, of course, from the 

Prince Albert Grand Council. 

 

Also I want to introduce Vice-chief E. Dutch Lerat from the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Good to see you 

here in your Assembly, vice-chief. 

 

And I also want to add a word of greeting to Chief Perry 

Bellegarde. Chief Bellegarde is quite a runner. While we’re 

telling all the things about Chief Bellegarde, he’s quite a 

long-distance runner. And in politics, of course, sometimes we 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7299 

compare campaigns to marathons. And I had the privilege, 

along with some other colleagues, of witnessing Chief 

Bellegarde go through that long marathon for the Assembly of 

First Nations and then following that marathon up, Mr. 

Speaker, with a sprint marathon of a 24-hour-plus election day 

with the Assembly of First Nations. It was a very thrilling 

campaign to watch, and Chief Bellegarde carried himself with 

dignity and pride throughout that. But I want to add my voice to 

those welcoming the First Nations guests to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would like to, in your gallery, welcome Joe Hordyski, who is 

from La Ronge. And he moved up to La Ronge 25 years ago to 

build a house. He’s a carpenter by trade and loved it up there so 

much, he decided to stay after building about 50 more houses. 

 

And he’s been a very instrumental part and a very good person 

for the community of La Ronge. He’s sat on the town council 

for 18 years, and 12 of them as mayor of La Ronge, Mr. 

Speaker. He is also on the board of the Mamawetan Churchill 

Health Region. He’s been involved with the SaskWater Board, 

the Elks Club, and a variety of other local boards including the 

La Ronge Regional Waste Management, Fire, Water, Parks and 

Recreation, Library. 

 

So he has a great love of the North, Mr. Speaker. And he is also 

the Saskatchewan Party candidate for the Cumberland 

community. Anyway I wanted all of this association to . . . or I 

want all of this Assembly to please welcome Joe to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to also welcome Joe Hordyski, who’s from La Ronge and 

obviously is here being introduced as the candidate for the Sask 

Party. I’d like to welcome him to the legislative, and we’ll be 

working hard to keep him there. Thank you. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a number of 

people representing CLASSIC. That is the acronym for 

Community Legal Services for the Saskatoon Inner City. They 

are here to meet with me and the Ministry of Justice staff. 

 

CLASSIC operates in partnership with the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Law and private law firms. They 

provide two programs: firstly, a walk-in advisory clinic where 

law students under the supervision of staff lawyers assist clients 

with legal issues; and secondly, a legal advice clinic that 

provides free half-hour consultations with lawyers for 

low-income people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, joining us today are Lori Johnstone-Clark, a board 

member and a lawyer; Glen Luther and Tim Quigley, also 

lawyers who represent the College of Law, professors as well; 

Dorion Brady, executive director; a lawyer, Haidah Amirzadeh; 

and law students, Gillian Gough and Christopher Terepocki. 

And from the Ministry of Justice, they are also joined by Ken 

Acton, assistant deputy minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join with me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly and to thank 

them for their very good work that they’re continuing to do on a 

volunteer basis. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I want to join in welcoming the guests from 

CLASSIC to your gallery today. I had the text of the minister’s 

remarks, and I thank him for that. And I noted to him before we 

began today that he showed remarkable restraint in not taking 

the opportunity to comment on the lack of appropriate federal 

funding for legal aid in the province of Saskatchewan which 

has been the case since 1995. And I make that comment, Mr. 

Speaker, in this introduction because context is everything. 

 

There are invaluable services that legal aid provides in this 

province, but not nearly the services it should be able to 

provide. And that is why I was persuaded when I was Minister 

of Justice to have the Government of Saskatchewan join with 

the College of Law and the legal community in the founding of 

CLASSIC, which provides and takes advantage of the College 

of Law and its brilliant student body to provide those needed 

services at least in the city of Saskatoon, and they are 

invaluable. And I wish to join with the minister in thanking the 

people here for that invaluable service they provide to the 

people of Saskatoon who need it the most. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly a group of wonderful students, 14 of them in total, 

from F.W. Johnson Collegiate in the constituency of Regina 

Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. Now these are grade 12 students that 

are here to visit their Assembly, watch the proceedings today. 

And you had the opportunity to come on a very unique day, and 

I’m sure you will enjoy the remainder of the proceedings. And 

we’ll have an opportunity to talk about today a little later on 

when we have a visit. 

 

But I’d like to introduce them to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all 

members of the Assembly, and they are teachers Mrs. Mandy 

Gullickson and Mr. Mike Leier. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

going to ask for leave for somewhat of an extended introduction 

of guests. I want to do the introduction in my own language of 

Cree and attempt the language of Dene, so I would ask for leave 

for an extended introduction of guests. 



7300 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has asked for 

leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say that I’m really glad that they’re 

here to fight for the trapping industry, to fight for their cause, 

but to also teach other groups in northern Saskatchewan not to 

be afraid to come here and tell the Sask Party what they’re 

doing wrong and tell any government what they’re doing 

wrong. I think those are two lessons, Mr. Speaker, that are very, 

very important. 

 

The other language I want to speak, Mr. Speaker, is . . . We’ve 

heard people speak Cree here. I think Lawrence Yew was the 

first man to speak Cree in the Assembly. I think Keith Goulet 

was the second, and I believe I was the third. But I was the first 

member to speak Dene, and that’s one of the things I want to 

hold to my fame. So I want to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I thank the Assembly for the opportunity to 

not only speak in Cree but to speak in Dene. And I welcome 

and ask all members to welcome this fantastic group of 

northern trappers to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan that wish to draw facts to the attention of this 

Assembly that rental increases across the province are simply 

making living in Saskatchewan unaffordable. Mr. Speaker, it 

also draws a comparison between the new rental unit starts in 

Regina and Saskatoon between 2007 and 2009, which was 

fewer than 300, Mr. Speaker. And during the same period of 

time in Winnipeg, that currently has rent controls, they 

generated over 1,500 new rental units. Mr. Speaker, it raises the 

concerns of many citizens that we’re hearing across the 

province. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that Legislative of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the government to immediately 

enact rent control legislation that protects Saskatchewan 

tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed on behalf of citizens in 

Indian Head, Carlyle, Regina, Cudworth, Yorkton, Esterhazy, 

and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition of people who are in support of maintaining quality 

health care services, and they want the Government of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

To recognize the need for timely access to comprehensive 

and quality health care services for all communities 

within the province, including Wakaw and surrounding 

areas, and that the disruption of emergency services and 

in-patient services at Wakaw Hospital will not serve the 

needs of the residents in this community and surrounding 

areas; and 

 

That cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic and 

laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding areas will also not serve the needs of 

residents. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to commit to maintain quality 

health care services through the commitment of necessary 

funding to address critical retention and recruitment 

issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Wakaw, Birch Hills, Tisdale, Prince Albert, Cudworth, Tway, 

and Middle Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. We know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security and that 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition on behalf of the Northern Trappers Association 

Co-operative. The fur industry has so much potential for our 

northern trappers. It is a way to educate and empower our 

northern youth and to connect them with their culture. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7301 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to recognize that Northern 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association Co-operative 

maintains the traditional values of hunting, trapping and 

also brings in millions of dollars to the provincial 

economy every year from the proceeds of fur harvesting 

combined with the economic spinoff to the tourism sector 

and to the local economy; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Sask Party government to 

immediately show their support for the Northern Trappers 

Association Co-operative by providing additional funding 

to assist in developing a value-added and marketing 

strategy that will enhance the current income level 

available to its members. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Stanley Mission, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, and La Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in 

Hampton Village about the need for a new school for their 

children. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a number of petitions in support of the National School of 

Dental Therapy because for 30 years the National School of 

Dental Therapy has been educating largely Saskatchewan 

residents who provide services in our communities, that the 

school is scheduled to close in June of this year, and that this 

program is educating primarily Saskatchewan residents who 

stay and work in Prince Albert and area, Mr. Speaker. 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the National 

School of Dental Therapy. In doing so, allow the 

students, teachers, and citizens of Saskatchewan to 

benefit from this institution. That the majority of the 

patients the school serves are children and young adults 

from lower income families, elderly on restricted budgets, 

and people living in rural and northern Saskatchewan 

with no private dental insurance. 

 

The programming provides oral health care and education 

to six Prince Albert community schools. It provides care 

to 3,000 active patients who have no other oral health 

alternatives. Additionally, the school has 570 odd names 

on their waiting list, Mr. Speaker. It is believed that not 

funding this institution will cost the taxpayers more 

money for worse health outcomes than not funding the 

program. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are literally thousands of names on these 

petitions today, somewhere close to 4,000. The petition I read 

specifically has people who come from the cities of The 

Battlefords, Regina, and Prince Albert, as well as Shellbrook, 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again, once 

again, to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 will have 

on human rights law if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Osler, 

and Delisle, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the fact 

that the Sask Party, despite record highs in revenues, has 

increased debt and run deficits all to the detriment of 

Saskatchewan people. That record of increasing debt over the 

past three years has increased debt by more than $1.3 billion, 



7302 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

and this year alone increasing our public debt by $548 million, 

of course having consequences now but also well into the 

future, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of Ituna 

and Melville. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

also want to present a petition: 

 

And wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the provincial government to recognize that the 

Northern Trappers Association maintains the traditional 

values of hunting and trapping and also brings in millions 

of dollars to the provincial economy every year from the 

proceeds of fur harvesting combined with the economic 

spinoffs to the tourism sector and the local economy. 

 

And as in so doing, to cause this government to stop 

turning their backs on the northern trappers, but all the 

people who live and work in northern Saskatchewan; and 

in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately reinstate the funding to the Saskatchewan 

Northern Trappers Association. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by hundreds of 

northern Saskatchewan trappers and hundreds of supporters. 

And the petitions that were signed, this particular one, Mr. 

Speaker, are from the fantastic community of Stanley Mission. 

And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The last petition that 

was read sounded so much similar to the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote, I’m going to take a look at it and review it 

based on the rules that we are governed by in the presentation 

of petitions. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Tribute to Serge LeClerc 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege, but with 

sadness that I rise in this Assembly today to speak about the 

passing of an individual who at times seemed bigger than life 

— humanitarian, motivational speaker, author, former MLA for 

Saskatoon Northwest, but firstly my friend, Mr. Serge LeClerc. 

 

His life of hardship and at times survival through crime is well 

documented in his autobiography, Untwisted. Born of a young 

Aboriginal girl who was a victim of rape, he stood little chance 

for a productive life. Years of physical abuse, a risky lifestyle, 

incarceration should have left him dead many times. But 

through an eventual encounter with a Christian pastor who 

asked Serge some difficult questions, he was renewed through 

faith in Jesus Christ. He turned his back on his old life. He 

strived to offset the wrongs of his past. He used his story to 

educate young people of the pitfalls and repercussions of drugs 

and crime, but was very careful not to glorify it. He would often 

say, my testimony is a powerful one, but it is not a good one. 

 

Serge was instrumental in bringing the highly successful Teen 

Challenge program to Saskatchewan before retiring from that 

organization and being elected to this Assembly in 2007. He 

became ill almost one year ago and was diagnosed with a 

cancer sometime after and passed away April 16th in Trenton, 

Ontario. A celebration of his life will be held there on May 7th. 

 

Serge was not perfect, Mr. Speaker. None of us are. To some he 

seemed stubborn, abrasive, and blunt. And believe me, I know 

he could be. But he did it always with the best of intentions 

from a passionate heart. I believe we should measure a man not 

only by where he is and what he’s accomplished, but how far he 

has come. I’ve never met anyone that has gone such a distance 

and touched so many in such a positive way as Serge LeClerc 

has. 

 

May God bless his family, and Godspeed, my friend. Rest in 

peace. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Conscience of the Land 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The trappers of 

Saskatchewan are the conscience of the land. They have 

hands-on experience and knowledge that can be taught in the 

classroom, but not learned overnight. They are the hands-on 

measuring stick for Saskatchewan’s vast environmental regions. 

Mr. Speaker, the trappers are our last line of defence in the 

outright takeover of the land from those who would extract all 

that we’re blessed with and give nothing back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments can sell water to the US [United 

States], minerals to the mining companies, or timber the world 

over. But we must exist here and survive and raise our families 

here. Now that trappers’ existence in this very land that they 

helped nurture is at risk, the trappers’ fight for survival is one of 

purity and speaks to the basic fundamental principles that help 

found this great country of ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the men and women in the trapping industry are 

not rich economically. However, they’re rich in history. 

They’re rich in culture. They’re rich in the language of the land 

and rich in tradition. It was the trapping industry that built this 

country and allowed us to flourish as a nation. Mr. Speaker, in 

our national anthem it says, God keep our land. I truly believe 

that God entrusted our trappers to keep our land beautiful and 

pristine. Mr. Speaker, we must fight with them to keep it that 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7303 

way. The great author James Fennimore Cooper said: 

 

The air, the water, and the ground are free gifts to man 

and no one has the power to portion them out in parcels. 

Man must drink and breathe and walk, and therefore each 

man has a right to his share of each. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Biggar Central School Student Awarded Scholarship 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Doors have opened 

for one Biggar Central School 2000 student, as she was one of 

15 selected for a national scholarship. Julianna Tan is still 

basking in the glow of having her post-secondary future assured 

with the awarding of the W. Garfield Weston Loran Award 

scholarship worth a staggering $75,000. That $75,000 opens 

more options for Julianna, the prestigious Dalhousie University 

being one of them. 

 

At Nova Scotia’s Dalhousie, Julianna will be going into 

medicine, undergradding in kinesiology. The W. Garfield 

Weston Loran Award scholarship, administered by the 

Canadian Merit Scholarship Foundation, is designed to 

recognize outstanding college-bound students who show a 

strong commitment to their fields of study and are interested in 

making positive contributions to the communities. 

 

“She’s one awesome student,” explained Natalie Chupik of 

Biggar Central 2000 School. “She is the one you want 

everybody like in your class. She’s very dedicated, very 

hardworking.” Julianna is student representative council 

president, involved in sports, all aspects of student life at BCS 

[Biggar Central School]. She’s not afraid about doing 

something different to show her school spirit. Congratulations 

and good luck to you, Julianna. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Regina and District Association for Community Living 

Spring Fling 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it was my honour, joined 

by my wife Stephanie, to attend the 2011 Spring Fling this past 

Saturday, along with the members from Regina Dewdney and 

Qu’Appelle, and NDP candidates for Regina Wascana Plains, 

Northeast, and South. 

 

Spring Fling is an annual fundraiser for the Regina and District 

Association for Community Living. Its vision is that citizens 

are valued and contribute to life in our community and that 

neighbourhoods, businesses, and organizations are enriched 

when they are open and welcoming of all people. 

 

His Honour, the Honourable Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, brought fine words of 

support to the crowd that evening. The masters of ceremony 

were Ms. Elizabeth Popowich and Mr. Nick Popowich, mother 

and son. They did a wonderful job. The crowd was entertained 

by ’round midnight with the impressive Bev Zizzy on vocals. 

I would like to thank the entire Spring Fling committee and the 

organization leaders such as Ms. Iris Miller-Dennis, Ms. Voula 

Danakas, Ms. Faith Savarese to name just a few. Mr. Speaker, it 

was my honour and it is my honour to thank the RDACL 

[Regina and District Association for Community Living], the 

organizers and supporters of Spring Fling 2011, and all of those 

who support the goal of creating a society that is open and 

welcoming of all, irrespective of cognitive and physical 

abilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in doing so. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

World Hemophilia Day 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 1989 

patient groups in treatment centres have been coming together 

on April 17th to celebrate World Hemophilia Day. Over the 

past 20 years, World Hemophilia Day has become a unique 

opportunity to increase awareness about hemophilia and other 

bleeding disorders. April 17th was chosen to honour the birth of 

Frank Schnabel, a hemophiliac and founder of the Canadian 

Hemophilia Society and the World Federation of Hemophilia. 

 

The theme for 2011’s World Hemophilia celebrates supporting 

positive change for people with bleeding disorders and 

encouraging others to do the same. By working together and 

inspiring each other for a brighter future, we can achieve 

treatment for all. Hemophilia’s the most common disease of all 

inherited bleeding disorders. It affects up to 1 per cent of the 

population, affecting both men and women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hemophiliacs often require transfusions of blood 

that can help prevent or stop bleeding. Canada is one of the few 

countries with a federally coordinated blood transfusion 

surveillance program. Mr. Speaker, together we can bring 

bleeding disorders issues into the light and ease the suffering 

for many people, especially those suffering from bleeding 

disorders right here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Using Respectful Language 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, people 

are calling for the end of the R word. Obama did it last fall, and 

we can do it here now. The campaign against the R word also 

known in its various forms as mental retardation was boosted 

by a full house when on April 8th People First hosted the 

Saskatchewan premiere of the film, The R Word. I want to 

quote Gloria Mahussier, president of the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living, as she said that night, “The 

R word — it’s vicious and it’s ignorant.” 

 

She told the audience about Rosa’s Law, which requires 

American laws that use the words mental retardation to now say 

intellectual disability. Gloria talked about Rosa’s brother, Nick, 

who said it best: 

 



7304 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

What you call people is how you treat them. If you 

change the words, maybe it will be the start of a new 

attitude towards people with disabilities. Rosa’s Law is 

about families fighting for the respect and dignity of their 

loved ones. 

 

They are making headway in the US, and Gloria thinks we have 

the same opportunity to build a strong campaign to end the use 

of the R word here in our province and in Canada for good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I will be moving first reading of the 

respectful language Act, a Bill intended to remove the last 

traces of the R word from our statutes. I also call on the 

government to look through their print and online materials to 

change any negative references to more respectful language as 

soon as possible. Let’s support People First and SACL 

[Saskatchewan Association for Community Living] and work 

together towards the day all people in Saskatchewan are treated 

fully with respect and dignity. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina and District Association for Community Living 

Spring Fling 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on Saturday I had the honour and privilege of 

attending the Regina and District Association for Community 

Living Spring Fling. Mr. Speaker, this annual fundraising gala 

raises tens of thousands of dollars to help fund ongoing 

programs to provide support to and advocate on behalf of 

people living with intellectual challenges and their families in 

and around Regina. The organizers have held this event for 

more than 20 years and have dedicated many years to 

improving the lives of those who live every day with 

intellectual disabilities. Mr. Speaker, every one of us deserves 

to be treated with dignity and respect and to have equal access 

to services. 

 

The Regina Association for Community Living makes it their 

mandate to ensure that individuals with disabilities can 

participate fully as valued citizens of our community. 

Congratulations to Iris Miller-Dennis and her committee for 

organizing this wonderful event. And I would like to commend 

Nick Popowich and his mom, Elizabeth, for emceeing this 

fun-filled event, even though Nick has shared with us that he’s 

looking for a new partner in emceeing. I ask all my colleagues 

to join me in recognizing the committee and dedication of the 

board of directors and the staff of Regina and District 

Association for Community Living for a wonderful event. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on to oral questions, I just 

want to remind members of the rules regarding the presentation 

of petitions. Rule 16(3)(d): “No more than one petition on a 

subject may be presented during the period.” I have taken a 

quick review of the two petitions, the one from the member 

from P.A. Northcote and the one from Athabasca. They’re 

basically similar petitions. I would ask the members to be 

mindful of the rules and make their . . . remember that in 

presenting petitions in the future. 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Remuneration of Health Care Employees 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday last week, or I 

guess it was late on Thursday, the Prince Albert Parkland 

Health Region announced that the pay for their CEO [chief 

executive officer] would increase by 60 per cent, retroactive to 

April of 2010. Mr. Speaker, the news release that was issued 

stated, and I quote, “The salary is based on the approved 

ministerial directive.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that many of the health care 

workers in this province were told not even a year ago that 

there was no money and they had to expect and be lowering 

their expectations to an increase of about one, one-and-a-half 

per cent . . . Now those workers, 80 per cent are women and 

they’re delivering quality health care throughout the province. 

How does the double standard work where the CEO gets a 60 

per cent increase and the people doing the heavy lifting in 

health care are required to take one and a half per cent? What’s 

fair about that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our government is focused on quality improvement, 

Mr. Speaker, making sure we put the patient first in everything 

we do. The health care system is a very complicated system, 

from CEO, Mr. Speaker, all the way through all the health care 

providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the out-of-scope personnel that 

we have in the health care system who are very important to 

make sure that the system works properly, when we look at the 

out-of-scope personnel, they hadn’t received an increase or a 

market adjustment for a number of years, Mr. Speaker. This 

brings them up to the 65th percentile of comparable jobs across 

Western Canada. How the compensation was determined was 

looking at comparable jobs across Western Canada, and the 

CEOs have moved up to the 65th percentile. Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t know if there is a health care worker right now on the 

floor that is at that level. All are at 90 to 110 per cent of that 

Western average, Mr. Speaker. We pay our health care . . . We 

value our health care workers very, very much and pay them 

accordingly to the Western standard just as we have the CEOs 

at their rate at 65 per cent. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there are very few health 

care workers who would agree that there is fairness where the 

health care workers on the front line — whether they’re giving 

home care to our seniors, parents. handicapped people, or 

working in nursing homes or hospitals — getting a one and a 

half per cent increase and the CEOs getting 60 per cent increase 

and retroactive for a year. Now the minister can say that that’s 

fair all he wants, but the fact is that the public in Saskatchewan 

feel that there is a real unfairness where the booming economy 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7305 

is not working for the working people. And that’s what this 

question’s about. 

 

In fact the CEO has a number of issues that she’s getting the 

increase for: the idea that closing down the health centre, the 

wellness centre in Prince Albert; letting 18 people go who were 

giving home care in that health region; cutting back on acute 

care beds and long-term care beds. And that person is being 

rewarded with a 60 per cent increase. 

 

How is it that American style of compensating managers for 

cutbacks works in this province where they get 60 per cent 

increase and the people doing the heavy lifting are required to 

take one and a half? This is not fair. And how does he justify it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to that 

member is that the average increase to the out-of-scope 

workers, Mr. Speaker, CEOs all the way through, the average 

increase is 5 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. When you look at 

when the last increase happened, Mr. . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we feel that that’s a fair 

compensation, 5 per cent increase on average across the board. 

We realize that all the health care workers, be it in scope or out 

of scope, are extremely important. I would say though, Mr. 

Speaker, the health system today is far better than it ever was 

under 16 years of NDP [New Democratic Party] government. 

 

CEOs . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, this past year will see every 

health region in Saskatchewan at a break-even basis, Mr. 

Speaker. We just have to go back a few years under the NDP 

when it was deficit after deficit after deficit. We have extremely 

competent CEOs, management, within the health care system. 

An increase of 5 per cent, we think, is appropriate when we 

look at the Western average. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the CEO in Prince Albert, 

Parkland Prince Albert, received an increase of 60 per cent. But 

that’s not the only CEO of the health regions who got an 

increase. The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region paid a $71,000 

increase to their CEO, and in fact Saskatoon Health Region, 

there the CEO got an increase of $100,000 in one year — now 

is being paid over $400,000 a year. In fact what we are seeing 

here is that CEOs are being paid by how little health care 

service they give and being rewarded for cutting back health 

care. 

 

How does it work in a medicare system where the less you do 

and the less service you give, the more you get paid? How is 

that proper and reasonable, that the more service you take 

away, the higher your pay; and the more service you give, the 

less you get? How is that fair to the people who do the work in 

the health care system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, we’ve seen health care workers across the province . . . 

One contract left to settle, but all health care workers, Mr. 

Speaker, have settled, some as high as a 95 per cent ratification, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the out-of-scope, they hadn’t received an 

increase for about five years, Mr. Speaker. This brings them up 

to the 65th percentile of the Western average, Mr. Speaker. 

Now I don’t think, I don’t know if the opposition is arguing that 

our CEOs, our management, should not be paid at the 65th 

percentile of the Western average. Do they think it should be 

down around 30 or 40? What do they think they should be paid, 

Mr. Speaker? Because, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a competitive 

market and, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that our 

executive, that our out-of-scope employees are paid 

accordingly. That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you that over the last two or three years, when we 

see a reduction in the people waiting 18 months and longer by 

over 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker, great work is being done by 

CEOs across this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Support for Trapping Industry 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, trapping is a profession and a 

tradition that is hundreds of years old here in Saskatchewan, but 

especially in northern Saskatchewan. Yet despite this 

profession’s heritage, trappers in Saskatchewan are now hurting 

for one reason: the lack of respect shown to them by their 

government. This government has made a decision to slash the 

funding for Northern Trappers Association and their 

co-operative, keeping the industry from thriving. 

 

To the minister: why is this government trying to destroy this 

centuries-old industry in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the member for his question, and I look forward 

to discussing this further with the representatives from the 

trappers association, the Northern Trappers Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this budget, in the ’11-12 budget, the Ministry 

of Environment continues to provide dollars for trapping 

education, for new . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would expect that members 

would allow the minister to respond so at least the members in 

the gallery would have an opportunity to hear the response. I 

recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

I was saying, in this budget, the ’11-12 budget, the Ministry of 

Environment will continue to provide dollars for the northern 



7306 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

trapping association, for trapper education for new trappers. As 

well, Mr. Speaker, we will provide it based on the association 

holding training workshops. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a very valuable 

organization in this province, Mr. Speaker, as are all trappers in 

the province, and that is why we have eliminated the fur 

royalties that trappers pay in the province of the Saskatchewan 

to the treasury. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they had 

to come here to Regina to lobby. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the 

trapping industry in northern Saskatchewan could be thriving 

right now. Aboriginal unemployment in Saskatchewan is 

extremely high, and expert Eric Howe has said that this 

government is directly, directly at fault. 

 

To the minister: at a time when unemployment of Aboriginal 

people in Saskatchewan is alarmingly high, why won’t this 

government do something to assist the industry that could 

provide solid employment for many of Saskatchewan 

Aboriginal people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, we know that this is a valuable industry 

in our province, and it is one that has not only built this 

province but built this country, Mr. Speaker. And we know that 

work needs to be done to ensure that it continues beyond future 

generations. 

 

That’s why we are providing in this budget additional funding, 

continuing to provide funding for workshops that are put on by 

the Northern Trappers Association to encourage young 

trappers, new trappers to take up the craft. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There’s three or four 

members on the backbench of the opposition that are making it 

difficult for the rest to hear the response. I recognize the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have taken 

the step in this budget year to eliminate all royalties that 

trappers will pay to the treasury, thereby keeping more dollars 

in their pockets. Mr. Speaker, we know that prices are low, and 

so this will help them keep money in their own pockets. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve taken the step when it 

comes to traditional resource use cabins which many trappers 

use in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they used to pay an 

annual permit and have a one-year lease, a year-to-year lease. 

That’s why we’ve extended that to a 21-year lease so that to 

give them more stability as they continue to trap in the 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Trapping in northern Saskatchewan is not 

just a business; it’s a way of life. Currently many Aboriginal 

youth find themselves at risk. At the same time, the customs, 

the traditions of Saskatchewan Aboriginal people are at risk of 

being lost forever. 

 

Recently the northern trappers proposed to the government a 

plan that would have taught trapping to at-risk youth, keeping 

them out of trouble, teaching them good skills, and passing on 

the cultural traditions. Instead of supporting this plan, the 

government rejected it right out, losing a great opportunity to 

help young people and Aboriginal culture. 

 

To the minister: why is this government not ensuring a better 

life for northern people by supporting their good ideas? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, we are providing dollars for the 

association to hold training workshops to encourage young 

people to take up trapping in their futures, Mr. Speaker. Those 

dollars still exist. As well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we are also 

extending the lease, is a year-to-year lease for northern trappers 

that have traditional resource use cabins, Mr. Speaker, we are 

extending that to a 21-year lease, Mr. Speaker, to give them 

more stability and provide more certainty for their operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that this an important industry in our 

province, and I’m looking forward to meeting with these 

individuals once again today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’re here. 

Very clearly they’ve got concerns, and here’s what they want to 

know today. To the minister: with members of the industry here 

in the gallery, will the minister agree to immediately reinstate 

the trappers association funding that was withdrawn? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to correct the member. The funding wasn’t withdrawn. 

The contract expired at the end of the 2009-2010 budget year, 

Mr. Speaker. While that contract did expire, we kept in place 

the dollars that would allow the trappers . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, while that contract 

expired, we did keep the funding in place for the association to 

run workshops to bring in new people into the industry, Mr. 

Speaker. As well we took the unprecedented step in this budget 

year to eliminate all royalties paid by trappers in the province, 

thereby keeping more dollars in their pockets rather than going 

to the treasury. 

 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7307 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Funding for National School of Dental Therapy 

 

Mr. Furber: — I’m pleased at the reception, Mr. Speaker, but 

I’m not sure the members opposite will be. The National School 

of Dental Therapy is in Prince Albert, and it’s about four blocks 

from where I grew up. There are people in the gallery today 

who are here to explain to the government the importance of the 

program both to the city and to the region. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this program has done field clinics of dental 

therapy in Stanley Mission and Hatchet Lake just this year. And 

while it was originally funded by the federal government, the 

federal government has withdrawn the education portion of the 

funding for the program. Now the Saskatchewan Party 

government has an opportunity to fund the program and they’ve 

backed away from their responsibility to do so. 

 

So my question to the minister is simple: will he commit to 

finding the money today to keep the National School of Dental 

Therapy open in Prince Albert, doing the good work that it’s 

doing, or will he allow this valuable institution to perish? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the National School of Dental Therapy has been 

funded by the federal government for nearly 30 years, and, Mr. 

Speaker, undoubtedly it has done valuable work. Mr. Speaker, 

there have been a number of efforts that have been ongoing 

over the course of the last year. These have included working 

with Mayor Scarrow, obviously, in Prince Albert. We’ve also 

had interventions made from Chief Guy Lonechild as well as 

Vice-chief Lerat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we know, Mr. Speaker, is that there have been no federal 

dollars committed to sustaining this program, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition, Mr. Speaker, what we have done is we have then 

consulted other jurisdictions because the students come from a 

variety of jurisdictions right across the country, and we have 

had no pickup, no interest, Mr. Speaker, as far as shared 

funding. We have then gone back to the federal government; 

we’ve asked about transitional funding. The answer again has 

been no, Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, what we continue 

to do is encourage our partners to continue to press the federal 

government — as we do, Mr. Speaker — to sustain the funding 

for this federal program. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is wrong on 

this as he’s wrong on so many things. The federal government 

has offered a portion of the funding to the provincial 

government in order to keep the program going. Why doesn’t 

he know that is beyond me, Mr. Speaker. 

Not only is the National School of Dental Therapy an important 

educational institution; it’s also vital to health outcomes for 

people in central and northern Saskatchewan. Dana King, an 

instructor at the school, wrote, “Our school has provided dental 

care free of charge to several community schools, young adults 

just entering the workforce, and elderly patients who cannot 

afford private dental care. We have over 3,000 active patient 

charts and a long waiting list.” 

 

Dental health is obviously important for the individuals of 

Saskatchewan in their overall health, and that can’t be forgotten 

in the questions today and the answers today, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

told that not funding this program will actually cost the 

taxpayers more for worse health outcomes in the same way that 

chiropractic care did. 

 

So my question to the minister is simply this: will he and is he 

willing to put at risk and why is he willing to put at risk the 

health of Saskatchewan people, the health of so many 

Saskatchewan people, and why won’t he do something to save 

the National School of Dental Therapy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Again I’ll reiterate: this is a national program, Mr. Speaker; it’s 

been funded for nearly 30 years. Mr. Speaker, importantly what 

we have are students from right across the country. We have 

those, including those from other countries. We have those 

from New Brunswick, from Quebec, from British Columbia, 

from Ontario, from Newfoundland, from Nunavut, from the 

Yukon, Northwest Territories, from Alberta and Manitoba as 

well as Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In addition to pressing the federal government to continue its 

funding, Mr. Speaker — and we’ve done that, not unilaterally, 

but we’ve done that with the mayor of Prince Albert and we’ve 

done that in co-operation with Chief Lonechild and others, Mr. 

Speaker — we have also canvassed and invited other 

jurisdictions, other provincial and territorial jurisdictions to 

come forward, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to date there has been 

no uptake in this. 

 

This is a federal program, Mr. Speaker. We encouraged the 

federal government and continue to encourage, Mr. Speaker, 

these federal dollars to be sustained within the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. At the end, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

federal initiative; it has been. And we continue to press the 

federal government to maintain its investment in the students of 

this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I hope at some point this member’s blame 

thrower runs out of gas because it’s getting to be a sad story in 

Saskatchewan where all he does in this Assembly is blame 

somebody else for the problems that fall on his doorstep. Now 

he can try, the member can try all he wants to fob this off on the 

federal government, but he has a responsibility. 

 

Education of Saskatchewan students is a provincial 



7308 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

responsibility. The federal government is willing to put in a 

portion not related to the education of Saskatchewan students. 

But instead here we have today again a government whose 

priorities are misaligned with the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The minister was able to funnel $9 million into a private college 

for a failed merger attempt, and he found another $400,000 to 

pay accountants to look into the mess of that failed merger. And 

he claims he doesn’t have enough money to fund this vital 

program. Now, Mr. Speaker, why is spending nine and a half 

million dollars on projects involving private schools a higher 

priority for this government than keeping alive the National 

School of Dental Therapy, a one-of-a-kind institution in the 

province of Saskatchewan in the city of Prince Albert? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has a 

very curious line of questioning. That is, he’s making reference 

to the knowledge infrastructure program, which was a federal 

initiative, Mr. Speaker. So what we know is there were more 

than $117 million invested . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the 

knowledge infrastructure program. It offered benefits to about 

21 different projects, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what we hear 

now is, no, the federal government shouldn’t be involved. Mr. 

Speaker, the very reference is, the federal government needs to 

be involved, has been involved for 30 years, Mr. Speaker, is 

involved in a number of initiatives across this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We continue to press forward, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that those 

federal dollars continue to come into this program, Mr. 

Speaker. We do this in conjunction, in co-operation with the 

mayor of Prince Albert and with Chief Guy Lonechild and 

others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — We do this, Mr. Speaker, because there 

are fiduciary responsibilities that the federal government has, 

Mr. Speaker. As we go through, knowing that there are students 

from New Brunswick, Quebec, British Columbia, Ontario, 

Newfoundland, Nunavut, the Yukon, Northwest Territories, as 

well as the Prairie provinces, Mr. Speaker, the voice is clear. 

The federal government ought to maintain its funding for this 

initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Response to Flooding 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for 

the Minister of Corrections, Policing and Public Safety. Mr. 

Speaker, tension and anxiety levels are running as high as the 

water levels in the province. Municipalities and communities 

across the province are bracing for a disaster. Cowessess First 

Nation’s declared a state of emergency and have evacuated 150 

people. Radville, Laurier, Estevan, Abernethy, and most 

recently Lumsden have declared states of emergency and are 

preparing to evacuate families. 

 

To the minister: is there a plan to put emergency services 

personnel in place to help with evacuations and flooding 

preparations, and if there is, when will the minister be putting it 

into action? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, last year was an unprecedented 

year for rains and flooding in this province, as we all know. 

This year it’s starting very much again. 

 

I think the member opposite should realize that our government 

put in $22 million in mitigation funds — unprecedented in the 

province’s history to put in $22 million for mitigation. Mr. 

Speaker, that mitigation funding has been out to the 

communities that have applied for it. 

 

We have gone forward from CPSP — which is Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, for the member opposite — we 

have put money together to have mobile trailers where we can 

take equipment. Our trailers are equipped with pumps, 

generators, sandbags, sandbagging equipment. We have, we 

have tubes that we can use to fill with water to mitigate 

flooding. Mr. Speaker, this has been unprecedented in the 

province’s history. And we’re very proud at the way we’re 

going, and we know that this mitigation money will go a long 

way to slowing down the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance 

program] response later on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has my sincere 

apologies for misnaming his ministry. I assure the minister, 

through you, Mr. Speaker, that it was unintentional. 

 

The money that the government has set aside for flooding is 

clearly nowhere near enough to help families and municipalities 

get through what they are going to be going through this spring 

and summer. Municipalities and communities have spent 

hundreds of thousands of dollars last year repairing flooded 

roads, bridges, and culverts. 

 

Businesses were damaged, and almost 10 million acres of farm 

land were flooded. Hundreds of families were displaced from 

their homes. Many of these families are still waiting for their 

claims to be settled. The cost to RMs [rural municipality], 

communities, and families is going to be in the millions of 

dollars. The municipality of Three Lakes says it could cost 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7309 

them over $10 million alone over the next couple of years. 

 

To the minister: will the government provide the funds actually 

needed to help Saskatchewan families and communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 

the member for his question. I also . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would . . . Order. I 

would hope, I would hope the members would like to have or 

hear the response, or the member who presented it would like 

the hear the response. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank the minister and his officials for the 

unprecedented improvements to the provincial disaster 

assistance program. We’ve reduced the deductibles down to 5 

per cent, Mr. Speaker. The minister has increased the values for 

which people can be compensated and added resources so the 

program can actually deliver help immediately after an incident, 

at least interim assistance, $22 million for mitigation for this 

year’s flood as a result of the ministry’s leadership. 

 

And I can tell the House . . . This is important if members are 

interested. I can tell, I can tell members of this House that 

earlier this day I had a discussion with the minister. The 

minister has been carefully inventorying the money that’s 

available and the money that’s needed. He has indicated to us 

that more resources may well be . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask 

members to allow the Premier to respond to the question from 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure members 

opposite: for communities that are facing a flood, this isn’t a 

joke. It’s not a laughing matter. I can also tell members of this 

House that the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing has already identified the need probably for more 

resources on top of the unprecedented $22 million we’ve 

already set aside for flood mitigation. 

 

We had said as a government to that minister and to his team, 

just get the job done. Work with First Nations. Work with all 

the ministries of government. Work with municipalities. Get the 

materials we need, the new sandbagging equipment, the new 

water dikes, Mr. Speaker, the new structures that are in place, 

literally saving communities like my hometown. We’ve said to 

them, get that job done. We’ll do the accounting later. We have 

$700 million in our rainy day account. It’s wet in the province 

today. We are going to be there for the people of Saskatchewan 

right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

[Interjections] 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

members to come to order so we can hear the calling out of 

introduction of Bills. Order. I believe the minister has a 

ministerial statement. I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Creation of New Provincial Parks 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

the House today to bring you and the members of this 

Assembly some exciting news about Saskatchewan’s parks. 

 

On Friday my ministry announced that we are beginning 

consultations regarding the creation of two new provincial 

parks. One of the proposed parks is north of Prince Albert and 

includes the existing Emma Lake and Anglin Lake recreation 

sites, as well as some adjacent Crown land. Now the second 

proposed location is south of Hudson Bay. It includes the 

McBride Lake, Pepaw Lake, Parr Hill Lake, and Saginas Lake 

areas, the Woody River recreation site, and some adjacent 

Crown land as well. 

 

These particular areas were selected because they have great 

potential to protect important environmental assets and to 

enhance outdoor recreation opportunities in our beautiful 

province. Mr. Speaker, the consultations are getting under way 

now, and the first open houses are scheduled in May. 

 

Our government is committed to adding more parks to our 

provincial park system, but it is important to note that we’ll 

approach this goal with all proper consideration and 

consultation with involved parties. Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport will consult with the public and other stakeholders 

including municipal governments, tourism operators, outfitters, 

and other local businesses. We will talk to First Nations and 

Métis communities, property owners, the provincial and 

regional organizations such as Tourism Saskatchewan. 

 

The ministry will be looking for feedback on the proposed park 

boundaries, on current uses of the proposed park area, future 

infrastructure recommendations, and possible future recreation 

opportunities. The proposed new parks will help protect 

important environmental assets and improve outdoor recreation 

opportunities for Saskatchewan citizens and visitors alike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our provincial parks play a major role in 

conserving Saskatchewan’s ecosystems. They also contribute to 

economic development in nearby communities and help create 

jobs. Adding new provincial parks is part of our commitment to 

enhance our already enviable quality of life and to keep 

Saskatchewan moving forward on the road ahead. The ministry 

hopes to have a decision regarding the proposed new parks by 

the fall of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to inform the 

Assembly of the upcoming consultations. I look forward to 

updating members at a later date on the outcome of this 

important process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, thank 



7310 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

you to the minister for sending over a copy of his remarks 

shortly after 1. I appreciated that. 

 

It’s always good to hear, Mr. Speaker, when the government is 

looking at further protecting our rich environmental assets. 

We’ve got many here in this province and much to be proud of, 

whether it’s the Grasslands National Park, all the way up to 

Lake Athabasca and the sand dunes. 

 

So my first question would be, why these two specific areas? 

And I know the minister mentioned the opportunity for 

protecting the environment and also increased recreational 

opportunities. But what has been the government’s way of 

deciding, why these areas over other areas like the Churchill 

River basin, for example? So why these two areas over 

something like the Churchill River basin? 

 

[15:00] 

 

I know from first-hand experience that the area, Emma Lake 

and Anglin recreational sites are incredibly highly utilized. I 

actually have two brothers who have cabins at Emma Lake, so I 

know there will be much public interest in this consultation 

process. 

 

Establishing a new provincial park is about striking the balance 

between creating opportunities for residents and visitors to 

enjoy our wonderful natural assets while learning about and 

developing a strong appreciation for those natural assets, all the 

while ensuring our delicate ecosystems are kept in healthy 

balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know from first-hand experience too that it’s great to get 

people out to some of these special and pristine areas. Because 

when we see something first-hand, we can read about it in a 

book or see about it on a TV show, but when you experience it, 

you tend to have a greater appreciation and say, yes that is 

something we really need to foster and preserve. 

 

So this opposition welcomes this move to developing two new 

provincial parks. But I would be remiss if I didn’t point out in 

the minister’s remarks that he says these sites have been 

selected because they have “great potential to protect important 

environmental assets.” 

 

So this is the government that removed 3 million acres from 

protection last year. All the while not only did they remove 

these 3 million acres, sensitive acres, from protection but they 

had a terrible consultation process. 

 

So the minister here talks about consultations. He’s beginning 

consultations on this process to determine the next two 

provincial parks. So the opposition will be working hard to 

ensure that this is a fulsome process and that the government 

makes a genuine effort to hear from all those, including the 

general public and stakeholder organizations that will be 

impacted by this. My colleagues and I will be working very 

hard to ensure that these voices who need to be heard are heard 

in this government process. 

 

I also want to point out too that as we welcome a new 

provincial park, it’s important for the government to ensure that 

it’s managing what it already has. For example this government 

last year had a report on Blackstrap Provincial Park that 

wrapped up last summer, but we’ve yet to see the 

recommendations on that provincial park. So I’d encourage this 

government, yes it’s important to establish new provincial 

parks, but it’s equally important to maintain and enhance what 

we already have. 

 

So again the opposition supports this move to add two 

provincial parks. We question why these two areas in particular 

are the focus. And we want to encourage the government to do 

real and meaningful consultation with all who need to have a 

voice in this process and ensure that all those who want to 

participate in consultations do. We’ll be working hard to make 

sure that happens. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 170 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 170, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 170, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 171 — The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 171, 

The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill 171, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7311 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 625 — The Saskatchewan Respectful Language Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 625, The 

Saskatchewan Respectful Language Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 625, The Saskatchewan 

Respectful Language Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call orders of the day, I lay on the 

Table the report of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

on the 2010 financial statements of CIC, Crown corps and 

related entities, section 14(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 

I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought there 

for a moment I got a promotion. Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I wonder if I could move a motion of transmittal of 

the words spoken by the Premier and myself earlier. 

 

The Speaker: — The opposition leader has asked for leave to 

move a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Motion of Transmittal 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

That not withstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes together with 

Hansard transcript be communicated in memory of the 

former Premier Allan Blakeney to the bereaved families 

on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 

Opposition that by leave of this Assembly: 

 

That not withstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes together with 

Hansard transcript be communicated in memory of the 

former Premier Allan Blakeney to the bereaved families 

on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview on his feet? 

 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 

Bill No. 622 — The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would ask that Bill 

No. 622, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be 

withdrawn from the order paper. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to withdraw 

Bill 622. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The Bill that is Bill 

No. 622 has been withdrawn from the order paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 164 — The 

Police Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

briefly address Bill No. 164, An Act to amend The Police Act, 

1990. As would it become apparent from the second reading 



7312 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

debate and the remarks of a number of my colleagues, the 

opposition had, if not a concern, at least a question arising from 

the proposed Bill. And that is a question that I took to the police 

associations and the Saskatchewan police federation, and that 

was the section that on the face of it would allow municipalities 

with cabinet approval to move from a municipal police force to 

the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been provided with a draft of a 

proposed amendment, which I won’t go into. The government 

is seeking to clarify that the municipalities currently having 

municipal police forces are grandfathered and that the section 

now would apply to municipalities currently receiving services 

through contract with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and 

desiring to maintain those services even after growing to a 

certain population, which may or may not have been the intent 

of the government originally, but certainly addresses a 

significant question that the Bill as originally drafted proposed. 

 

And although I appreciate that sometimes the words due 

diligence and consultation when spoken by members of the 

opposition on Bill after Bill after Bill start to take on sort of the 

ring of the wine-dark sea in Odysseus — just a phrase that is 

used without much thought and as a descriptor of our general 

approach to legislation of the government and to our role as 

opposition. But here is certainly a case where I believe 

diligence on the part of the opposition and consultation with 

those affected or potentially affected by the changes has 

resulted in certainly a different or will result certainly in a 

different Bill than the one that was put forward by the minister 

in the legislature in the first instance. 

 

I think that the Bill, even with the amendment that I expect that 

we will see in committee, still raises some questions as to the 

reasons behind the desired change, prospective change, if I can 

use that term, Mr. Speaker. But those are questions now that I 

think can be addressed in committee, and we will allow it to 

proceed to that stage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Corrections, Policing and Public 

Safety that Bill No. 164, The Police Amendment Act, 2011 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 169 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 169 — The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to briefly 

address Bill 169, the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission. There was a brief discussion in estimates, as a 

matter of fact, on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and whether cost 

drivers were at all involved in the changes being proposed in 

The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act. I 

believe the minister said no, but I expect the same question 

might arise in committee. 

 

This is a small reorganization of government, Mr. Speaker. We 

have now reached a stage once this Bill is enacted, if it indeed it 

is enacted and proclaimed, we will have reached the stage 

where once was the Department of Consumer Affairs, and had 

as part of that department a financial services responsibility for 

insurance and pensions and securities trading in the province, 

we will have now reached the stage where there will be, if this 

becomes law, Mr. Speaker, where the Financial Services 

Commission will have as part of its responsibilities the 

consumer protection legislation that would formerly have been 

administered by an entire department but later subsumed by the 

Ministry of Justice and now by the Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission. 

 

I suppose, Mr. Speaker, and to a certain extent it reflects the 

changing nature of our society, the complexity around 

retirement and . . . [inaudible] . . . issues and the relatively, 

relatively simpler issues around consumer protection and 

warranty that this development would have taken place over the 

last number of decades. 

 

It is a matter of government reorganization. It isn’t even a 

matter of reorganization of departments, but of responsibilities 

within the ministry. And I guess I should say that guardedly 

too, Mr. Speaker, because inherent within the legislation and I 

think within the minister’s and the government’s intention is a 

more independent, stand-alone Financial Services Commission, 

more distinctly independent from the Ministry of Justice. And 

the desirability of that and the actual accomplishment and 

progress towards that, I suppose, will also be a matter of 

discussion within the committee as well as will be issues 

surrounding the Financial Services Commission, particularly 

some cases that are now before our highest court in respect to 

securities regulation. 

 

So all that is heavy work but more a matter of discussion, I 

think, than debate. So again, as with the previous Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, we would allow this now to proceed to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7313 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 169, The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 

2011 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to be able to enter into the discussion and debate 

regarding the amendments that the government has introduced 

to The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. I have some 

observations that I hope the government will take into account 

when they decide to implement this legislation. 

 

Fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation that the 

government has introduced into the House allows for, it allows 

that the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation can purchase 

assets which are to benefit the rail industry, and they can 

provide financial assistance to railways for acquisitions of 

assets, Mr. Speaker. Now this is a government that said that 

they weren’t going to take us back to the past, that they were 

going to be fiscally responsible, and that they were going to be 

wise managers of the public purse. But there’s a couple of 

observations. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that just agreed 

through order in council and in the budget to loan guarantee 

immigrant investor funds in the province to the sum of over 230 

million. They have an order in council. And that money that 

they’re loan guaranteeing is going to be lent to the real estate 

industry or the housing developer industry in the province. 

That’s a problem because what we’re doing is, we’re going 

back to the past. 

 

Because if you look at Donald Gass and his report in . . . When 

we came to government in the early 1990s, he suggested that 

this was not a prudent way to proceed. And now we have a Bill 

that the Sask Party has entered in to this House where they are 

going to, according to the Bill that they have put in to this 

House, they are going to start to provide loan guarantees to the 

rail industry in the province of Saskatchewan. And that is 

problematic. And I want to read it into the record. What they 

are going to do is: 

 

provide financial assistance by way of grant, loan, 

guarantee or other similar means to persons for the purpose 

of allowing those persons to acquire railway rolling stock, 

plant, equipment, or other assets that will benefit the rail 

industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are now moving back to the past. And I 

would remind the members opposite that in 1991, under the 

recommendations from Donald Gass, we wrote off $36 million 

in debt that had been accrued by the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation. And my colleagues have talked about the history 

of the Grain Car Corporation. It was not unlike Alberta did, 

Manitoba, as well as the Government of Canada, to get enough 

cars on the track to get grain to market. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned, or I certainly am 

concerned, that we’re going, we’re moving back to the past 

where an NDP government will take over at some date in the 

future and will once again have to write off a bunch of debt 

that’s been accumulated by the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation because this government just can’t stay away — 

and I’m talking about conservative governments — just can’t 

stay way from loan guarantees, grants, and so on and so forth. 

So we’re going to be watching this very, very carefully, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I said earlier, what this legislation allows the government to 

do is to provide financial assistance to railways to acquire 

assets. It also allows the government to purchase assets for the 

benefit of the rail industry — not for the benefit of 

Saskatchewan citizens but for benefits of the rail industry — 

which really does send a sharp signal to farmers who have 

relied upon these assets to get their grain to Vancouver or to 

Thunder Bay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would say to the members opposite that this legislation 

appears to take us back to the past. It appears as though the 

government is now moving in a direction that we fought hard to 

eliminate in the 1990s, where loan guarantees were provided to, 

you know, who knows who. And what ended up happening is 

this province had a debt of over $15 billion that we have slowly 

and carefully whittled away at reducing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be interested to see what the 

minister of transportation has to say about this in committee. It 

is an interesting set of amendments to the legislation. It’s quite 

clear that the government is going to use this Grain Car 

Corporation that returns about $1 million a year to the people of 

the province, but they’re going to use the Grain Car 

Corporation to start handing out loans and grants to heaven 

knows who. And this is simply taking us back to where we 

were in 1991. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 



7314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 167. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask members if, in responses to the 

questions, to speak up so the Speaker can hear. It’s been agreed. 

Carried. 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 168 — The 

Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the discussion on Bill No. 168, An Act to 

amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is not especially long in its length, but it 

does, Mr. Speaker, have some great relevance because of the 

matter that it deals with. And that has to do, Mr. Speaker, with 

the benefits that are paid to teachers in our province. As 

members would know, the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation] bargains with the provincial government as well as 

with the members of the SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association] to establish a contract. And this occurs on a 

regular basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this ensures, through the bargaining process, that 

teachers in our province who do such important work in 

educating our young people and instilling the values that are so 

very important in a healthy democracy, this bargaining ensures 

that those teachers are properly paid and recognized for the 

important work that they do do in our province for all 

Saskatchewan people. And I think that’s a very important thing 

to remember whenever we’re talking about the benefits that 

teachers receive here in Saskatchewan. 

 

In reading the minister’s second reading speech, it would 

appear, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation has been 

brought in in order to address an oversight that occurred with 

the last bargaining agreement that occurred in 2007, and that 

agreement received Royal Assent on May 14th, 2008. So this 

piece of legislation is being put in place now, Mr. Speaker, to 

address a shortcoming or an oversight that occurred a few years 

back. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s an appropriate and an 

important thing to do. When there are changes that occur or 

where there are agreements that are reached, it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, that the correct legislation that needs to be in place in 

order to address those changes and respond to those changes, 

it’s important to ensure that that legislation is in fact in order 

and everything is above board and is moving along as it ought 

to. 

 

In this situation, Mr. Speaker, it was recognized that there were 

some changes that needed to occur. So this piece of legislation 

is making those changes in order to ensure that the bargained 

agreement that was agreed to by both sides is in fact fully in 

order and everything, from a legal perspective, from a 

legislative perspective is proper. And I think that’s a good thing 

to do, and it’s an appropriate thing to do. 

 

I do read in the minister’s second reading speech that any of the 

financial responsibilities that the government had in relation to 

the previous agreement, I read that those financial 

responsibilities and obligations have been met on an ongoing 

basis. And that’s an appropriate and a good thing as well. And 

what this piece of legislation is doing is ensuring that, from a 

legislative perspective, everything is in order. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is more of a housekeeping 

matter in order to ensure that the legislation is in place to 

respond to the previous agreement. It’s also important to note, 

Mr. Speaker, that bargaining for the next agreement, as the 

previous one has expired which we’re now passing legislation 

for, bargaining for the next agreement right now is not going so 

well, that negotiations have broken down, and as I understand 

it, Mr. Speaker, the teachers in this province have taken a strike 

vote. 

 

And so I think, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that in this next 

round of bargaining that is not going so well right now but 

needs to occur, I would hope that the ministry, and through the 

minister’s oversight, that the correct steps would be taken in 

this next round so that if there is an oversight, if there is an 

error in something that needs to be changed and hasn’t been, 

that that would be dealt with in a timely manner so we wouldn’t 

be placed in a situation where retroactively we have to correct a 

mistake that occurred or an oversight that was made. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s been a few speakers 

who’ve had the chance to speak to this, and the individuals who 

have spoken have identified that this does appear to be a piece 

of legislation that is retroactively correcting something that was 

missed out. I think that’s a proper thing to do. I’m glad that the 

oversight has been caught. And my hope would be, Mr. 

Speaker, that as the ministry moves forward with this next 

round of bargaining, that such oversights would not occur so 

that we do not have to retroactively introduce legislation to 

address an agreement that is already expired. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would thank members for the 

time to speak to this piece of legislation, and the opposition at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, would be happy to move this Bill to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Education that Bill No. 168, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7315 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee does the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and add comments to the Bill before the House, 

No. 155, The Natural Resources Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been an interesting process to go through this 

Act and have a look at the changes that are being proposed. 

And I think when many people would have a look at it, they 

may just kind of shrug their shoulders and say, well it looks 

pretty mild, not a lot of drastic changes. But, Mr. Speaker, it 

needs to have some scrutiny for a number of reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think first and foremost, I don’t think there’s 

anyone in this House that doesn’t recognize the value of 

hunting and fishing, outfitting, and many of the wildlife 

organizations and nature organizations that are very active in 

this province. Hunting and fishing alone is estimated to have a 

$100 million economic impact on our province. And for some 

people that may be a bit of a surprise, Mr. Speaker. But all you 

have to do is go to an airport in Regina or Saskatoon at the 

beginning of fishing season or hunting season, and you will see 

an amazing number of people who have come to our province, 

many from quite a ways away, to partake in either hunting or 

fishing activities in this province. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Saskatchewan is well-known for the hunting and fishing 

opportunities, and we need to make sure that that is able to 

continue and move forward. And I guess there’s a number of 

questions as to what the impacts from this Bill will be as we go 

forward and in the years ahead. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, the 

Bill appears to be pretty minor in the changes that it makes. 

 

And I think one thing that we have to do is question about the 

potential implications of the changes that are proposed to the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, and in particular the role 

played by the advisory council. So, Mr. Speaker, when we look 

at the Bill itself and the explanatory notes that go along with it, 

Mr. Speaker, we see that some of the definitions are changing. 

And really it’s just bringing in line and removing department, 

any reference to department, and putting in place ministry, 

which is basically considered housekeeping, Mr. Speaker. And 

that goes on through a number of clauses. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is also a number of pages — and I have 

to find my spot here, Mr. Speaker, I apologize. Besides the 

housekeeping that takes place, Mr. Speaker, there is a new 

clause in the initial section that officially identifies the current 

steering committee for the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund as the fish and wildlife development advisory council. So 

the steering committee is now turning into an advisory council, 

which as it says in the explanatory notes, it will raise “. . . the 

profile and importance of the steering committee in providing 

advice to the government.” And, Mr. Speaker, when I read the 

legislation itself, it seems to go quite a ways beyond providing 

advice to the government, in fact that this advisory council will 

take over responsibility for the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this fund has been put in place, I believe it 

was in the 1970s. And I think it’s estimated that about 30 per 

cent of hunting and fishing licences go towards this fund, the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. And I think the last 

amount that I’ve seen in a budget, it runs about three, three and 

a half million dollars annually. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure whether it’s the habitat 

certificates that are purchased with hunting and fishing licence 

that contribute to this or whether it is across the board all of 

each of the individual hunting licence and fishing licences. But, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a substantial amount of money, and it was 

begun to be able to promote programs and have a pool of 

money that could be used in the area to really maintain the 

opportunities here in the province for hunting, angling, and 

trapping licences and make sure that those are viable into the 

future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do know that over the years there has been a 

number of programs that have been devolved out of the Fish 

and Wildlife fund to, say, different organizations like the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation — they do a number of fish 

projects — and there are others that have been moved out under 

the jurisdiction of the government and the ministry, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And when I look at many of these projects, while they’ve been 

very successful, we have to I think take into consideration 

where does the responsibility start and end of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, and who provides an overarching view and 

connect to all of the other government ministries. And, Mr. 

Speaker, without a doubt, when we look at wildlife habitat or 

the fish and game fund, Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that it isn’t done in isolation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, ever since this government’s been elected, 

they have talked about a new way of doing things and making 

sure that the government doesn’t operate in silos. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn’t a new idea. Previous governments have 

worked towards interdepartmental co-operation and making 

sure that various programs are coordinated through departments 

and across government instead of just operating within their 

silos. And, Mr. Speaker, I know various government members 



7316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

have spoken on this topic ever since this session of the 

legislature and since they’ve been elected government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So now we see this Fish and Wildlife Development Fund being 

hived off and moved out, separate from government, from 

government oversight. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need to 

question, I don’t think, the financial accountability of the 

process. But what does seem unusual is that here we are hiving 

off and keeping compartmentalized, separate, individual 

initiatives. 

 

And I would question, Mr. Speaker, if there isn’t an issue and a 

good rationale for having the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund still connected, still integrated into government to ensure 

that programs are in fact integrated and we are looking at the 

big picture. So I guess my main question is, where does 

responsibility for this fund begin and end with this new piece of 

legislation? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do know also that organizations like the 

Wildlife Federation have lobbied for not necessarily greater 

access to the fund but a better use of the fund to be able to 

support other projects and to be able to augment the programs 

that are already being done by a variety of wildlife organization 

and nature organizations across the province. So you know, 

there’s always that balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I still question where does the responsibility of the 

government end or where does it start? Where does it end? And 

who provides kind of the integration to the broader view that 

should be taken provincially when we are talking about whether 

it’s wildlife lands or the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

or any number of other operations, organizations, initiatives 

that are out there and have been put in place over the years?  

 

Mr. Speaker, they aren’t put in place just for the fun of it, to 

create more paperwork and to create more work for someone, 

Mr. Speaker, or to charge hunters and fishermen more money 

on their licence or to take a portion of that money. Mr. Speaker, 

they’re always . . . They have been set up for a reason, a reason 

that was important enough for the government in the 1970s to 

decide that this needed to be done and that the funding needed 

to be designated in certain areas. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have to ask, well why is this government so 

bound and determined to move a number of these operations 

outside of government to advisory committees or independent 

panels? You know, you kind of wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it’s just 

to reach their goal of reducing the civil service by the 4 per cent 

per year. They’re not actually reducing any jobs; they are just 

moving them outside of government proper so that they aren’t 

counted in FTEs [full-time equivalent] for the government. 

Could be part of that, Mr. Speaker, but no. Some people may 

call me a bit of a cynic looking for what may be wrong with 

this legislation instead of solely looking at what’s right about it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s any criticism of the 

organizations that receive support through the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund. They do some very valuable work in the 

terms of retaining fish and wildlife habitat. And this is work 

that they have done for many years, as I’ve said, and I know we 

in the opposition support that work. However, we are concerned 

about the implications of the government’s decision to expand 

the scope of activities funded and that the Fish and Wildlife, 

while it receives as I said a portion of proceeds from every 

fishing and hunting licence, the amount of money in the fund is 

dependent upon the level of angling and hunting activity in the 

province. 

 

Now some people may say that, well that will never go down, 

so we never have to worry about the amount of money that’s in 

the fund. But, Mr. Speaker, I do know for a fact that there have 

been some major changes in this sector, not necessarily 

provincial changes but there has been major changes. 

 

And I guess the first one that comes to mind is I think we saw a 

drastic reduction in bird and waterfowl hunting when the 

changes were made to stainless steel shot — going from a lead 

shot to a stainless steel shot in shotgun shells. Mr. Speaker, that 

was done a number of years ago, and I know many of the 

hunters that I know quit at that point in time. They just said it 

was too expensive. By the time you paid for your gas, you 

bought your licences, you bought shells with the stainless steel 

shot, it increased the price substantially. It may be — and I’m 

sure it is, Mr. Speaker — more environmentally sound not 

putting lead pellets all over the environment, but it did raise the 

cost considerably. And for many people what was a hobby and 

a passion, they actually stepped back from it because it had just 

got to be one more thing, one more cost that was associated 

with spending a day out hunting that just kind of put . . . It was 

the tipping point, Mr. Speaker, for many people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, another issue I think that’s been kind of 

front and centre, and maybe this is why last year when The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was changed with the millions 

of acres across the province being . . . changing designation, 

possibility of changing designation, Mr. Speaker, and some of 

that land — we’re not sure how much — being offered for sale 

to producers across the province. Mr. Speaker, many people 

rely on wildlife habitat lands for hunting in the fall. Many 

people have again stepped back from hunting because in some 

areas — and, Mr. Speaker, I know there are all kinds of reasons 

why it could have happened — that there is posted land. So if 

you can’t hunt or you’re very restricted where you can hunt, 

that also been cause for many hunters to step back from 

pursuing this hobby or sport that they have done, many for all 

of their lives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at more changes coming in this 

piece of legislation, we have to ask, what do they do? What 

impact will they have? And will it be an improvement for the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, or will it be a step 

backwards? And that’s what we need to know. So, Mr. Speaker, 

we know the funding can change because if it is solely funded 

by the 30 per cent of hunting and fishing licences, there are 

things that can affect the amount of licences that are sold and 

what kind of an uptake there is on the licences that are offered, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s not a guaranteed amount of money. I’m 

sure it’s been fairly stable over the years, but it’s in no way 

guaranteed, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so that’s also a concern; 

how the fund is used, how it will be designated. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, looking through part of the explanatory 

notes, there was another area that raised a number of concerns, 

and it has to do with section 21 . . . no, 22(6), and I believe it is 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7317 

(b), (d), (e), and (h) that were changed. And it designates what 

the minister may use the assets of the fund for. Mr. Speaker, so 

while there is some very specific issues that the fund can be 

used from, in the new legislation there is an expansion, and it 

says quite clearly in the explanatory notes that: 

 

Amendments to this section broaden the scope of 

activities that are covered under the Fund to include 

restoration of fish or game populations or habitat 

necessary for fish or game species. 

 

But also: 

 

The amendments to this section also include the addition 

of two new subsections to allow the Fund and the 

Advisory Council to contract services that are deemed 

necessary for the management of the Fund. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure when they talk about the 

management of the fund whether it’s management, financial 

management of the fund, or whether it is contracting services 

that currently, Mr. Speaker, the government in effect has 

contracted with the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation to do a 

number of fish projects or other projects that are out there. So 

now we are moving it one step farther away from government. 

And it says: 

 

These services could include contracting expertise from 

groups such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Nature Conservancy of Canada or Ducks Unlimited 

Canada for management of land within the Fund. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a little more clarity is needed when we look at 

the changes being proposed to the fish and wildlife 

development Act and the actual, what will now turn into an 

advisory council, Mr. Speaker: what the makeup will be, what 

the impact will be, and if in fact . . . I guess my biggest worry, 

Mr. Speaker, is I truly believe that government does have a role 

in these types of organizations because there has to be a 

responsibility on an organization that has the ability to have an 

overall view of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can’t keep contracting out services to a 

variety of organizations and expect to have that overall view. 

The people of the province are expecting the government to 

maintain that balance in the province, whether it’s through the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, whether it’s through The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, that the lands that are protected 

across this province, whether it’s in land leases for oil and gas 

exploration, whether it’s in other mining operations or 

agricultural operations or something as close to many of us, I 

guess, as planning and development in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these issues cannot be done in isolation. The 

government needs to maintain oversight. They need to maintain 

a connect, so that what we end up with and what we continue to 

have is a balance in the province of Saskatchewan so that all 

initiatives builds a greater whole of the province and contribute 

to a greater package in what we call the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill may seem pretty mild but, Mr. 

Speaker, I do believe that it needs more scrutiny because there 

is a number of concerns about this government’s growing 

propensity, I guess, to reduce accountability on how 

government funds are spent. I mean we can point to any 

number of examples through estimates over this past little while 

where future commitments for long-term care facilities don’t 

show up in budget documents. They’re not carried as debt 

anywhere. But, Mr. Speaker, you cannot partially fund 

something and not account for 100 per cent of the money. So 

we question a lot of these entries. We question a lot of, kind of, 

the incomplete estimates that are being rolled out for scrutiny 

and, Mr. Speaker, it does raise concern. 

 

So this Bill too falls into that category. I know there are people 

that are asking for greater access to the fish and wildlife fund. 

Mr. Speaker, I know there are lots of good uses that it could be 

put to, but we also have to ensure that there is that oversight by 

the government, a responsibility and a requirement by the 

government to have an overview of all of these programs to 

make sure they are interconnected, they’re augmenting each 

other, complementing each other, and providing a better 

balance for people to live in the province of Saskatchewan — 

not just this generation, Mr. Speaker, but for generations to 

come. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a couple of other of my 

colleagues that are looking forward to making comments on 

this Bill and, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I would adjourn 

debate on Bill 155, The Natural Resources Amendment Act. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

adjourned debate, moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 

155. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud 

to rise and participate in the debate on this piece of legislation 

today, and in some ways it connects to the fundamental issues 

that brought me to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 161, of 

course, deals with The Election Act, and I want to say that — 

had the chance to talk about this previously and expand on that 

a bit in my remarks today — but electoral process, the 

democratic process, our parliamentary form of government, 

these things are certainly evolutionary, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly we should be continuing to strive as the province of 

Saskatchewan to . . . What are the ways that we can make our 

system more democratic, more accessible, and of course more 

reliable, Mr. Speaker? 

 



7318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

And certainly in Canada or throughout, as long as elections 

have been held and there have been ballot boxes to count the 

contents thereof, sometimes these things have gone well, Mr. 

Speaker, sometimes they have gone less well. Sometimes 

they’ve been outright scandalous; sometimes illegal activities 

have taken place; sometimes what has taken place is outrageous 

and offensive to the very spirit of democracy. But if you’re 

going to have a democratic process, if you’re going to have an 

electoral process that allows people to come out and make their 

mark at the ballot box, make their democratic choice known, 

certainly the process around that again has to strike that balance 

between what is accessible, Mr. Speaker, and what is secure. 

 

And over the years in the province of Saskatchewan, one of the 

key sort of mechanisms by which we go back and look at 

elections to see if, you know, things were done poorly or well, 

is the mechanism of the all-party committee that convenes after 

the election concludes, and they go through the entrails of what 

has taken place and make recommendations on how the 

procedure by which we govern the electoral process has 

functioned. 

 

And, you know, be it the hours of polling or the availability of 

the ballot box, and maybe it’s regards to the polling divisions 

themselves, the provisions under law by which we once came to 

allow time out of the workday for working people to come and 

cast their ballot, ranging off into electoral finance and the kind 

of restrictions or prohibitions that have been put in place and 

the kind of guidelines that are there, the kind of law that is there 

to govern the electoral finance, there have been a great number 

of things that have come about over the years in response 

sometimes to problems that have been identified, sometimes to 

respond to best practice as identified in other regions, and 

sometimes as a desire to correct or remedy scandal that has 

taken place or behaviour that has taken place that is offensive to 

the spirit of democracy. 

 

And like I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now, one of the 

key mechanisms by which things have been brought forward 

previously in a fairly open and democratic way — which helps 

if you’re looking to construct a democratic process, Mr. 

Speaker, or to ride herd on that process — has been the 

all-party committee. 

 

The chief provision in this legislation is the introduction of 

photo voter identification being a requirement of being sworn in 

at the polling station and thereby gaining access to the ballot 

and thereby being able to make your choices known on election 

day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As far as we can tell, the origin or the 

genesis of this was the Throne Speech that was brought forward 

by this government in the fall of 2010. 

 

And one of the places this measure did not originate of course 

was in the report provided by the all-party committee that 

examined the conduct of the last election and made a number of 

recommendations on improving or correcting different of the 

practice that was examined there. So this recommendation came 

forward out of, you know, it was very much an initiative out of 

that government caucus or that government cabinet, and it did 

not come out of the all-party committee that convenes after the 

election. And of course I’m sure you’re probably thinking, you 

know, big deal. You know, they’re the government. They’ve 

got the opportunity to introduce legislation as they see fit, and 

why wouldn’t they do that? 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s 

significant about this legislation and different from another 

piece of electoral reform legislation that was brought in by this 

government, the fixed election date legislation or the fixed 

election legislation as it was then introduced in the Chamber by 

the Minister of Justice — I’m not sure if Freud is involved in 

that, Mr. Speaker — but anyway the piece of legislation dealing 

with fixed election dates that was part of the now government’s 

party platform, they were upfront with the people of 

Saskatchewan about it. Fair ball. This is something that they 

brought forward. 

 

But other changes that are made to electoral practice have 

generally gone through this other channel that I’m talking about 

in terms of problems that are identified or situations that need 

correction or remedy through the all-party committee process. 

So it wasn’t in the platform. It wasn’t identified by the all-party 

committee that reported after the election, examined the 

conduct of the election. As far as we can tell, Mr. Speaker, this 

is a remedy in response to a problem that has not been 

experienced to date in the electoral practice of this province, 

certainly not in my experience of the past 10 years of elections, 

Mr. Speaker, and certainly not identified by the all-party 

committee as has been the practice in years previous. 

 

So where does this come from? As far as we can tell, this 

comes from the doings of the federal Conservative government. 

And of course the introduction of a photo identification 

requirement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again is something that 

we’ve seen the federal Conservative government introduce in a 

way that seems to be more about making the electoral process 

more difficult or more frustrating for people that want to get to 

the ballot box than it is about facilitating the casting of the 

ballot or the making known of your democratic choice. 

 

And again we all recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there’s a 

balance to be struck in terms of accessibility and security of 

who is involved in the election. And certainly there have been 

. . . That’s been an evolutionary process, and it’s something that 

demands vigilance and watchfulness. But again the problem 

that this measure seeks to correct was not identified by the 

all-party committee. There was no reporting of this in any 

substantial way at the time of the last election or the election 

before that and again within my recent memory of the conduct 

of provincial elections, Mr. Speaker. So you have to wonder, 

what is this about? 

 

Well the requirement for photo identification, they’ve cited 

other jurisdictions that have brought this in, chiefly the federal 

Conservatives that, you know, there are well-known 

connections between that cabinet and that caucus and the 

federal Conservatives. But why would they bring in photo 

identification in the province of Saskatchewan? Or to ask it 

another way, Mr. Speaker, who doesn’t have photo 

identification in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Well there tends to be a high correlation between people that 

are First Nations, that are Métis, that don’t have photo 

identification. Low-income people tend not to have photo 

identification, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and seniors tend to be a 

group that there tends to be a lesser amount of photo 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7319 

identification for. 

 

And again, one of the chief means of photo identification is the 

driver’s licence. And that would seem to be one of the things 

indicated as a photo identification or which satisfies the 

requirement for a photo identification, but this leads into 

another problem of this legislation that I’ll get to momentarily. 

But just to finish the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why would 

you want to make it more difficult for those groups to get to the 

ballot box to make known their democratic choice? 

 

And as with the federal Conservatives, there tends to be a 

correlation between the groups that this makes it more difficult 

for them to get to the ballot box and groups that traditionally 

have not been big supporters of that government opposite. So 

again you look and see where did this suggestion come from. 

What is the problem that this legislation seeks to remedy? Well 

it wasn’t identified by the all-party committee, you know, 

which has been a fair and broadly based practice by which 

people can seek to identify problems that take place in the 

elections and then give them redress. It didn’t happen out of 

that process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What it comes out of is the 

federal Conservatives. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And in terms of the federal Conservatives, that’s a government 

that’s famous for their how to game the parliamentary 

committee process, Mr. Speaker. That’s a government that is 

famous for their how to disrupt the House tactics manual that 

they handed out to the members of their caucus. That’s a 

government that laughed off the finding of contempt as 

somehow just a mere procedural matter or a petty partisan 

matter and trying to deny the fact that was the first time that a 

federal government has been found in contempt of the very 

rules by which we’re supposed to govern our parliamentary 

procedures. So again, that they would look to that government 

for measures that are helpful to our democratic practice and to 

our electoral process, we find highly suspect on this side of the 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I guess the broader sort of, one of the broader questions that this 

legislation raises is that there’s a fair amount of, you know . . . 

Again the very premise of it we find to be suspect, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But the way that certain things are not accounted for 

in the legislation, but are instead punted to regulations is 

another thing that we find less than helpful if you’re going to be 

an open and accountable and transparent government generally. 

But we find it offensive when it comes to using that practice on 

the very election Act that conducts our democratic process here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, there have been all-party mechanisms that have built up 

over the years to try and make this a broad, fair, open process. 

And when you’ve got something that’s not just sort of coming 

in out of what seems to be a fairly suspect set of motivations, 

but then on top of that the government can’t even be straight 

about what’s going to be in the legislation, they instead forgo 

things and punt it off to regulations, that tends to double down 

on the suspicion with which we regard this measure from this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and the suspicion with which 

this measure is regarded by a fair number of the people of this 

province. 

But again one of the things that I find interesting about this 

measure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the fact that we’re having 

this debate when we are, is of course not long on the heels of 

the passing of the Honourable Allan Emrys Blakeney. And I of 

course take great pride in representing the seat of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, which of course is where the Mr. Blakeney 

once represented the people. And certainly one of the ways that 

I came to be involved in active electoral politics was the fact 

that in the 1971 election my father volunteered for Allan 

Blakeney as his then NDP candidate. 

 

Now my father had come off the farm with my grandma in the 

’50s. And they had certainly grown up with supporting the CCF 

and Tommy Douglas and seen him speak off the back of a hay 

wagon and things like that. But one of the things that got my 

father active, got him active and engaged to the point where he 

wanted to go knock on doors and take an engaged, active role in 

the election was the fact that in 1967, Regina Centre came into 

being as a riding. Up until then you’d have Regina East and 

Regina West, and these were multi-member seats where the two 

members in Regina East that got the most votes would 

represent the seat; two members in Regina West the same thing. 

 

In 1967 they were carved out as discrete ridings all by 

themselves. And that was the first election where Regina 

Centre, which was the forebear of what became in 1975, Regina 

Elphinstone came into existence. Well in advance of the 1971 

election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the then Thatcher and Liberal 

government, the free enterprise flavour of the decade, came 

forward with such a vicious gerrymander that it was so 

obviously offensive to so many people that this is one of the 

things that propelled my father in deciding that, you know, this 

is not fair. This is something that I want to fight and do so with 

every means possible to me. 

 

And what happened in the 1971 election, Mr. Speaker, which 

Allan Blakeney contested and ultimately won as the premier, 

won the premiership of Saskatchewan and led the then NDP 

government in the 1971 election, brought the New Deal for 

People platform into the halls of government and began 

implementing that policy. 

 

That election in Regina Centre, we had an enumeration, after a 

boundary redistribution, we had a enumeration of about 19,600 

people — 19,600 people. And meanwhile in Regina South, 

which at that point had a tradition of voting Liberal, they carved 

out a very distinct riding for the Liberals at that time, that had 

less than 5,000 people. And when you think about that, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, the 4 to 1 sort of ratio involved in the 

trying to cut the knees out from under the voting power of the 

people that were then put into the riding of Regina Centre, 

that’s offensive to democracy. That’s offensive to the very 

reason by which we’re supposed to be here in this legislature. 

 

So one of the measures, one of the remedies that was brought 

forward in that election in 1971 was the whole notion of an 

independent Boundaries Commission. And in lesser or greater 

ways that mechanism, that electoral institution has carried 

forward to this day. And the idea that you’d sit in the back 

office of the Premier’s offices and cut up a map and in places 

like Regina to gerrymander it so that you’ve got nearly 20,000 

voters in an NDP-leaning riding and less than 5,000 voters in a 

Liberal riding, that’s no longer possible under the legislation. 



7320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

But of course these things evolve. And, you know, as measures 

come forward, countermeasures that developed, so what is it 

about this legislation that we find offensive? Well, what we find 

offensive about this legislation is that it seems to set out a series 

of hoops for people to jump through that also happen to, you 

know — I’m sure not by coincidence, Mr. Speaker — line up 

with supporting the New Democratic Party and not supporting 

the government of the day. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, as has been said, I’m forgetting the 

speaker, but the price of democracy, the price of freedom is 

eternal vigilance. And as you try to set up these democratic 

institutions and these democratic practices, there will be those 

that come along to try to abuse the process. 

 

And certainly that abuse of the process in 1971 was something 

that led to the inclusion of the independent Boundaries 

Commission in the New Deal for People, it is one of the things 

that led my father to get out and knock on doors for Allan 

Blakeney. And it was one of the things that I think of, or I 

thought of when we heard the news of Mr. Blakeney’s passing. 

 

And if you don’t have a democracy that’s worth the practices, 

that’s worth the procedures that it sets out by which it’s 

supposed to engage people in the voting process, then the rest 

of it tends to be not worth a whole lot. And in terms of what the 

disclosure is around the spending of public money, what the 

groups that have been consulted with in terms of different 

measures being brought forward, these are all things that should 

be going to open and transparent practice in our public affairs. 

 

But there’s nothing much more fundamental to the conduct of 

the provincial government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then how it 

approaches the very rules of the game. If this, you know, were 

in the playoffs here for hockey, if the ref and if the rules are not 

fair and above board, and if there’s one team that’s trying to 

game the rules or game the ref, then people are outraged. Well 

if you’ve got the same kind of thing going on in your 

democracy, Mr. Speaker, well people should be outraged as 

well. 

 

And again in terms of those bipartisan, broadly open processes 

by which we’ve examined our electoral practice in past, another 

recent example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the appointment of the 

Chief Electoral Officer. And in the past, that has been subject to 

a recommendation of the Board of Internal Economy, which 

has representation from the parties that make up the legislature 

on it. They interview the candidates, they weigh their merits, 

and then they make a recommendation which, in past, has been 

taken on by the government and appointed as the electoral 

officer. 

 

But of course, we don’t have an electoral officer right now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we have an Acting Chief Electoral Officer. 

And that’s because that individual was put forward, went 

through the interview process, knew enough about the system 

and knew enough about the conduct of fair and open elections 

to put his resumé forward. It was weighed according to its 

merits by the Board of Internal Economy, which again has 

representation from both sides of the House, and the Board of 

Internal Economy decided that this was the preferred candidate. 

This is the person that should be in charge of conducting fair 

and open elections in this province. The recommendation was 

made and then of course what happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

Well the government caucus got its fingers into it and turned 

back the appointment of the, you know, what should be the 

head referee for our democratic practice. 

 

So what happened there, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well what I 

think we saw was a government that did something because 

they could do it. Whether they should do it or not goes against, 

again, what have been bipartisan, broadly open practices in this 

legislature that make sure that you have that give and take, that 

say from both sides, and then a decision that should be removed 

from political jousting or the politics as they are conducted on 

the floor of this legislature. 

 

So again you see what’s the electoral reform of this government 

to date. You’ve got the measure around the election dates, you 

know. Fair enough. That seems to be straight up. It was 

campaigned on by that government; it was in their platform. 

Fair enough to bring that forward. But where you’ve got the 

appointment of the Chief Electoral Officer, the head referee of 

our democratic practice in this province, the means by which 

people make their choice known at the ballot box and by which 

the government is decided, what happens then, Mr. Speaker? 

Well that government got their fingers into it, and instead of 

having the electoral officer in place, we’ve got somebody 

who’s in an acting position and this will carry on till the 

election I imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s hardly a 

satisfactory state of affairs. 

 

So again in this debate, Mr. Speaker, coming back to the 

elections Act, when you’ve got for, one, a remedy that seeks to 

solve a problem that hasn’t been identified by the bipartisan, 

broadly open practices that have built up to ensure that we’ve 

got a fair and open democracy and a democratic practice in this 

province, when you’ve got a remedy that comes forward and 

there’s not a problem to be solved, that raises a fair level of 

alarm and suspicion on the part of the government. When 

you’ve got a government that takes what have been previously 

bipartisan practices and completely ignores those and gets their 

fingers into them in terms of the appointment of the electoral 

officer, the Chief Electoral Officer, that increases the suspicion 

and the worry on the side of this House. 

 

And when you’ve got a government that won’t even bring the 

measures forward and identify them clearly within the 

legislation, but instead punts them to regulations which will be, 

you know, drafted behind closed doors by those members, and 

then the people won’t have any chance to have their oversight 

and their input into what those are, on those grounds, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think that this is a fairly alarming piece of 

legislation being brought forward. 

 

And I think that it, I think that this speaks to the character of 

that government when it comes to what should be the fair rules, 

the rules of engagement that govern how people get to the 

ballot box. And if you can’t, if you can’t be trusted with such a 

fundamental, critical aspect of our parliamentary democracy, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, then I think people are going to take 

notice, and I think that they’re going to take notice and put paid 

to that kind of behaviour when they get the chance. 

 

So in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll move to concluding 

my remarks. I know that there are others of my colleagues that 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7321 

want to participate in this debate, very much so. And as such, I 

will conclude my remarks on Bill No. 161. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

continue comments on Bill 161, the Act to amend The Election 

Act. And as my colleague from Rosemont just was talking 

about -- Rosemont? Sorry, Elphinstone; sorry — was talking 

about the impact that this type of legislation will have on 

people’s lives. People do have a problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

with the integrity of the government who, a government who 

brings forward something that will decrease people’s ability to 

vote. And what does that say about a commitment to 

democracy? 

 

And I think basically I think I’ve said some of these things 

before in other remarks I’ve had to different Bills because it 

does speak to the lack of integrity of the government who does 

not have a commitment to democracy. And this is only another 

example of that lack of integrity and lack of commitment. 

 

When the government vetoed the selection of the Chief 

Electoral Officer, that selection being made by an all-party 

committee, it certainly spoke to a lack of transparency, a lack of 

accountability, and a lack of commitment to the democratic 

process within this legislature. That committee was a committee 

of the legislature that chose and that recommended the Chief 

Electoral Officer’s appointment. We now have an Acting Chief 

Electoral Officer which will take us into the next election. 

 

But this Bill can severely inhibit many people’s ability to vote. 

And the minister in his remarks has said this is nothing new, 

which then begs the question of, why do it? And since most 

people are starting to look with a bit of suspicion at some of the 

things the government is doing, you do have to examine what 

the motives then could be. And basically many people who will 

be affected by this will be seniors or Aboriginal people or 

homeless people or students, people who don’t have access to 

photo ID [identification], and it will be those people who are 

not traditionally Sask Party supporters who will not be able to, 

it will not be easy for them to vote. 

 

And so you have to ask yourselves if the Sask Party is picking 

on those people to disenfranchise and to make it more difficult 

for them to vote. You do wonder about the government, the 

Sask Party government’s commitment to democracy and the 

democratic process. It should be something that any 

government is interested in actually increasing citizen 

participation in democracy, not putting in roadblocks that 

would make it more difficult. 

 

And I think that anybody who has heard about needing photo 

ID has immediately pushed back and said, why? What does that 

do? What about people who don’t have photo ID? Are you 

going to have somewhere, some place that goes into all seniors’ 

homes and gives them photo ID? And is it going to be free? 

 

And what about any information on education? How will 

people know the long list of things that the minister has 

indicated can be brought along instead of a photo ID? Every 

kind of phone bill, utility bill, anything with your address on it, 

which then begs the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what about 

people who are homeless? And there are thousands of people 

who are homeless. Has the Sask Party government just written 

them off? They’re not prospective voters? They don’t have 

utility bills. They don’t have anything that has an address on it. 

They are homeless so they will not have the ability to vote. 

 

So basically the government has said they don’t care about that. 

They don’t care about providing a home for them. They don’t 

care about doing anything about affordable rents and affordable 

housing and yet here again we’re looking at another way to 

disenfranchise them from society, and that’s take away their 

ability to vote. 

 

I think the Sask Party has basically said well, we don’t care if 

they vote. We don’t care if they vote. We don’t care if seniors 

vote because they don’t usually vote for us. The Sask Party 

doesn’t care about seniors because they don’t usually vote for 

the Sask Party. And seniors are looking at certainly things that 

have happened in this province that has not been to their 

advantage. There isn’t affordable housing. There isn’t rent 

control. Many seniors are having a great deal of difficulty 

managing their lives. They are not being able to afford 

sometimes their utilities. I’ve had seniors talk to me about 

selling their grave plots; some of them who have come and said 

they’re taking their medications every second day — they’re 

cutting the tablets in half. Some of them aren’t turning on their 

electricity or their power, so they’re not cooking. 

 

I mean these are things that are facing everyday seniors on low 

or fixed incomes. And now they’re looking at again having to 

decide how are they going to get to vote. How are they going to 

come and . . . And seniors are great. They turn out in great 

numbers to vote. They understand their rights. They understand 

about democracy. And they certainly don’t think this is a step 

forward in the democratic process, and it seems like it is 

targeting them. 

 

So a lot of seniors, and I do have a lot of seniors in my riding of 

Eastview, they’re not happy about this. They’re not happy that 

this is yet another way . . . And last election, there was a lot of 

confusion about who had bills to bring to say their address. 

Many seniors were turned away at the polls and can’t 

themselves back to the polls. They don’t have a way to come 

back. It’s sometimes very difficult for them to get there in the 

first place. And yet to turn around and have to go home and 

collect yet another piece of ID or a different kind of piece of 

ID, that has discouraged many of them at that time to vote at 

all. 

 

So I think this is something that many of them do not see as a 

positive step forward in the democratic process and certainly 

don’t think that the Sask Party has given any indication that this 

is something that’s necessary or that will move the democratic 

process forward and encourage more people to come and 

participate. 

 

Students again too, there’s students who will be struggling to 

find the proper ID. Many of them sleep on couches someplace, 

and a lot of them are now telling us that they can’t afford their 

rent. Meeting with young people in my riding, the biggest issue 



7322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

for them is housing. It isn’t tuition. It’s housing. Tuition is 

second, but housing is first. And so if many of them are staying 

in places with friends and sleeping on their couches, they will 

not have those types of ID either. And our First Nations people, 

they are also not in . . . They’re not engaged in the democratic 

process fully. And yet this is no way to encourage that 

engagement. 

 

There are many things, Mr. Speaker, in this Bill that even the 

media have pointed out. And the articles that talk about it have 

said that this is not more inclusive; this is more exclusive, and 

that people who say, when you go to the polls, that you have to 

go to such an extensive process, it might be discouraging to 

some people. And it’s also very concerning that people who are 

at the polls are very clear about what they’re asking from for 

people who come to vote. It’s, like I said, turning away people 

because they didn’t have the right ID or had what the polling 

clerk or the DRO [deputy returning officer] thought should be 

the right ID. It has been difficult in the past and has had some 

people very angry about their inability to vote. 

 

And it isn’t something that the minister was clear about in his 

remarks, his second reading speech, about what actually 

triggered this, what brought forward the need to have it. As far 

as anybody can see, there was no specific incident, but he said 

it’s to enhance the integrity of the system. Well that’s an odd 

statement coming from somebody, a government, who refused 

to hire or name the Chief Electoral Officer. It speaks a great 

deal to the integrity of the government who actually overturned 

that decision. And now we have an Acting Chief Electoral 

Officer to take us into the November election. 

 

And the minister said he doesn’t think this will disenfranchise 

voters but he said, interesting, if you plan your affairs you 

should have no difficulty voting. So if you plan ahead and 

gather all your information, you should have no difficulty 

voting. But if you think you’re going to go out five minutes 

before election time without anything, well then you will have 

some problems and you’re not going to be able to vote. 

 

Well I’m not sure exactly if our electorate has got all those 

plans in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A lot of people do tend to 

go out to vote after supper; sometimes it is a 

spur-of-the-moment decision. And certainly this isn’t going to 

encourage those people to actually make that decision and 

actually go to vote and go to the polling station, especially 

people who are on fixed incomes, who are working poor, who 

are very poor. There are all kinds of things that they’re going to 

have to need. 

 

And this business about one person can vouch for you and one 

person can only vouch for one person, I’m thinking of group 

homes where people live and have one caregiver and would 

need to have more than . . . If there’s four people in that home, 

four different people will have to go and vouch for them. That 

seems onerous as well. Why can’t the caregiver in the home 

take all four residents and vouch for all four of them? This 

doesn’t seem to be an inclusive way of encouraging people to 

get themselves engaged in the democratic process. 

 

And if people have to prepare in advance and get everything, 

including a photograph of themselves on a driver’s licence or a 

passport . . . I don’t know how many people have passports 

either, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s really moving it a little bit too 

far into the onus on people to get themselves prepared. 

 

They’ve certainly made it, as I said, very hard for people to 

vote. And I think this message is clear. These are the people 

who the government doesn’t care about if they vote. And it is 

overzealous definitely when you put in something that isn’t 

necessary. No special incident triggered this. And it’s just 

something that I really don’t understand why we would seem to 

have this be necessary, a necessary change, which then 

obviously does raise my suspicions because the minister was 

quite anxious to tell all of us that there’s always all these other 

options that people can have. And so why this? Why would this 

. . . He mentioned other provinces who are moving this way. I 

was just reading in my notes about the push back in BC [British 

Columbia] for people who are homeless and who are taking this 

to the BC courts, that this is a violation of their human rights to 

present a photo ID. So that court case will be ongoing. So there 

is . . . It does seem like a strange thing to actually put in place. 

 

And we’re also looking at renters who change addresses quite 

often. So if you need a phone bill or a telephone bill or a utility 

bill to verify your address, if your address has changed . . . And 

if you have a cancelled cheque. People don’t often have bank 

accounts if they’re homeless. So it certainly is going to be 

difficult for many, many people. 

 

And I don’t actually think that, given that the minister had no 

real basis to share with us about why he thought this was a 

necessary change to the Act, I don’t think . . . I certainly can’t 

see it, and I don’t think people are actually understanding why 

it has to be. And they don’t actually, I don’t think they support 

it at all. 

 

And it is something, like I said, to put this in place when people 

voting, the number of people voting decreases over and over 

and over after each election. We look at very disturbing and 

very disappointing voter turnout numbers. You’d think that the 

government would be paying more attention to ways to 

encourage people to vote, to reach out to people who are more 

interested in the new technology now to look at online voting, 

to look at things that would move us positively forward and 

encouraging more people to vote rather than put more 

roadblocks in place for people who traditionally do vote, like 

seniors, and put roadblocks in front of them so they can’t vote. 

 

You do wonder then about intent and motive when you see 

something like that. And I’ve heard nothing from this 

government about looking at new ways of encouraging more, 

encouraging people to come out to vote. This doesn’t speak to 

encouraging anybody to come out to vote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So I think that it’s certainly something that people have asked 

me, why do we need this change? And I really don’t think that 

there has been anything, like I said, that has shown me that this 

is something we need. 

 

It’s interesting that in some of the other notes that I have, 

requiring voter ID may be considered a violation of one’s 

Charter rights, and similar legislation has been struck down in 

some US states. So I’m wondering why we would step into that 

when it’s going to cause, or it already has in BC, legal 

challenges. Why do we think that that’s necessary? How does 

photo ID improve the voting turnout? How does it improve the 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7323 

integrity of the system? I don’t think anybody has said that 

there has been fraud in the polling booths. I certainly haven’t 

heard it and I don’t think anybody else has heard it either. 

 

So when the government puts amendments like this forward, 

you wonder how people will access photo ID. Like I said, will 

there be free photo ID? Will there be roving photographers 

going into seniors’ homes? Will there be some way to make 

sure that people have access to these photo ID in places that are 

accessible to them before the election in November? 

 

And the minister talked about, in his press release or a news 

release in November, that the list of other allowable forms of 

identification will be extensive. Which again, as I’ve said, Mr. 

Speaker, you wonder, if the list just keeps growing, what is the 

point of actually doing this? 

 

And the minister said the changes for adding to this list of 

exemptions or allowable forms of identification will be in 

regulation rather than in the Act itself. So regulation, for people 

who are watching, means no one will be able to see the changes 

until after it’s done. So that again, Mr. Speaker, makes me very 

suspicious of motive. If you can change things in regulation and 

then people don’t have the ability to have scrutiny, nor do we as 

members of the Legislative Assembly have the right to 

scrutinize or the opportunity to scrutinize until it’s a fait 

accompli where it does no good — all you do is be notified of it 

— then that does to me also sound, it does sound ominous and 

it does raise my curiosity factor. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So I think also the minister was talking about further 

consultation and he’s going to be consulting people after the 

Bill is passed. Well it’s not going to do any good to talk about 

further exemptions when everything has been already passed. 

 

And I think the big thing that people really should be aware of 

and should be concerned about is the fact that we don’t have a 

Chief Electoral Officer appointed. And the process for that was 

the democratic process of this legislature. And the committee, 

the Board of Internal Economy, vetted the applicants and made 

a recommendation to the legislature. Somehow that process was 

derailed by the Premier and cabinet and caucus. Somehow, we 

don’t know, but it has been derailed. 

 

So we are now faced with an interference in the democratic 

process of this legislature, which speaks to me of many things. 

There is a disregard and an actual contempt for democracy in 

this House. And it’s not actually limited to one issue. This 

government has a contempt for democracy. We see it in many 

things, including the failure to consult on Bills that have been, 

in some cases they say they’ve consulted on and it turns out 

they have not. And that’s the wildlife protection Act of last 

year. We were very aware of that lack of consultation. So 

people I don’t think are very, they’re not reassured that any 

changes to regulation, which is what I gather from the 

minister’s comments in his news release, changes to regulation 

will be done with consultation. I think people are a little leery 

about that as well. 

 

I think at this point in the term of this government for a three 

and a half years in or just about three and a half years in, people 

have seen the pattern. They have seen the pattern of 

disregarding seniors’ needs. They’ve seen the pattern of 

disregarding renters’ needs. They’ve seen the pattern of 

disregarding Aboriginal needs, for sure. No mention of 

anything like that, any help for people in those situations. 

 

And I think the actual, just the absolute disregard for the 

democratic process is what worries me a lot. It signifies when 

we’re looking at, when we look at citizens who have . . . 

They’ve almost given up on trusting governments to do what is 

best for them, and they’ve become quite cynical. And then we 

see a government acting in this way. It only adds to that 

cynicism. It adds to the fact that people don’t trust politicians 

any more. 

 

And I find that hard, Mr. Speaker, because I think many of us 

are here to try and do the right thing. And I think when people 

say, well but we don’t trust politicians, and then the 

government does something like this to only add to that, it hurts 

all of us. It hurts all of our credibility. It hurts each one of us in 

our constituency’s eyes. It hurts each one of us in our 

day-to-day ability to do the work of this House that we have 

been elected to do. 

 

And many times I think that that disregard for process in the 

House, disregard for rules of the House, disrespect for the 

democratic process of the House, that’s a signal of not a good 

government, not a people’s government, and not a democratic 

government. I think that signals a real danger to our democracy 

here in Saskatchewan and I don’t think it’s only particular to 

Saskatchewan. I think Stephen Harper has much of the same 

attitude. 

 

So I’m thinking . . . Someone told me it’s in the genes. And I’m 

talking about not your Levis. I’m talking about in your genes, 

your genetic makeup. And I think that people, the person that 

was saying it to me said that the actions of a conservative 

government, they can’t help themselves; it’s in their genes. And 

as I watch and see some of the things that happen and some of 

the things that this government is, our government in 

Saskatchewan is following along, I think they’re right. I think it 

is almost genetic because it isn’t something that appears to be, 

seems to be in a policy direction written down someplace 

because we know that Sask Party conventions don’t have policy 

direction or have policy discussions. So where does this come 

from? And the only explanation would be then it comes from, 

sort of, just intrinsic genetic makeup. 

 

And I’m glad to say I don’t see that in the New Democratic 

Party or New Democratic members of this Legislative 

Assembly. And I think that as an opposition it’s incumbent 

upon us to make sure that we do stand up for assaults on the 

democratic process. And I can see several of them which I’ve 

mentioned, but I think this one — asking for photo ID and 

changes to The Election Act — does demonstrate an actual 

willingness of this government to erode the democratic process 

and to actually disenfranchise many, many of the voters in the 

province. 

 

So I think it’s something that people should be concerned 

about. I think they should listen to the debate. I think we should 

spread the word far and wide that this isn’t something that a 

government who is committed to democracy and committed to 



7324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

a democratic government, committed to transparency and 

accountability, which was all over many of the Sask Party 

government’s publications and budgets . . . They talk about the 

most transparent and most accountable government. Well no 

one’s seen any of that in anything that’s ever happened in the 

last three and a half years. 

 

So meeting with people who have had the Sask Party 

government’s policies affect them directly, and the most recent 

ones are people in the health sector of course like in 

communities who have lost their health services, they don’t 

have a lot of faith in the government to be working for the 

betterment of their community or their family or themselves in 

particular. They don’t have a lot of confidence. And so when 

people look at changes to The Election Act and look at what it 

means to them and their right to vote . . . Because their right to 

vote actually is their only way of getting rid of somebody or a 

government who doesn’t reflect their needs or the best interests 

of their communities or themselves or their families. 

 

And I think people who I’ve mentioned aren’t in a position 

right at this moment to be benefiting from the Sask Party 

government’s policies and funding choices, like seniors, like 

Aboriginal, First Nations people, Métis people, like students, 

like low-income, poor people, poor working people, homeless 

people, none of these people are benefiting from any of the 

boom that we’re seeing in our economy, all the good times that 

are in Saskatchewan. When you ask people, so how are you 

doing, those type of people are not doing well. 

 

And their way of saying that, I don’t like this; I don’t want this 

for myself, is at the polls on election day, November 7th. That’s 

the only way they can speak out and say so. And so to take this 

away from them or make it extremely difficult for them to get 

to the polls is again I think a real assault on democracy. 

 

And I think people are starting to understand that. I don’t think 

people are confused, and they’re certainly not, they’re not 

turning a blind eye to it. They’re actually noticing it and they’re 

not happy with it. And I think that unhappiness is starting to 

come through in many ways. People are coming to this 

legislature in droves, coming to talk about their issues because 

they think this is where they will have an impact. They’re 

talking to their elected officials, if they can get them on the 

phone or get them to return a phone call. I understand from 

Kamsack, the Deputy Premier’s office isn’t returning calls 

about people in Kamsack concerned about the closure of their 

hospital. But people do see the legislature as a place to have 

their issues resolved. 

 

And they see the people that sit here in the legislature as people 

that they have chosen. And if they don’t have the right to 

choose, if it’s so difficult to get to the polling booth to mark 

your X on that ballot, then you have taken away their ability to 

choose what happens in their lives and to choose a government 

that will best reflect their values, the values of their families, 

and the values of their communities. 

 

And I think people are starting to see that they are just chipping 

away, chipping, chipping away at the democratic process, 

especially when you look at what happens in this House. And 

the Chief Electoral Officer fiasco I think is a real benchmark for 

how low the government has sunk about trying to manipulate 

the democratic process. 

 

We see it often in the House. We see it often in the disregard 

for processes. We see it in the arrogance that’s coming through 

in committees and in the House and in the answers of the 

ministers to our questions, the questions that people actually 

ask. We see that arrogance coming through daily and ministers 

who laugh at issues that people bring forward. And people are 

sitting in the gallery watching. They’re actually here when their 

questions are being posed, and they see the minister who is 

supposed to be answering the question laughing about their 

issues. 

 

Well then they need the right to come on November 7th and 

mark an X and say, I don’t want that person here any more. I 

don’t want that person representing me. I don’t think that 

person is doing a good job. So we need to make it easier for 

people to come and vote. 

 

There has not been any fraud. There’s not been any incident 

that says, we need to have this because there has been a cause. 

We haven’t heard any of that. All we have heard is that 

somehow this will make it better. 

 

Well nobody’s actually into believing that sort of stuff any 

more from this government — just trust me. That doesn’t work. 

I think the trust factor is pretty much gone and people are 

starting to look at the government and the government’s 

decisions with a bit of a jaundiced eye. There is a fair amount 

of cynicism that comes from a government who gets angry or 

gets arrogant and doesn’t want to answer questions of the 

people. 

 

And yes, they do get angry when questions are asked of them 

and they don’t think they need to answer those questions. And 

that arrogance . . . I mean it’s a good thing to be up on a high 

horse. I like to see the ministers up on their high horse because 

it’s a long way to fall. And they are going to fall because people 

aren’t turning a blind eye to the things they’re doing. 

 

They’re actually seeing what’s happening and they notice that 

when things like this election Act change comes and it’s trying 

to make things more difficult for them as voters, they 

understand what that means. That means that this government is 

interfering in the democratic process and interfering in their 

rights to exercise their democratic right to vote. 

 

And they don’t see this as something that’s progressive or 

positive or necessary. They’re wondering why. And there is no 

answer in the minister’s remarks in the second reading speech, 

in the news release; there’s no answers to that. There’s no good 

answer for why this is being done. So you have to say then, 

well the answer obviously is the government wants to decrease 

the ability for people to vote, especially in targeted groups who 

don’t particularly support the Sask Party. That’s pretty stark, 

Mr. Speaker, when those groups are obviously the targets, 

because that’s the groups that will be affected the most by these 

things. So it does speak to integrity. It does speak to 

transparency. It does speak to accountability. 

 

And I don’t think . . . People certainly don’t seem to like the 

idea that the government is trying to make it more difficult for 

them to vote. And I don’t think there’s anything in any of the 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7325 

remarks I’ve seen that there has been a need for this. People 

that . . . The minister said, as I said before earlier in my 

remarks, that there are some constituencies like British 

Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec who are doing this already and 

so we should be following their lead. And I think that there is 

also a clear indication in BC, before the courts, where there’s 

several people, homeless people, who are launching a suit 

against this as an infringement on their civil rights. 

 

So I’m not exactly sure why we have to follow that direction 

when there seems to be no indication from the minister in any 

of his remarks, as I’ve said, that makes this, that there seems to 

be a good reason for this Bill, that there seems to be a way that 

this Bill is fixing some problem. There doesn’t seem to be 

anything in any of this that actually does any of that. 

 

And I think that many people, as I said, who are feeling like 

they’re outside of the democratic process, and I’m thinking of 

young people who don’t come out very much to vote anymore. 

There’s a whole group of people who are disenfranchised just 

from not having any faith in government, so why would we 

make it harder for them to come out? Why would we make it 

harder for people who do vote who are seniors, why would we 

make it harder for them to come out? The only reason I could 

think of is that you don’t want them to come out. And then you 

look at who do they usually vote for? And then you wonder, 

well this is really a manipulation of a very, very, very ominous 

degree. And I think people are going to see that too. 

 

So when this Bill is coming forward, it does speak to a 

fundamental assault on democracy, when you try and take away 

someone’s right to vote. So I don’t think there’s anything in any 

of the material I have seen that would suggest that we should be 

seeing this as a Bill that would be important to pass or that 

somebody should support and have it into our rules in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And even saying that we want to have, go to some direction that 

other provinces are going, we don’t seem to follow that 

direction in other areas. When we talk about rent control, and 

80 per cent of people in the country are under some form of rent 

control, no one seems to care about following that example. 

Somehow or other this seems to be a selling feature of these 

changes, but it doesn’t . . . It’s very much picking and choosing 

what you want to support that other provinces are doing. And 

this doesn’t seem to be one that would definitely, would 

definitely do any good for anybody, especially people with 

disabilities, seniors, renters, and certainly people who are 

homeless. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And that’s definitely what’s happening in BC. People in BC 

who don’t have a fixed address, who don’t have any ability to 

have a telephone bill or a utility bill or a driver’s licence are 

saying that this type of thing is definitely going to 

disenfranchise them. And it’s just almost like writing off a 

whole section of our society when saying, well it doesn’t matter 

if they can’t vote, if they can’t come to the polls, if they can’t 

get there with their photo ID. It doesn’t matter because they’re 

not the ones we’re actually targeting. They’re not, they’re 

basically not the Sask Party supporters. 

 

So lots of people are going to find it difficult to comply with 

this legislation. And if you’re going to make some fundamental 

changes to what people have to bring to the polling station with 

them on election day, and if you’re going to make those fairly 

rigorous, you first of all have to make sure that everybody 

understands and everybody has a very, very high level of 

education on what they have to do. Because there was a lot of 

very unhappy people who got turned away in the last election. 

And I think that people who had that experience — and I’m 

talking about seniors who mostly had that experience, who 

were told to go home and get another piece of ID or a different 

piece of ID — they couldn’t come back. And so there was a 

whole bunch of people, voters, who made the effort to come out 

and vote, who had come to exercise their democratic right and 

were turned away because they didn’t meet some requirement 

that they didn’t know of ahead of time or didn’t understand. 

 

So I think that if we’re going to see something that comes in 

that disenfranchises so many people, how on earth are you 

going to make sure they all know that you’ve changed the rules, 

and that the rules that you’ve changed are going to be so 

onerous that they are likely not going to come? 

 

So there’s a whole bunch of questions about how you make 

sure people have the ability to follow your rules which I don’t 

see anything in here about that either. There’s nothing about 

how you’re going to make sure that people have all kinds of 

information so that you have, after November 7th, when you 

look at the election turnout or the electoral turnout on 

November 8th, you can say in Saskatchewan the new rules 

made this the best voter turnout in many, many elections. 

 

I don’t think that’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker. I think this is 

going to see a decrease in number of people who are going to 

be able to come out simply because you’ve added a whole other 

level of requirement onto them. You’ve added a whole other 

level of confusion, and you’ve added a whole other level of 

disrespect for their circumstances. 

 

You haven’t actually looked at what do people need to get to 

the polls, not what do people need from your point of view. 

You need photo ID for what reason? Why does the government 

think that they should require that? You should be looking at 

what does a senior need to get to the poll? What does a disabled 

person need to get to a poll? What does a First Nations person 

need to get to a poll? What do the homeless people need to get 

to the poll and actually engage themselves in the democratic 

process? 

 

I don’t see any of that conversation taking place when the 

minister makes his remarks. He doesn’t have any connection 

with those types of people. He has no reason to put this sort of 

Bill in place, these changes to The Elections Act, no sound 

reason that would suggest that we absolutely need this change 

in Saskatchewan or somehow or other our electoral process will 

be compromised. Nothing has come forward to suggest that that 

has happened before, and nothing has come forward to suggest 

it will happen. 

 

So the minister has acted on some, I’m not sure, some incentive 

of his own or the party’s own or the government’s own 

initiative that somehow sees this as a way to, I’m not sure what. 

I think basically what it says to me is to make sure that certain 



7326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2011 

segments of the population who are not their traditional 

supporters don’t get a chance to vote. And that is a very serious 

problem in a democracy. If you do this, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

serious problem in democracy. And it does speak to a level of 

arrogance and a level of disregard that is very scary actually. 

And I think people should be very worried about a government 

who actually puts something like this in place and tries to tell 

people that it’s somehow innocuous — it’s not going to matter 

or it’s for their own good or it’s for the good of the democratic 

process. I don’t think anybody’s going to actually believe that. I 

think this is a serious problem with a government who 

somehow thinks that the people that this will affect the most 

don’t matter and that their ability to vote doesn’t matter. 

 

And I think if we look at the turnout on November 8th, we’re 

not going to see a huge improvement because we’ve made it 

easier for people to vote. We’re going to have, I’m pretty sure, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have fewer people vote with this 

type of regulation or this type of legislation in place. I don’t 

think it’s going to make it any easier for anybody to vote. We 

should be looking at ways to improve our turnout. We should 

be looking at ways to improve people’s trust in democracy and 

people’s commitment to democracy. There are countries where 

people stand in line to vote and are shot when they’re in line. 

And we’re trying to make it more difficult for people to get out. 

And which way are we going? 

 

People in other countries, in Third World countries, look at us 

and say, anybody can come and vote. It’s easy to come and 

vote. You’re free to come and vote. You’re encouraged to come 

and vote. People are dying to get the right to vote. And in our 

country, we’re looking at ways to stop them from coming to the 

polling station and mark their ballot. I don’t think that’s the 

way a country with Canada’s reputation and Canada’s history 

should be looking at the voting process and looking at the rights 

of voters. I think we’re going backwards, Mr. Speaker, when 

other countries are trying so hard to encourage people to come 

to vote and people are committing themselves, their very lives, 

to stand in line and vote, and we’re trying to put roadblocks in 

front of our citizens so that they can’t come and vote. 

 

I don’t think this is, this is not progressive. And it’s certainly 

not, it’s not a commitment to democracy. It’s a very sad 

statement of a government’s intention and a government’s 

philosophy and a government’s policy and a government’s 

belief that this is the way that they think this province should 

go. I think that’s a sad commentary on a government when I see 

countries that on the news where people trying to vote are shot 

or beat up or otherwise discouraged. I think we have such a 

good country where we’re free to vote, where we’re free to 

come and exercise our democratic right. I don’t think this 

speaks to any of that. I think this is a step backwards in the 

democratic process. And I think people will see it for what it is. 

And I don’t think anybody in our caucus would ever think that 

this is a good idea. I think many of my colleagues still have yet 

to speak on this, and I look forward to the opportunity to hear 

what they have to say . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You want 

me to adjourn? Yes, Mr. Speaker, I can go for another four or 

five minutes. 

 

I think basically what I was saying, Mr. Speaker, in other 

countries that look at Canada to model a democracy after, when 

you have roadblocks like this put in place and legislation like 

this put forward with no actual reason or any good reason for it, 

I think those countries would wonder and shake their heads at 

where are we going. We’re sliding backwards in the democratic 

process. 

 

They are trying so hard to struggle to get their citizens the right 

to vote, the freedom to vote without fear of dying in line to 

vote, and yet we have people now who we’re going to 

disenfranchise, that won’t be able to come because they don’t 

have the proper identification. They don’t have the ability to get 

photo ID. Why are we doing this? We don’t have a good 

reason. And I think it demonstrates, to not only the province but 

the rest of the country, that we’re not interested in being 

inclusive. We’re interested in being exclusive. 

 

So I don’t think that this is something that people will like as a 

Bill. I think they would not see this as something that their 

families and that their communities or they themselves will 

benefit from. I think it’s definitely something that they will 

look at and think, why? Why would we be doing this? What 

good will this do to me? What will I have to do on voting day 

on November 7th? What will it mean to me? How am I going to 

get there? And if they don’t know ahead of time, if there’s not 

enough education ahead of time and they come to the polls on 

November 7th and are turned away, this is again a black mark. 

 

We should not be putting barriers in place for people to come to 

vote. We should be looking at ways that are more in tune with 

who we should be reaching out to. We should make every effort 

to make sure that students vote, that seniors vote, that homeless 

people vote, that Aboriginal people vote. We should be making 

every effort to make sure that they have every available 

opportunity to get to the polling booth and mark their ballots so 

that truly the government that sits in these seats is 

representative of their issues and that they have confidence in 

the people that sit in this seat to actually put their views 

forward, and they have also the assurance that if they don’t 

have that confidence, if they have lost that confidence, then 

they have a way to actually change that. And that is to go and 

vote on the election day. 

 

And we want to make sure that they have every opportunity to 

do that. We’ve encouraged every single citizen of 

Saskatchewan to vote. Instead of putting up barriers and putting 

in blocks, we should be looking at ways to encourage people to 

vote, to actually make every effort on the part of a government 

and an opposition to make sure that people have that 

opportunity that they can exercise their democratic right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that, like I said, there’s many people 

who still want to comment on this, and I think that there will be 

opportunity for them to do it. I have certainly I think 

summarized all the remarks that I want to make because I’m not 

in favour of this. I don’t see any reason. No one has given me 

any idea that this is a good thing, a necessary thing. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I will now adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



April 18, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7327 

The Speaker: — I recognize the government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, to facilitate the work of 

committees, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 

moved the Assembly adjourn to facilitate the work of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Allan Emrys Blakeney 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7295 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7296 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7297 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7297 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7297 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7297 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7298 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7298 

  Vermette ........................................................................................................................................................................ 7298, 7299 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7298 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7298 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7299 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7300 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7300 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7300 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7300 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7302 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tribute to Serge LeClerc 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7302 

 Conscience of the Land 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7302 

 Biggar Central School Student Awarded Scholarship 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7303 

 Regina and District Association for Community Living Spring Fling 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7303 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7304 

 World Hemophilia Day 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7303 

 Using Respectful Language 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7303 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Remuneration of Health Care Employees 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7304 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7304 

 Support for Trapping Industry 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7305 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7305 

 Funding for National School of Dental Therapy 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7307 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7307 

 Response to Flooding 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7308 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7308 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7309 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Creation of New Provincial Parks 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7309 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7309 

 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 170 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2011 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7310 

 Bill No. 171 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2011 (No. 2) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7310 

 Bill No. 625 — The Saskatchewan Respectful Language Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7311 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7311 

MOTIONS 

 Motion of Transmittal 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7311 

BILL WITHDRAWN 

 Bill No. 622 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7311 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7311 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7312 

 Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7312 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7313 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7313 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7314 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 7315 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7315 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7317 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7321 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


