




















































Hansard: May 09, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 58A  MONDAY, MAY 9, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7551 

 May 9, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to members of the Assembly it’s my great pleasure 

to introduce a group of very special guests in your gallery 

today. They are high school students and their chaperones from 

high schools in Stanley Mission, Pinehouse Lake, Turnor Lake, 

and Fond-du-Lac. 

 

From Rhoda Hardlotte Memorial Keethanow High School in 

Stanley Mission, we have Josiah Charles, Daryl McKenzie, 

Deborah McKenzie, Lauren Charles, James Ballantyne, and 

their teacher, Alexis Wenzowski. 

 

From Minahik Waskahigan High School in Pinehouse, Mr. 

Speaker, we have Lorelle Natomagan, Kelsey Lariviere, Faith 

McCallum, Colleen Georges, Markel Tinker, and teacher, Elsie 

Forsythe. 

 

From Birch Narrows Dene Community School in Turnor Lake, 

we have Keenan O’Connell, Trent Moberly, Chanise Harkins, 

and Colten Oneeye, and their teacher, Kristin Doile. 

 

From Father Gamache High School in Fond-du-Lac, we have 

Loretta Randhile, Josseline Mercredi, Georgianna McDonald, 

Ivana Adam, and Frank McDonald Jr., and accompanied by 

teacher, Laurie McFadden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are here today to take part in the 

Youth Mentorship Program, which was sponsored by the 

Government of Saskatchewan in partnership with Cameco 

Corporation of the Government House Foundation. This visit is 

an opportunity for these fine young men and women to learn 

more about our system of government in Saskatchewan and to 

consider a career in public service. 

 

It’s my pleasure to introduce them today, and I ask all members 

to welcome them to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with my colleague opposite to also welcome the students 

from northern Saskatchewan, and to point out very quickly that 

I see three of the groups are from Athabasca, which is the best 

constituency in the whole province. But I want to say, 

especially to the Cree-speaking students from Pine House: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Then to the Dene students, both from Turnor Lake and from 

Fond-du-Lac: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

So I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure having these 

Aboriginal students here and let them know that this House is 

yours. There’s a lot of room, and I’m really, really pleased that 

they’re here today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the legislature a group of students from 

Langenburg, Saskatchewan. There’s 24 grade 8 and 15 grade 12 

students. They’re accompanied by Fallon Prince, one of their 

teachers, and Christine Neustaeter. And I would ask everyone to 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to recognize several constituents in the Speaker’s 

gallery. First of all, Patti Hughes who is president of my 

constituency, Sask Rivers, and she’s a former media person and 

private entrepreneur. And I also see Jeanette Wicinski-Dunn up 

in the gallery, from Big River, and Sandra Gilbert. So we’d just 

like the Assembly to welcome them to their gallery. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce through you and to members of the Assembly, 

Jeanette Wicinski-Dunn who’s here from Big River. She is a 

former town councillor there. She was on the local forestry task 

force, the doctor recruitment committee. She is a former CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the chamber of commerce in the 

area and is also a small-business owner, Mr. Speaker. She’s 

been an entrepreneur in that area for a good long time, was born 

and raised in the Big River area and will be a tremendous 

candidate for us in the upcoming provincial election. I would 

ask all members to welcome her to her Assembly today. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly I would like to 

introduce five members from the Northern Lakes recruitment 

committee from Spiritwood. They’re here today joining the 

delegation from Big River, and they’re seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members are Betty and Martin Taylor, Joyce Willick, 

Helen Mack, and Leanne Sawatsky. They’re here to view the 

proceedings of the legislature. And I welcome them and I’d ask 

all members to help welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

join with the member and welcome these folks from Spiritwood 



7552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2011 

today. And while I’m on my feet, if I can, Mr. Speaker, in the 

west gallery is a gentleman from the province of Alberta who 

has become a friend, Mr. Speaker. He’s a businessman in that 

province and for some time lent his good abilities and counsel 

to the Premier of Alberta, Ed Stelmach. He also has a 

background in journalism in the province of Alberta. He’s here 

for some meetings in Regina today. His name is Tom Olsen, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’d just ask all members to welcome Tom to 

this Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I’d just like to acknowledge the students that are 

here. And we’ll be having supper with them tonight; we’re 

going to join them in 218. It will be an honour to gather with 

them. And that they’re here as youth mentorship and to 

understand and work with, I guess, both sides of the House — 

the official opposition and the government. And I just want to 

welcome them here. And of course we had, one of the students 

is from Stanley Mission, my constituency, which is 

Cumberland. And I just want to welcome them here. 

 

But I want to welcome all the students that are here to learn 

about the process of government and official opposition. And 

just seeing them here, I just want to welcome them, and I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations, and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security, and that 

the income gap between the rich and the poor in Saskatchewan 

continues to grow and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today again to present 

petitions on behalf of people who support maintaining quality 

health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding areas; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding areas will also not serve the needs of the 

residents. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Nipawin, Regina, Carlyle, and Central Butte. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand up today and present a petition in support of 

maintaining the educational assistants throughout our great 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s amazing that the 

educational assistants that are being cut in great numbers, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s part of the Ministry of Education’s document of 

enhancing opportunities through full-time school divisions 

whereas, Mr. Speaker, they will have a seven-year plan to 

reduce the number of EAs [educational assistants] in the 

classroom by more than 70 per cent, which to date represents 

230 full-time positions. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide appropriate funding for 

the required number of educational assistants to provide 

intensive-needs students with the supports that they 

require to maintain a positive learning environment for all 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petitions are 

from Weyburn, from Moose Jaw, from Regina, from Melfort, 

and from all throughout the land, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the running of deficits and increasing of debt at times of record 

highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, the last three years increasing 

debt by over $1.3 billion, and this year alone increasing debt by 

$548 million, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 



May 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7553 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Nipawin, Lumsden, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effects that Bill 160 will have on human 

rights law if enacted. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, 

Martensville, Maymont, Wynyard, Watrous, and Humboldt. I 

so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of personal care home funding: 

 

That Saskatchewan residents require a different level of 

care in their senior years; and 

 

That personal care homes play a vital role in providing the 

seniors who live in them an appropriate level of care; and 

 

That the Saskatchewan Ministry of Health currently does 

not fund personal care homes, although it does fund 

special care homes which provide services to seniors 

requiring high levels of care. 

 

Therefore in the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan to cause the government to provide a 

subsidy to personal care homes permitting the seniors 

who rely on them to live in dignity and independence 

without bearing an undue financial burden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Vanscoy and 

Saskatoon, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

again today to present a petition regarding restoring funding 

equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools 

receive $275 less per pupil than the Regina public schools, 

amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million for the last 

fiscal year. And that total is growing, Mr. Speaker, because that 

problem has not yet been resolved for the past year as well. 

 

That funding inequity places program delivery and staffing 

levels at risk, and this is throughout the entire province of 

Saskatchewan that this funding inequity affects, Mr. Speaker. 

The Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 

risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, 

immediately restore funding equity to ensure that every 

student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic 

or public school, receives equitable resources to ensure 

every student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords 

. . . [inaudible] . . . Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That is correct. I rise 

again today with a petition in support of a potash royalty review 

because the people of Saskatchewan are owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic resource and deserve to receive the maximum benefit 

of that resource. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, the CEO of a major 

potash company in Saskatchewan has said that there’s a new 

norm for potash, and first quarter earnings of $732 million 

proves that. So, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Saskatoon, Yorkton, and Manor. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 



7554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of Saskatchewan teachers. The 

petition reads: 

 

That teachers are vital to the future of Saskatchewan 

through educating our most valuable resource, our young 

people;  

 

That a competitive offer to teachers is needed in order to 

demonstrate respect to teachers and support the teaching 

profession over the long term; and  

 

That teachers have supported job action with a 95 per cent 

in favour vote, indicating their level of dissatisfaction 

with the stalled bargaining process. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

on the government to immediately stop disrespecting 

Saskatchewan teachers and return to the bargaining table 

with a willingness to bargain in good faith, thereby 

demonstrating that teachers are valued, respected, and 

central to the success of Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hundreds and hundreds of people who have 

signed this petition are from right across Saskatchewan. With 

that, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 9th to 15th is 

Women Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan. The rise of 

female entrepreneurship has had a significant and increasing 

impact on Saskatchewan’s employment and economic activity. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize a few female 

entrepreneurs whose businesses have received recognition at the 

YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] annual 

Women of Distinction awards. 

 

Nikki Lamb won the award for Leadership and Management. 

She is the regional manager for the prairie region of the Neil 

Squire Society, executive coordinator of the NSS annual job 

fair for people with disabilities, and founder and director of 

business development for the Neil Squire Society. 

 

The next group recognized was the Breast Friends, Circle of 

Friends. Mr. Speaker, Breast Friends is a group of 10 friends 

from Foam Lake who have raised well over 1.1 million for local 

and national cancer charities through their bestselling 

cookbooks. 

 

Angeline Panio received the Contribution to a Rural 

Community honour. She has dedicated her time to many 

worthwhile organizations and has helped improve the rural 

communities of Montmartre, Kendal, and Wadena. Mr. 

Speaker, Jill Arnott was also recognized for Community 

Leadership and Enhancement for her work at the Regina 

women’s centre. 

 

There are but a few examples of female-run businesses that are 

providing the people of Saskatchewan with valuable services. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Woman Entrepreneur Achieves Success 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

second week of May in Saskatchewan, we celebrate Women 

Entrepreneurs Week. In 2010 over 33,000 women were 

self-employed in this province. This has a significant and an 

increasing impact on Saskatchewan’s employment and 

economic activity. 

 

One woman entrepreneur in particular has had an incredibly 

successful year. When she started her business, Rachel Mielke 

wanted to create an investment-worthy jewellery line that is 

fashionable, beautiful, and functional. The designer and owner 

of Hillberg & Berk, an attainable luxury jewellery line, has 

succeeded tremendously on all these counts. 

 

Rachel launched her jewellery business in 2007 and since then 

has achieved much renown. She has appeared everywhere from 

CBC’s [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Dragon’s Den, 

where she convinced Brett Wilson to invest in her company, to 

the Oscar red carpet where she was invited to attend the 

pre-Oscar luxury gifting lounge in 2008. Today, celebrities 

including Sarah McLachlan, Michelle Obama, Carrie 

Underwood, and Celine Dion wear her luxury pieces. Recently, 

Rachel was named the Business Development Bank of 

Canada’s 2011 Young Entrepreneur Award winner for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Small business is the backbone of our province and woman are 

leading the way. Rachel is a wonderful role model for women 

entrepreneurs, for all entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. She has 

turned her passion for fashion in jewellery into a business 

success. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

celebrating Rachel’s achievements, as well as all women 

entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Prairie Scene Celebrates Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, Prairie Scene, the fifth in a 

series of regional art festivals hosted by the National Arts 

Centre in Ottawa, has just wrapped up. Judging by box office 

numbers, we’re hearing that this was the best Scene yet — 200 

Saskatchewan artists, writers, dancers, musicians, actors, 

playwrights, craftspeople and even chefs exhibited their work or 

performed in front of new audiences and connected with 

national and international talent scouts and booking agents. 

Prairie Scene told the Saskatchewan story and helped to show 



May 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7555 

the world that our province is a great place to visit, invest, and 

enjoy a great quality of life. 

 

Adding to the fun was the same green scene which was such a 

big hit at the Olympics. Three hundred people had their photo 

taken with a Saskatchewan scene as a background. We even had 

a special performance of Riders on the hill, Mr. Speaker — 

literally, that is. On Saturday, with the help of Rider legend Al 

Ford, we showed Ottawa a little Rider pride by staging a green 

and white touch football game on Parliament Hill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, supporting this festival was one tangible way our 

government helps artists. The government’s direct investment 

in our artists has helped propel their careers and has allowed us 

to showcase not only Saskatchewan’s great talent but also the 

natural beauty and high quality of life in our province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

National Aboriginal Hockey Championship 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan hosted the National Aboriginal Hockey 

Championship at the Jemini arenas in Saskatoon March 26th to 

30th. The tournament featured teams from across Canada. And, 

Mr. Speaker, National Aboriginal Hockey Championships 

provides a forum for the elite Aboriginal hockey players 

throughout the country. 

 

Two teams represented Team Saskatchewan — one male, one 

female — and they’re both comprised of the bantam and midget 

A athletes. Mr. Speaker, the event celebrates the athletic 

abilities of the Aboriginal athletes from across this great 

country. 

 

Team Saskatchewan won both the men’s and the women’s 

division. The men won a 4-3 overtime thriller over E.D. & N, 

which is a team comprised of players from northern Ontario and 

Quebec, and this is their fourth straight national title. 

Meanwhile the women’s provincial team steamrolled to a 7-3 

win, earning their first championship as one of the more 

dominant teams at this year’s tournament. The men were 

expected to have a strong chance of winning, but the women’s 

victory was a breakthrough for the team. For the athletes, 

winning a national gold in an Aboriginal tournament is a huge 

honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal people are an under-represented 

segment of the population when it comes to sports, and the 

success of these athletes is a great inspiration to people across 

this province. The players carried themselves well, both on and 

off the ice. They are great role models and ambassadors and 

everything we want our young Aboriginal people to become. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these inspiring First Nations youth and great hockey champions 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

 

Small-Business Optimism 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The April 2011 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business monthly Business 

Barometer reveals optimism for the year ahead among 

small-business owners. According to the Barometer, the 

optimism of Saskatchewan business owners increased by 1.5 

points in April to 76.7 from an index of 75.2 in March and well 

ahead of the national index of 70.7. Fifty-nine per cent of 

Saskatchewan small-business owners rated their overall state of 

business as good compared to 38 per cent nationally. 

Twenty-nine per cent also planned to increase full-time 

employment in the next three to four months — the highest in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] survey shows that Saskatchewan business owners are 

on a positive trajectory. Their hard work and vision for a better 

future contribute to the high quality of living that we enjoy in 

this province. 

 

Owning and running a small independent business is a risky 

venture, and we know that not everyone is successful. However, 

Mr. Speaker, we do know that positive government policies 

contribute to a healthy economic climate. Our Saskatchewan 

Party government is proud of its record of supporting small 

independent businesses but, Mr. Speaker, we are even more 

proud of the business owners and workers who continue to 

drive Saskatchewan’s economic engine forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increasing business optimism is yet another 

example of the Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Health Sciences Association 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we had our 

province’s 12,000 teachers take job action. This morning 

members of the Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan, 

representing more than 3,000 health care professionals, hit the 

picket line in Prince Albert after issuing a 48-hour strike notice 

on Friday. There seems to be a pattern developing in the 

Premier’s new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Workers have been without a contract for two years. These 

workers are the people on the front line of our health care 

system who work tirelessly to ensure that the residents of our 

province receive quality medical care. Workers who walked off 

the job this morning in Prince Albert include addictions 

counsellors, assessors, coordinators, and mental health 

therapists as well as dieticians, exercise therapists, health 

educators, occupational therapists, pharmacists, physical 

therapists, psychologists, and speech-language pathologists. Mr. 

Speaker, they are our family members, our neighbours, and our 

fellow citizens. 

 

The public services that they provide improve our quality of life 

and strengthen our communities. Many of these workers 

rallying in Prince Albert today with their co-workers are calling 

attention to the Sask Party government’s frustrating and 



7556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2011 

disrespectful process at the bargaining table. The government 

does not recognize the important role that our health care 

providers provide in our province. 

 

Many people feel disrespected with the way this government is 

treating workers at the Health Sciences Association of 

Saskatchewan as housing prices have skyrocketed, utilities cost 

more, food prices are increasing, and this Sask Party 

government offers a little more than 1 per cent a year in 

compensation. I call on this government to take immediate 

action in recognizing 3,000 employees and the pivotal work that 

they do in our health care system every day. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in last 

week’s 75-minute debate, the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

told the people of Saskatchewan that STARS [Shock Trauma 

Air Rescue Society] would pick and choose who to save based 

on the size of their wallets. She said, and I quote, “. . . if a 

citizen who hasn’t made a corporate donation to the STARS 

program is injured at the same time as a worker whose company 

has given a donation to STARS, how will STARS pick and 

choose where to go, Mr. Speaker?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, STARS has a 25-year history of making medical 

and ethical decisions based on patient need. The emergency 

physician is the one that makes the call based on all available 

information regarding missions, and there has never been a 

situation where a donation changed the carefully triaged 

mission response. STARS has had and will continue to have a 

sterling reputation for putting patients first. 

 

I am dismayed that the member from Nutana would resort to 

cheap political shots and fearmongering regarding such a 

respected life-saving organization. Bringing STARS to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is about saving lives. As a former 

Health minister, I expected a debate based on fact from the 

member from Nutana, not misinformation and fearmongering. I, 

for one, am proud to be part of a government that continues to 

put patients first in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Negotiations with Health Care Workers and Teachers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, today 60 health care 

professionals withdrew their service in Prince Albert and 

withdrew because of the failure of this government to provide a 

contract for 3,000 health science professionals here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. They’re concerned about the fact 

that they’re being treated with disrespect. And the fact is that 

for two years now they’ve been doing everything they can to 

get a contract. They would much rather be at work today, but in 

order to highlight the position of no contract, they’ve decided to 

withdraw service — 60 members of their association — for 

today. 

 

My question to the Premier: in light of the fact that these 

workers, these professionals are being offered less than 1.5 per 

cent per year and in that same region the CEO was offered and 

received 60 per cent increase this year, how is that fair? And 

how does he expect, how does the Premier expect to get a 

contract with this unfair situation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

know that as a result of adjustments for out-of-scope health care 

workers and managers, there’s been some increases that will 

take them to be about 65 per cent of the average of their 

counterparts in Western Canada. Fortunately with contracts that 

are already settled with thousands of health care workers, we’re 

now well over the 90th percentile in terms of front-line health 

care workers being competitive with other Western Canadian 

averages, in some cases well over 100 per cent. So we are 

actually paying more here for front-line health care workers 

than any other Western province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also want to be competitive with the very 

valued people in the Health Sciences Association of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We value their work. We also 

value the collective bargaining process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in 2002 under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], services were withheld for 28 days. I can tell 

you there was a strike in 2007 under the NDP. I assume they 

would say that then the NDP government valued and respected 

those workers. The same is true today. We know the solution to 

this is at the bargaining table, and we look forward to those 

negotiations continuing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, at a time when the workers 

have withdrawn their service because they’re being offered less 

than one and a half per cent, I think it’s unfair that the Premier 

indicates that they’re the highest paid in Canada. It’s just not 

accurate, and the workers in Prince Albert know that. In fact 

one of the reasons they’ve withdrawn service is because of the 

underfunding and understaffing of a number of important areas 

in health care and the professions they represent, most 

importantly, and importantly the area of ambulance service. 

And each day in this province, in rural Saskatchewan, seven 

times a day people are waiting more than recommended by this 

government for ambulance. In the city it’s more than that; it’s 

10 times a day. In fact in Coronach my understanding is that 

last week a family waited one hour, more than an hour, for an 

ambulance, putting the life of the individual at risk. 

 

Can the Premier tell me, at a time when we have record profits 

from resources in the province, more money than ever for the 

revenues in Saskatchewan, how is it that these professional 

health care workers are being offered less than 1.5 per cent for a 

three-year contract? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the offer on the table is 7.5 



May 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7557 

per cent over four years, Mr. Speaker, and we understand that 

the Health Sciences Association is not comfortable with that 

and they’ve taken . . . They’re on strike today in certain locales, 

Mr. Speaker. We understand that’s part of the collective 

bargaining process, and we respect that. 

 

In the preamble of the member’s question, he highlighted the 

fact that there’s human resource issues in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the fact that the 

Government of Saskatchewan and SAHO [Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations] and regions have been 

working hard to deal with the human resource deficit left 

behind by the NDP in terms of nurses, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

the number of doctors. We’re also happy that there has been a 

settlement with thousands of public sector workers across the 

province. Obviously more work needs to be done with respect 

to this contract. That work needs to happen at the bargaining 

table, and we look forward to negotiations continuing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, last week 12,000 teachers in 

this province took job action. Three thousand of them came 

here to the Legislative Building to try to indicate to the Premier 

and to this government that the wages being offered, the 

increase in wages being offered, simply is insufficient. And in 

fact it’s the first time in 78 years that teachers in this province 

have withdrawn service and I think that indicates the fact that 

this Premier and this government are not paying attention to the 

people who are doing the heavy lifting in teaching our children. 

 

Today, today we have 3,000 health service professionals who 

are indicating the same concept, that they just are not being 

treated with respect and are not being given a contract that is 

meaningful to their families. And at a time when inflation is 

high for housing, for food, for gasoline, to be given an offer that 

is less than the rate of inflation is absolutely inadequate. 

 

And my question to the Premier is: when will this government 

realize and recognize the hard work being done by the teachers 

and the health care professionals in this province and give them 

a meaningful contract? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as we indicated last week 

when the teachers were here, the government-trustee bargaining 

committee has rejected the request, the demand on the part of 

the Teachers’ Federation for a 12 per cent increase in one year. 

We know that the teachers are rejecting the initial position of 

the government-trustee bargaining committee, and we’re happy, 

Mr. Speaker, that negotiations are going to continue and this 

matter will resolve at the table. 

 

We believe the same is true for the Health Sciences 

Association, Mr. Speaker, and we have confidence in a proper 

resolve to this because since 2007, Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of 

the health care employees in this province have reached an 

agreement without need for arbitration with the public sector 

employer, Mr. Speaker. In addition to that, we have made 

significant progress over the massive deficit left behind by 

members opposite, where there were 1,000 too few nurses in 

the province, where there were too few doctors being trained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can’t fix the problems left behind by members 

opposite overnight. But the good news is, we’re making 

progress and 90 per cent of health care workers have signed a 

contract, Mr. Speaker. And we’re looking forward to the fact 

that these other very important public sector employees will see 

a new contract and the matters will be resolved at the 

bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Issues 

 

Ms. Junor: — I think what the Premier misses, Mr. Speaker, is 

that it took Bills 5 and 6 to get those contracts settled — 

nothing to do with good bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of people in the gallery today 

from the communities of Big River, Spiritwood, and Kamsack. 

They’re very concerned about the government’s failure to 

provide health care to their communities. Spiritwood and Big 

River have lost their hospital emergency services, and the 

government is giving the Prince Albert regional health, health 

region CEO a 60 per cent wage increase, with a 10 per cent 

bonus for meeting efficiency targets. People in these 

communities say they are suffering death by management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: since none of the P.A. [Prince 

Albert] CEO’s performance is based on any deliverables in 

rural Saskatchewan, how can rural communities like 

Spiritwood, Big River, Kamsack have any faith that more 

services won’t be cut to secure personal performance bonuses 

for CEOs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working very 

diligently with the health regions, Mr. Speaker, who are 

working with the communities to ensure that we have the 

proper complement of health care providers, in this case a 

number of physicians, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have the 

proper complement of physicians around the province. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that work has begun over the 

last three and a half years. Unfortunately, the work should have 

been begun much earlier, Mr. Speaker. It should have begun 

much earlier, and it didn’t. Mr. Speaker, under the former 

government, you can imagine when you only have 55 medical 

seats for a province, Mr. Speaker, of 1 million people, it simply 

was insufficient. We’ve increased the number of medical seats; 

we’re increasing the number of residency positions to match a 

growing population, Mr. Speaker. We’re optimistic about this 

province. It’s too bad those members weren’t when they were in 

power. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



7558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2011 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s optimism isn’t doing 

anything in rural Saskatchewan. Communities like Big River 

and Spiritwood are working hard to raise money to recruit 

doctors. Spiritwood has raised over $110,000, and all the 

physician recruitment agency that the minister has put together 

has done to help them is to tell them to keep raising more 

money. 

 

In the new strategic plan issued in March 2011, where the 

Health ministry outlines their direction for the next two years, 

the word rural is not even mentioned once. Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: if the government has such a huge emphasis on fixing 

rural health care, can the minister tell the people in the gallery 

today why is he rewarding health region CEOs with huge wage 

increases for cutting rural services, and why the word rural is 

not mentioned in the minister’s strategic plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can say unequivocally 

that the physician recruitment agency is working diligently in 

rural Saskatchewan, as our government is, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that we have the proper complement of health care 

providers. I find it interesting that that member opposite is now 

interested in rural Saskatchewan. I could certainly quote a quote 

about her dealings in rural Saskatchewan if she wants me to. It 

has something to do about hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. For 16 years 

under the NDP government, they absolutely ignored rural 

Saskatchewan. That isn’t the case under this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be the first to admit that there is more work to 

do in many of these communities. That’s why we’re working 

closely with the communities. That’s why we’ve actually put a 

physician strategy in place, Mr. Speaker, something that was 

never in place under the NDP. I think it probably stems back to 

the fact about nurses. They were too scared to set a target 

because they just wouldn’t do it. It was the same with 

physicians on that side. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the government has ignored the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d just like to remind 

our guests in the gallery that, while you’re welcome to be here, 

we ask that you not participate in any way, including clapping. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government has 

ignored the health care needs of far too many rural 

communities, many of which I visited over the last summer 

with my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Rural communities have been forced to set up their own 

recruitment committees. When rural communities are talking to 

each other about doctor recruitment, ambulance services, or 

long-term care facilities, the biggest word of advice the 

communities have for each other is, stay as far away from the 

regional health authority as you can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what kind of message is he 

sending to rural communities when they are telling each other 

to stay away from him if they want to keep whatever health care 

they have? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, over the past 

number of years we’ve worked hard to make sure we have the 

proper complement of health care providers, including health 

sciences. Mr. Speaker, we’re working diligently. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting because under the former 

government if we ever went back to those days, I’m sure we’ll 

cut the College of Medicine down to 55 seats. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we are the only province in Canada that was in risk of 

losing their College of Medicine under that government, Mr. 

Speaker. The College of Medicine went under probation under 

that government, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely unacceptable. 

 

Under this government, we’ve increased the number of seats. 

We’re going to increase the number of physicians working in 

this province. That’s why we’ve changed the assessment 

process, Mr. Speaker. We no longer rely on Manitoba with the 

CAPE [clinicians’ assessment and professional enhancement] 

process. We’re self-assessing so that we can spread the number 

of countries that we attract physicians from, not just to the 

seven that was under the old NDP, but all countries across the 

world. Once our assessment process has been qualified through 

the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 

able to attract more internationally medically trained grads to 

complement the Saskatchewan citizens we’ll be training here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The minister, Mr. Speaker, thinks he’s at an 

SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association] meeting still. Mr. 

Speaker, while the government is giving a 60 per cent wage 

increase to the CEO of the P.A. Health Region, he’s allowed 30 

long-term care beds to close in Muskeg Lake Cree Nation and 

leave unopened five long-term care beds in Hafford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on any given day in Prince Albert Victoria Union 

Hospital, half the beds are taken up by long-term care patients 

waiting for placement. For additional 750,000, the government 

could keep the 30 long-term care beds open in Muskeg Lake 

and take some of the stress off the wait-list for long-term care 

beds in the region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on November 10th, 2010, when talking about 

Muskeg Lake, the Premier said, and I quote, “If it’s important 

for First Nations to have that long-term care, to have 

accommodations, the Government of Saskatchewan said we’re 

going to be there.” 

 

To the minister: where’s the government now, and are they 

going to put up the additional 750,000 to open the Muskeg Lake 

long-term care facility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member was right 

that yes, last week I was at the SMA convention. In fact, Mr. 



May 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7559 

Speaker, I was at the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association] annual convention on Thursday as well, Mr. 

Speaker, and received a very positive response, something that I 

don’t think those members ever did receive when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker. when it comes to long-term care, we won’t take 

any lessons from them. In 16 years they closed 1,200 beds in 

this province. That’s the NDP record, Mr. Speaker. Under our 

government, we’ll be opening new facilities, not under the old 

formula of 65/35 under the NDP; we’ve changed the formula to 

80/20 so that those projects will go forward, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re getting it done in Saskatchewan. We’ve got a long ways 

to go yet, but we’ve come a long way from where they were 

under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Natural Gas System 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We have a 

serious situation in south Regina. In the past few weeks, there 

have been several occurrences of fires and explosions in and 

around homes, Mr. Speaker, as a result of leaks of natural gas. 

This has involved homes, garages, and serious injuries to 

individuals. It’s obviously a public safety issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister is this: what steps is the minister 

taking to ensure that the backyards and the neighbourhoods of 

south Regina are safe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

I want to thank the member for his question. This is something 

that the Government of Saskatchewan and all of our officials at 

SaskEnergy take very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the very wet weather that we’ve had over the 

winter and this spring has led to some incidents across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. An investigation is under way, as 

members will know from the Whitmore Park, the incident at 

Whitmore Park on April 10th and 11th; as well, Mr. Speaker, a 

garage that the member opposite refers to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I do want to note that 

SaskEnergy has increased the amount of public advertising 

they’re doing to alert people of what to look for or smell for or 

hear for when there could be natural gas. And, Mr. Speaker, 

letters went out to every single household in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, last week, to give more information to the people 

across this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, increasing advertising doesn’t fix 

the problem. Last week, a serious explosion which sent an 

individual to the hospital, to intensive care, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of the neighbours called SaskEnergy looking to have their 

yard checked, Mr. Speaker, and they had to insist upon it. They 

came and checked the yard, said there was nothing. But lo and 

behold, the next morning they’re digging up the backyard to fix 

the gas line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these occurrences are occurring far too frequently 

in south Regina. If the government needs to bring in more 

resources and check every neighbourhood in south Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, the people deserve it. This is a safety issue. People’s 

lives should not be put at risk. So can the minister tell this 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan what he’s prepared 

to do to protect families in south Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

can tell the member opposite that SaskEnergy is taking 

corrective action, not just for the safety of people in south 

Regina but for people all across this province. Mr. Speaker, 

that’s why, in fact, since the members opposite were the 

government of Saskatchewan, there are 69 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Most members have been 

allowing the questions and the responses to go ahead without a 

lot of interference. A couple are having difficulty. I ask them to 

allow the minister to respond. The Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members 

opposite that since the government changed in 2007, there are 

69 more individuals working for SaskEnergy that deal 

specifically with emergency gas leaks. That’s over a 10 per cent 

increase in the personnel. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy made the decision to take 

more of a visual approach to identifying where leaks took place, 

as the member opposite has stated. That was a decision made by 

the corporation to do a more in-depth investigation and to 

excavate areas where they believe that there may be a problem. 

 

While I’m on my . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres to allow the minister to respond to the 

member’s question. The Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, 

I want to commend the individuals and the people that work for 

SaskEnergy and, Mr. Speaker, that respond to these incidents, 

whether it be the incidents that the minister, or the member 

opposite is speaking, referring to, Mr. Speaker, or, Mr. Speaker, 

the gas leak that was discovered on Saturday morning a block 

away from my house, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This work is being done in Regina. It’s being done all across the 

province. Whenever there’s an incident, SaskEnergy takes this 

very seriously, Mr. Speaker, and we ask for everybody’s help in 

identifying any leaks. 



7560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not faulting the workers. 

There is something wrong with the integrity of the system when 

there are so many leaks occurring in the system. So if this 

problem is escalating, Mr. Speaker, it’s incumbent upon the 

government to look for new tools, new techniques, new ways to 

ensure the integrity of the natural gas system in our province. 

That is the responsibility of the provider, and the government in 

this case that is the provider, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So can the minister tell us what steps that this government is 

doing or taking to ensure that the future integrity of our system 

is maintained so people can go to bed at night without worrying 

about somebody dying in their family, Mr. Speaker? Does 

somebody have to die before we deal with this problem in a 

serious way? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for his question. And I want to state very clearly: the 

Government of Saskatchewan and everybody at SaskEnergy — 

from the board of directors to the management to the front-line 

workers, all 1,000 people, plus people, that work for 

SaskEnergy — take this extremely seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the last four years, the budget dealing specifically for the 

integrity of the gas system has increased by about 16 per cent or 

over $30 million. Under the members opposite, it was less than 

$25 million. That budget has increased. We’ve increased the 

individuals that deal specifically with emergency responses 

when it comes to gas leaks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that over this winter we had, in large parts of this 

province, over 200 per cent of the 10-year average when it 

comes to snowpack and snowfall, so we know that we have 

extremely moist conditions out there, Mr. Speaker. That can 

have an effect on the integrity of the gas system. But this is 

something that we’re responding to in a very serious manner, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Relationship with Teachers 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the Premier said 

that if the Sask Party government were to give teachers a 

competitive wage increase, they could face massive layoffs or 

be forced to work up to 20 per cent more hours. My question is 

this: when teachers are already feeling undervalued and 

disrespected, why on earth is the Premier threatening them with 

increased workloads and massive layoffs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I strongly suggest that 

the member opposite read Hansard. That is not what the 

Premier said, Mr. Speaker, because . . . Perhaps he didn’t hear it 

because members on that side tend to talk above the answers, 

Mr. Speaker, so he might have missed it. He can read it. 

 

That is not what was said. What he said was, we do not want to 

be in the situation that Alberta’s in. We do not want to see the 

massive layoffs, because we do value and we think that we need 

all of our teachers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m very happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that the invitation that 

has been extended to the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation], they have accepted and they are going to return to 

the bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier threatened 

teachers with massive layoffs and increased workloads, he 

wasn’t just speaking off the cuff. The threats are part of the 

Sask Party’s strategy on this file. The same threats are included 

in a draft of a letter that was accidently left in the men’s 

washroom of the legislature. This letter’s intended to be used by 

Sask Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to 

respond to frustrated constituents and the aim of it is very clear 

— to try to turn the public against teachers. The letter even 

urges parents to demand that the STF reimburse their child care 

expenses from last Thursday. 

 

To the minister: again, how does it make sense to threaten 

teachers and try to turn the public against them, when teachers 

are already feeling undervalued and disrespected? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I must apologize. I 

wasn’t in the men’s washroom so I don’t know what letter he 

was referring to. But however, I’m sure he’ll provide a copy at 

some point in time because he does, he does like to come up 

with all sorts of mysterious anonymous letters, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we definitely do value teachers. That’s why we 

believe that they should have a fair, competitive offer. 

However, we believe that the negotiations need to take place at 

the negotiating bargaining table, and we’re very, very pleased 

that the Teachers’ Federation is going to return to that table. I 

know there is a number of areas that can be discussed, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is where those discussions need to take place, 

not with false accusations from the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to anonymous 

letters, I think the Minister of Advanced Education can vouch 

for my track record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the draft of this letter has the following sentence 

crossed out: “Saskatchewan teachers do a great job.” They 

actually crossed out that sentence, Mr. Speaker. I guess when 

the rest of your letter is bashing teachers, threatening them with 

massive layoffs, and trying to incite public anger towards 

teachers, you don’t want to start by acknowledging that they do 

a great job. 

 



May 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7561 

The letter also argues that the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation “ordered its members to go on strike.” That 

completely ignores the fact that 95 per cent of Saskatchewan 

teachers voted in favour of taking job action. To the minister: 

why is the Sask Party misrepresenting the facts, trying to turn 

parents against teachers, and continually undervaluing and 

disrespecting teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again and again the 

member opposite just sends out accusations. He doesn’t want to 

listen to the answer. I will say the negotiations need to take 

place at the bargaining table. We’re very pleased that the 

teachers are returning to the bargaining table, and we wish both 

sides all the best in making those negotiations work for what’s 

best for the education system in this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 174, 

The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 174, The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this 

House do now adjourn to accommodate committees this 

afternoon and this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that, in order to allow the work of committees, this Assembly 

do now stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:25.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7551 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7551 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7551 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7551 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7551 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7551 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7551 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7552 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7552 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7552 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7552 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7552 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7553 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7553 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7553 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7553 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7554 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women of Distinction Awards 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7554 

 Woman Entrepreneur Achieves Success 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7554 

 Prairie Scene Celebrates Saskatchewan 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7554 

 National Aboriginal Hockey Championship 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7555 

 Small-Business Optimism 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7555 

 Contract Negotiations with Health Sciences Association 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7555 

 Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7556 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Negotiations with Health Care Workers and Teachers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7556 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7556 

 Health Care Issues 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7557 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7557 

 Natural Gas System 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7559 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7559 

 Relationship with Teachers 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7560 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7560 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 174 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7561 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


