
















































Hansard: March 31, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 
N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 41A  THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 
   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7065 
 March 31, 2011 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

House a group of students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate in my 

riding, Mr. Speaker. Today we have 24 students accompanied 

by a number of teachers and chaperones, Mr. Speaker. They 

have come to the Assembly today to watch the proceedings, and 

I will have an opportunity to meet with them in a few minutes. 

They’re accompanied by their teachers Jill Williams, Tracey 

Turnbull, Russ Cushway, and two teacher aids as well, Mr. 

Speaker: Flo Coffey and Paul Fyckes. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

a wonderful group from the great riding of Regina Dewdney, 

and I wish all members to join me in welcoming them to their 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents, and it 

speaks to the issues being faced by those residents of a 

combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in many 

communities. And, Mr. Speaker, it also recognizes that a 

majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control 

guidelines, including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, 

Quebec, and Prince Edward Island, and that the argument that 

the private market would deliver sufficient affordable housing 

in the absence of rent control has proven to be false. And the 

prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens mostly in Regina 

on these ones. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that Saskatchewan’s income gap 

between the rich and poor continues to grow, and now one in 

five children in Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And 

we know that freedom from poverty is an enshrined human 

right by the United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to 

social and economic security. And we know, for example, the 

challenges many families face with the rising cost of housing. 

And tomorrow the price of bread goes up in Saskatchewan by 

some 5 per cent, so this is a very important issue to many 

people in Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And this petition is signed by citizens of Regina and Saskatoon 

and many other parts of Saskatchewan. I do so present. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And it’s about the need for 

a new school for their children. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in 

Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 will have on human 

rights law in the province of Saskatchewan if enacted. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before any 

amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 



7066 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina, Saskatoon, 

and Kindersley, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the tabling of deficits and incurring and growing of our debt at 

times of record highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, 

at a time of unprecedented revenues, adding $548 million to our 

total debt, Mr. Speaker, and a record that includes over $1.3 

billion of debt over the last three years, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Yorkton, Melville, and Gerald. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

World Autism Awareness Day 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this Saturday, April 2nd will mark the fourth annual 

World Autism Awareness Day. Created by a resolution of the 

United Nations General Assembly in 2007, this day aims to 

bring global attention to autism, a pervasive disorder affecting 

tens of millions of people around the world, many of whom are 

undiagnosed and misunderstood. It’s a day, Mr. Speaker, to 

raise awareness about autism throughout society and to 

encourage early diagnosis and early intervention. 

 

World Autism Awareness Day also provides an opportunity for 

us to reflect on how our society can better support those with 

autism, their caregivers, and their families. The developmental 

challenges posed by autism, Mr. Speaker, can be severe, and so 

families coping with the disorder are fortunate to be able to rely 

on support networks like Saskatchewan’s own SaskFEAT 

[Saskatchewan Families for Effective Autism Treatment], a 

provincial organization of families, friends, and dedicated 

professionals concerned with the well-being and development 

of individuals with autism or within the autism spectrum. 

 

World Autism Awareness Day carries special significance this 

year in our country, Mr. Speaker, since 2011 also marks the 

35th anniversary of the Autism Society of Canada, which for 

over three decades has worked across the country to reduce the 

impact of autism spectrum disorders on individuals and their 

families. To celebrate that anniversary, Mr. Speaker, the Autism 

Society is encouraging people to wear blue on World Autism 

Awareness Day to help celebrate the unique talents and skills of 

persons with autism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with this effort to inspire 

compassion, inclusion, and hope. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 
 

Kidney Health Month 
 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March has been 
designated Kidney Health Month throughout the province. 

During this time, we all work toward improving the health of 

our kidneys through diet and exercise, as well, understanding 

the causes of kidney-related illnesses. 

 

The kidneys are described as the master chemists of the body. 

Their job is to remove waste from the blood and return the 

clean blood back to the body. Each minute a litre of blood is 

filtered through our kidneys and returned to the stream. Our 

kidneys are also important because they regulate the amount of 

water in our body and produce the hormones which regulate 

body functions. 

 

The Saskatchewan branch of The Kidney Foundation of Canada 

is an important resource for the people of this province. They 

provide a well-integrated system of programs and services that 

emphasize information and referral, educational materials, 

emergency short-term financial assistance, and peer support. 

 

As March winds down, I would like to take this opportunity to 

acknowledge the professionals across the province that are 

committed to educating and maintaining the health of the 

people of our province. Mr. Speaker, I would particularly like to 

send out a special mention to the Kidney Foundation and hope 

their message was heard during Kidney Health Month. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 

2011 SaskTel Tankard 
 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Battlefords was 
host to the very successful 2011 SaskTel Tankard featuring 64 

of Saskatchewan’s best men curlers. I’d like to take a minute to 

recognize and thank the local organization that ensured the 

curlers, the officials, the public, and the volunteers were taken 

care of and who made this one of the most successful in the 

history of the event. The 14-member host committee co-chaired 

by Doug Horn and Doug Fehr worked extremely hard to ensure 

everything was as expected and, Mr. Speaker, they did just that. 

This was a wonderful event. 

 

We of course have to congratulate the winner of the Tankard, 

the Pat Simmons rink from the Regina Tartan Curling Club. 

Let’s not forget to thank the sponsors, without whom this event 

would not have been possible, especially, Mr. Speaker, the title 

sponsor SaskTel. This shows everyone how valuable our Crown 

corporations are in this province. SaskTel serves its customers 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7067 

well, but at the same time donates time and money to provincial 

and community events right across Saskatchewan. You have to 

acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that without strong Crowns and 

their commitment to Saskatchewan communities, events like 

the Tankard that let us celebrate the best and the brightest this 

province has to offer would not be possible. 

 

Our congratulations to SaskTel, The Battlefords host 

committee, the volunteers, and the curlers for all that they have 

done this year to promote and celebrate men’s curling in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Cupar Canucks Win Bantam C Championship  
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 
the Cupar Canuck bantam hockey team journeyed to St. Brieux 

for the final game of the Bantam C provincial finals. First game 

a week earlier, Mr. Speaker, ended in a 5-all tie. The series was 

a two-game total point, so therefore the last game turned out to 

be a sudden-death final. 

 

The score after the first period, Mr. Speaker, was 1-all. It was 

2-all after the second period. And I’m happy to report, Mr. 

Speaker that the Cupar Canuck Bantams prevailed and ended up 

winning the series 4-3. It was a well-played game as the first 

game was, Mr. Speaker, and the record crowd at both games 

were treated to two great hockey games, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In order to reach the provincial finals, the Canucks had to defeat 

teams, bantam teams from Lampman, Assiniboia, Lanigan, and 

Gull Lake. It was a long, hard-fought series. Gull Lake put up a 

good fight, but they did not prevail, Mr. Speaker. The boys 

from Cupar, Southey, and Lestock were much too strong for 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate all the players on the team 

and the coaches, Lee Mielke, Tyler Gerrard, Lyle Sandercock, 

and manager Kristen Hart. I’d also like to acknowledge a 

couple of players on the team, Deanna Gerrard and no. 14, 

Owen Hart. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

 

Dress-Sharing Program 
 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Westmore School in P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote has a unique graduation dress-sharing 

program. This program allows students to purchase their grad 

dress for $25. Mr. Speaker, many of the students at Westmore 

would otherwise not be able to afford to purchase a dress. This 

program was created last year by two teachers, Kathy Nagy and 

Janis Sawa. 

 

Last year the school added another component. It held a fashion 

show showing off some of its finest dresses. New dresses were 

donated by Craft Haven and Treasures in White. Each are fine 

businesses in Prince Albert. Other dresses were donated by 

generous people throughout our community. Local dry cleaners 

cleaned the used dresses at no charge, and two male students 

who accompanied the models last night received free suits from 

Ted Matheson Men’s Wear. 

 

The staff at Westmore believe that the dress-sharing program is 

very beneficial to the students. It helps ease concern and stress 

of having to spend more money on a dress than they would be 

able to afford. The dress-sharing program was well utilized last 

year and will no doubt be well subscribed again this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating Westmore School, its staff, and most of all its 

students for providing unique solutions to unique 

circumstances. I would also ask that all members join with me 

in congratulating the business community in Prince Albert for 

their tremendous support of the Westmore fashion show. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 
 

Affordable Housing 
 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] answer for 

affordable housing in Saskatchewan is the continued call for 

draconian rent controls. A StarPhoenix editorial had this to say, 

and I quote: 

 

. . . legislated rent control only will exacerbate an already 

serious problem. 

 

Economists are pretty well united in pointing out the 

downside of rent control, saying it degrades the market in 

the long term and reduces the supply of private sector 

rental units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that there are better answers. Our 

government proposed a $252 million strategy that will increase 

the supply of available housing and help families mitigate the 

costs of housing controls or housing rents. While the NDP have 

admitted that our strategy will increase housing units, the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview has said that a housing strategy 

is “serving no purpose” and that “There is no need for those 

houses.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to lament and I quote, “What will that 

really do to the prices?” He’s concerned about driving down 

housing prices in the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP has completely lost touch with reality when 

their only criticism of an affordable housing strategy is that it 

will create affordable homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so there it is. Too much affordable housing; that’s 

the NDP’s complaint, that it’s going to create too much and 

keep housing prices down. Mr. Speaker, they are stuck in the 

past with their old ideas. We are moving Saskatchewan forward 

and helping families move with us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 

 



7068 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

Fossil Fools Day 
 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow is April Fool’s Day, a traditional day for jokes and 

pranks, but it’s also Fossil Fools Day, a day for serious action 

on the environment and climate change. 

 

It’s serious because no one’s laughing, Mr. Speaker, at the 

damage done to Canada’s international reputation for refusing 

to adapt to the realities of human-caused climate change. Last 

year in Cancun, Mr. Speaker, the Harper government earned 

Canada a Fossil Award from more than 500 leading 

international organizations who singled out the governments 

doing the most to disrupt or undermine the UN [United 

Nations] climate talks. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Stephen Harper’s partner in folly is 

this Sask Party government, which has refused to take serious 

action on climate change here at home just as the Harper 

government has refused to act on the national and international 

levels. Mr. Speaker, they have refused to legislate clear 

reduction targets for CO2 emissions, and their major initiative 

on carbon capture and sequestration, the cross-border Montana 

project, amounted to no more than a photo op in the rotunda — 

proof, Mr. Speaker, that this government has no plan to work 

with the federal government or other national, international 

partners to seriously reduce CO2 emissions, even though we 

have the highest per capita emissions in Canada and will be one 

of the regions most affected by the adverse effect of 

human-caused climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people concerned about the 

environment have one thing to say to this government and all 

the fossil fools out there: on this April 1st, it’s time to wise up. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 

 

Mother Baby Unit 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 20th, 2011, 
Cambria Tammie Leigh Shuba passed away at the General 

Hospital, less than one day after she was born. Cambria’s 

mother, father, and their families feel that Cambria’s death 

could have been prevented. In a statement made earlier today, 

Amanda, Cambria’s mother, said: 

 

The night of Cambria’s death, every nurse that we talked 

to told us that besides having the nursery removed to 

continually monitor the baby some four months earlier, the 

nursing crew was severely short-staffed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: was the unit fully staffed during 

that particular shift when Cambria died? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all I want to start by extending our deep 

condolences to the family that’s here today, on behalf of the 

government as well as myself, the Minister of Health, and all 

working within the ministry. I can’t imagine anything tougher 

in a person’s life than to lose one of their own children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very unfortunate situation. We have 

critical incident regulations that govern health regions when 

there is a critical incident. Mr. Speaker, I’ll report that the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is following along with that 

critical incident guidelines. They’ve notified the ministry. Now 

they do an in-depth review, Mr. Speaker, of this incident, 

anything leading up to, that may be a root cause of the incident. 

Mr. Speaker, they then make recommendations to the ministry 

to ensure that something like this will never happen again, Mr. 

Speaker. That review is happening as we speak. It would not be 

appropriate for me at this time to comment on any one 

particular situation, Mr. Speaker. But I can report that that 

review is undergoing right now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I went through the General 
Hospital mother and baby unit last week, and what I saw was a 

nursery that had limited access. Only under exceptional 

circumstances is a newborn baby admitted to the nursery. 

Amanda and her family questioned why the nursery was 

inaccessible to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the criteria for a newborn 

baby to be placed in this nursery? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the mother baby unit in 
the Regina General Hospital is a state of the art unit. It follows 

along with guidelines from Health Canada that were 

implemented in 2000. The design of this particular unit was 

designed in 2002. Construction started a number of years later. 

It was funded generally in 2008 and came into fully operational 

in 2010. 

 

Since that time I’ve been notified by the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region that it has been fully staffed, Mr. Speaker. It 

follows along with all of the guidelines set out by Health 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, it has been reviewed by people that work 

on the floors to make sure that it is appropriate care, Mr. 

Speaker. And to my knowledge — as I said, I can’t speak on 

any particular incident — but to my knowledge, according to 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, it has been fully staffed 

since its opening in 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, according to Amanda and her 
families, nurses on the unit warned of the possibility of the 

death of a baby as a result of the inaccessibility of the nursery. 

Amanda states: 

 

The nurses told us that they fought hard to have the 

nursery remain in the hospital to ensure the safety of the 

infants on the ward. They were told they were just being 

whiny nurses and they will get used to it. 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7069 

A baby died because nobody listened to the front-line nurses 

who provide the care. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: it is his 

responsibility to find out why the warnings of the nurses were 

not listened to. What is he going to do to make sure that another 

family doesn’t have to suffer through what Amanda and her 

family are going through? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, this is a critical 
incident that is being reviewed by the Regina Qu’Appelle 

Health Region. We’ll let that review do its work and follow 

through with any recommendations that it may come out with 

after an in-depth review. 

 

I will say though, Mr. Speaker, that this is a state of the art unit. 

It has just been remodelled, new equipment, Mr. Speaker, extra 

training for staff. It is a state of the art unit, Mr. Speaker. I was 

there for the opening. The Premier was there for the opening. 

The opposition was there for the opening. In fact, the opposition 

made a statement right after the opening of what a beautiful unit 

this is; that it is state of the art, one of the best in Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, state of the art has failed. This is a 
painful experience for everyone involved. Amanda and Mike 

and their families are suffering because the system failed them. 

State of the art is not working. 

 

According to Amanda: 

 

The scenario of being understaffed and without peace of 

mind of having a nursery to monitor babies around the 

clock has added undue stress to the nursing staff in the 

General Hospital mother baby unit. Since Cambria’s 

death, the nurses have moved babies into the hallway in a 

makeshift nursery to avoid any other complications or 

deaths. 

 

The situation has become so stressful and nurses are so worried 

that they’re putting newborn babies in the hall. Mr. Speaker, to 

the minister: what is he doing to ensure that newborn babies are 

not in the halls because of limited access to the nursery? And he 

has to do it now, not wait until the report is over. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the 
outset, any time that there is a fatality and especially an infant 

in our facilities, you know, deep condolences go out to the 

family. It is hard, it is hard on all — no one harder than on the 

family themselves. I realize that or we realize that. 

 

Having said that though, Mr. Speaker, we can only go, as a 

government, on the guidelines that are set out by those that 

know the health care business the best. Health Canada has set 

out guidelines. We followed along with those guidelines. We’ve 

taken the very best advice from people involved in health care. 

When the facility was designed under the previous government, 

Mr. Speaker, we can only go with the best advice that people 

can give us. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe we have done that. We have funded it 

fully. Mr. Speaker, $28.2 million has gone into this mother 

baby unit in the Regina General Hospital, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

conducting a review to see what went wrong and how it can be 

corrected, Mr. Speaker. To make rash changes on my order 

would not be appropriate, Mr. Speaker. We’ll let the 

appropriate professionals review this, look into this to ensure 

that it never happens again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has ignored the best 
advice he could get. The nurses have told him and told the 

district over and over again that this could happen, and they 

were ignored. In fact they were dismissed as being whiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has underfunded the health regions 

across this province and regions have been forced to cut 

programs, health delivery, and staff to make up for the 

shortfalls. Amanda and her family are questioning why the 

government has the money to give the Regina Health Region 

CEO [chief executive officer] a $70,000 pay increase, but not 

enough money to properly staff the mother and baby unit at the 

General Hospital. To quote Amanda: 

 

We wonder what the government’s agenda is with all of 

these cuts to services and staff. The possibility that people 

are dying to promote these cuts and implement these types 

of reforms seems criminal to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he finally admit that his 

failure to properly fund the health regions has resulted in cuts in 

health delivery that are endangering the lives of Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the mother baby 
unit was opened in 2010, a nurse advisory committee looked 

into it to see that, what it would take for proper staffing levels, 

Mr. Speaker, workload, and all of that. 

 

An independent assessment committee was to make 

recommendations as to what was needed as far as more than 

what we had already had put in place, Mr. Speaker. And 

according to the collective agreement, those recommendations 

would have had to have been followed through on. 

 

In fall of 2010, that independent committee convened, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m here to report that they made no 

recommendations on top of what was already being done. That 

was an independent advisory committee into the mother baby 

unit itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, again I have been told that the staffing 

levels have been appropriate. I can say that if there is one thing 

that we have worked extremely hard on, on many different 

levels, that it was making sure that we have the proper 

complement of health care professionals in this province. I’m 

proud to say that according to the SRNA [Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses’ Association] earlier this week, that for the 

first time in this province we have over 10,000 nurses working, 



7070 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, a far cry from where we were just three short 

years ago. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the independent assessment 
process that the minister refers to was done on the hospital unit 

— the old one, not on the new one. There are new complaints 

being registered with the nurses there and I will let the nurses’ 

union speak to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rooming-in model is being used not just in 

Regina. Right across this province, mothers and babies are 

being treated this way. According to Amanda, nurses warned 

that a baby could die as a result of the model and nobody 

listened to them. And they were right. The worst thing 

happened and a newborn baby did die. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: one newborn baby’s death is too 

many. Is the minister going to immediately call for a review of 

the maternal child policy before another newborn baby dies and 

another family suffers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll correct the member 
opposite. In fall 2010, an independent advisory committee was 

convened for the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region labour and 

birth unit. There were no recommendations regarding staffing 

identified by the independent assessment committee. That was 

of the new unit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, 

according to the critical incident regulation, is following 

through with an in-depth review that will look at the 

circumstances leading up to and during, Mr. Speaker, looking 

for a root cause, and will make recommendations. I can assure 

you and this Assembly that when those recommendations are 

made, this government will be following through with those 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker. It is too early to presume or 

assume what those recommendations will be. We’ll let the 

process which has been laid out in regulation do its work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I can tell you that from the outset of this 

unit, it has been fully funded and fully staffed, according to the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

 

Support for Film Industry 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, skilled 
people are leaving our province, our world-class sound stage 

sits empty, and despite saving more than $6 million a year with 

the privatization of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network], the minister has a paltry $116,000 in this budget for 

the beleaguered film industry. 

 

Why did this minister waste everyone’s time and money if he 

was just going to ignore the recommendations from his film 

industry task force report commissioned by his own ministry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We welcome the member’s question. Millions of dollars are 

being invested through the film employment tax credits that are 

being paid to film companies. Millions of dollars are going to 

fund programs administered by SaskFilm [Saskatchewan Film 

and Video Development Corporation] on behalf of the film 

industry in this province. And millions of dollars are going to 

cover the cost of the sound stage facility where a lot of the 

actual production takes place. 

 

There’s also funding for programs being directed by the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board and the Saskatchewan motion picture 

industry. In the past three years, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 

government has provided nearly 60, $60 million in direct 

funding and support programming to the province’s film 

industry. And that $60 million is a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, 

and I know that the sound industry, the film industry appreciate 

that, what we’re doing. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Actually, Mr. Speaker, the film industry said, 
we are disappointed . . . Quote from a SMPIA [Saskatchewan 

Motion Picture Association] news release on budget day, “We 

are disappointed in the fact the recommendations put forward 

by the task force were not implemented in the budget year.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, between 2004 and 2008, the Saskatchewan film 

industry saw more than $300 million in production. That’s a lot 

of money too, Mr. Speaker. Five consecutive years of more than 

$60 million coming into this province for production values. In 

2009 it dropped by 70 per cent to a mere 17 million, and was 

even lower in 2010. The loss of tens of millions of dollars in 

industry inevitably means the loss of skilled Saskatchewan men 

and women. When will this minister step to the plate like 

Manitoba has and do what is needed to revitalize this important 

industry for our province and to keep our skilled young people 

working here? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll read directly from 
SMPIA’s news release. They’re saying: 

 

SMPIA is pleased to announce that our advocacy efforts 

and work on the film industry task force has had some 

success. In today’s budget announcement, we learned that 

our industry will benefit from an increase of $116,000 to 

SaskFilm’s allocation. This represents an increase of over 

9 per cent to the money they receive in support of the film 

industry and television industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also aware that New Brunswick has 

cancelled the entire film tax credit system there. What we’re 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7071 

finding out here is that our industry is saying, thank you for 

maintaining the funding; thank you for increasing the funding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — One more time, Mr. Speaker, from the rest of 
that news release: “We are disappointed in the fact that the 

recommendations put forward by the task force were not 

implemented in this budget year.” 

 

If this minister took some time to stroll over to the sound stage, 

he would see that it sits empty. And if the minister took some 

time to understand the industry for which he is responsible and 

the recommendations of his task force, he would see the 

industry has some solutions to get people working again. Why 

is this minister ignoring his own task force recommendations 

and letting this world-class sound stage sit empty? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate 
the questions, and we are of course familiar with the film and 

TV industry task force recommendations. In fact, we created the 

task force, Mr. Speaker, bringing together industry leaders to 

investigate ways to stabilize and to strengthen the industry. 

They’ve done excellent work. We commend them on the value 

of the results, and we have a more comprehensive picture of 

what the industry’s needs and challenges truly are. 

 

We’re already hard at work and making progress based on the 

task force’s first recommendation regarding the importance of 

supporting Saskatchewan content, Mr. Speaker. The primary 

target that they identified for us was to speed up the approval 

process and the cheque-writing process for the film 

employment tax credits. We’ve actually done that, and with an 

in-house review, Mr. Speaker, we’ve reduced the amount of 

time by nearly half — 45 per cent. That’s exactly what they 

asked for. It was in fact their top priority. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, just to correct the minister here, 
his lean process saw a 40 per cent rate in the application process 

of the film employment tax credit payout, not the payout of the 

tax credit, which is what they were asking for — accelerate the 

payout of the tax credit, Mr. Minister. 

 

A big blow to the film industry came last year when the 

government privatized SCN. The least the government could 

have done was to use the savings from no longer operating the 

broadcaster to assist the struggling film industry. Instead, the 

money’s not there for film and TV in this new budget. There’s a 

paltry additional $116,000 to help this ailing industry, and this 

money has been earmarked for something that wasn’t even in 

the task force’s recommendations, not even in the 

recommendations. Why is this government refusing to use the 

money it saved with its reckless sell-off of SCN to help the 

people it hurt? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we accept SMPIA’s 
press release. They’re saying that they’re very pleased that their 

advocacy has been successful. They’re pleased that the existing 

funding has been maintained. They’re pleased that extra 

funding has been allocated. They were worried that the same 

kind of thing would happen in Saskatchewan that has obviously 

happened in New Brunswick. The funding here has not been 

cancelled, Mr. Speaker. It has been maintained and has been 

increased. They’re happy about that and we’re pleased to see 

their reaction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

Funding for Municipalities 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has no 
shortage of money coming in. They’re enjoying record revenues 

to the tune of $10.8 billion, but they’ve ignored municipalities 

and communities that need support for infrastructure to provide 

necessary services to taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: how does he expect 

municipalities to come up with money needed to upgrade water 

and sewer systems or repair streets and roads when he’s ignored 

municipal infrastructure in this budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
municipal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
the member opposite for her question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of our government’s record in 

funding infrastructure in this province. Along with the federal 

government, our government have committed together $648 

million from 2008-09 through to 2013-14 for various 

infrastructure programs, Mr. Speaker. We committed $113.7 

million to the Building Canada Fund-communities component 

which is an infrastructure program for communities under 

100,000 people. So we’re doing more across the province, not 

just for the big cities. So with this program, we were able to 

fund 76 water projects, 43 waste water projects, 23 road 

projects, three recreation projects, two solid waste projects, one 

brownfield remediation project, and one regional airport 

project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have heard the municipal sector ask for 

those funds. We are providing those funds in partnership with 

the federal government and the municipalities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister 
misunderstood, but I was asking about this budget and not 

what’s happened in past years. And when this government is 

seeing record revenues come into their coffers, they have 

ignored the municipalities’ call for a dedicated infrastructure 

fund. Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about last year. We’re not 

talking about federal funds that this government piggybacked 



7072 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

onto. We’re looking for a Saskatchewan solution for 

Saskatchewan municipalities and Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again 
thank the member opposite for the question. On budget day, Mr. 

Speaker, we put in our promise to commit one full point of PST 

[provincial sales tax] revenue to the municipal sector. That was 

an additional $50 million more this year, Mr. Speaker, $216.8 

million for revenue sharing alone, Mr. Speaker. Promise made, 

promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? Our platform committed those 

dollars to own-source revenue sharing, something the NDP 

never promised, Mr. Speaker, in the election platform. Why 

wasn’t it in their platform of 2007? I don’t see it in their new 

policy platform either, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the first question he answers by 
talking about previous and federal programs. The next question 

about infrastructure he answers by speaking about the 

municipal operating grant, Mr. Speaker. And if the minister 

would look at the documents, these are in effect a transfer of 

funds to serve as a payment for services rendered and are 

specifically targeted and calculated on the operating costs of 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker. The minister should know that. 

Infrastructure is not part of the operating grant. 

 

And to the minister: when is he going to actually take this 

seriously, the municipalities’ concerns — and taxpayers of this 

province — and provide some infrastructure dollars? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow will allow me to tell the 

people of the province again what this government has done for 

the province and for the municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I want to start with a quote though, Mr. Speaker. 

This is a quote from The Melfort Journal dated August 31st, 

2010, and I quote: 

 

The municipal side has been fairly good, I would say, 

because there’s been a fair bit with the Building Canada 

Fund and infrastructure dollars that have been out there 

over the last couple of years. Most municipalities are fine 

with that and feeling quite good about the improvements 

that they’ve been able to make. 

 

Who said that? That’s close quote. Who said that, Mr. Speaker? 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year when we committed one full point of 

PST revenue to the municipalities, we made a commitment, and 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

both agree, that that is for unconditional dollars, to be used as 

they see fit according to regulations, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that money is provided; they can do what they see fit; 

and they’re very happy with the dollars this government’s 

providing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, if the member would look at the 
SUMA website, they gave a thumbs-down to the infrastructure 

dollars coming out of this government in this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s clear. When there’s record revenues coming into 

this provincial coffers and this government is flush with cash, 

they have ignored municipalities and communities that have the 

responsibility of providing services on the ground to taxpayers 

of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has off-loaded time and time 

again onto municipalities, and they need to step up to the plate 

and address the concerns of municipalities. When is this 

minister going to put forward an infrastructure program for 

municipalities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s 
time to quote some interesting information from SUMA: 

 

The 2011/12 . . . budget acknowledges the crucial role 

urban governments play in the economic growth in 

Saskatchewan. This budget provides our cities, towns and 

villages the resources to deliver programs that vital to our 

quality of life. 

 

Quote again, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“SUMA is pleased to see the full commitment of one point 

of PST for the Municipal Operating Grant has finally been 

met” . . . [according to] President Allan Earle. 

 

. . . SUMA is pleased to see that the government is 

standing by its pledge to shift education funding from 

ratepayers to the provincial government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the one full point of PST, the 

level of funding, $50 million more this year for revenue sharing 

alone, the EPT [education property tax] portion now the 

government’s taking on — promise made, promise kept as well, 

Mr. Speaker — the municipal sector is very happy what we’re 

doing and moving forward to see the growth of this province 

still is maintained. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on the information on the 
SUMA website for a dedicated pool of funding directed at 

urban infrastructure to be distributed on a per capita basis: 

outcome — no new provincial funding for infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7073 

And when you see a government that has downloaded the 

responsibility for recruitment of doctors and medical 

professionals in municipalities, downloaded the responsibility 

for municipalities to provide incentives like clinics and top-ups 

on salaries to recruit health professionals, now we’re seeing a 

housing program that relies on the municipality having the 

initiatives and putting them forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has downloaded too much onto 

taxpayers and municipalities. So, Mr. Speaker, when will they 

step up to the plate and provide infrastructure money for 

Saskatchewan municipalities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 
Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government is engaging the municipal sector in a forum where 

they can bring forth ideas moving forward because they 

recognize from SUMA and SARM and the New North that this 

province is seeing growth like never before and will continue 

the sustainable proportion of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in closing, I guess in this statement I want to 

make a quote from my city manager, Robert Cotterill, from 

March 24th this year: 

 

It means we’ve got substantially more money to help us 

with our operating costs. If they didn’t give us the money, 

we would have had a deficit in our capital budget 

spending, and now we can replace that money. 

 

Close quote, Mr. Speaker. Once again then, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

engaging this municipal sector across the province. SUMA and 

SARM, the New North, everybody sees this government as 

working with them as partnership, not opposed to them like the 

NDP government was. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 622 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 622, The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved first reading of Bill 622, The Workers’ Compensation 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 

[10:45] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 
the opportunity. And thank you to all members of the Assembly 

for giving me an opportunity to stand and debate the budget, 

one that I’ll say right from the get-go that I intend to vote 

against. There is an amendment standing in front of that that 

tries to make the budget more meaningful that I’ll be voting in 

favour of. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I get into my comments on the budget, 

I just want to say a big thank you to a number of people who 

have made my political life much easier in the last little while. 

First of all, to the membership and supporters in Douglas Park 

who, as all members will realize, without your volunteers and 

your executive and your election planning committee, you can’t 

be very positive or very productive in this building or as a 

member of the legislature. So I want to say a very big thank you 

to all the volunteers. 

 

Also to the members of our team, our MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], the NDP MLAs, and now many 

candidates across the province who are working hard to get the 

message of progress and our policy document out to the people 

of Saskatchewan, the big ideas that we have for the future of the 

province in terms of economy, health care. We hear many 

issues around health care coming forward, lack of ambulance 

service in the rural area. Our policy is full of big ideas, Mr. 

Speaker, that we intend to campaign on proudly with all the 

candidates across the province in order to get that message out. 

And I just want to say a big thank you to all of the nominated 

individuals. 

 

And I might say to some of the members opposite, you should 

be interested in who the candidates are, discussing the budget 

out in the different areas. The member from Regina South 

might be interested in a young lawyer there, Yens Pedersen, 

who’s doing one credible job of campaigning. He was 

interested last night in listening to the member opposite’s 

speech from Regina South. And you might want to listen to that 

because, if that’s the campaign speech of the member opposite, 

it makes our job a little bit easier. But we shouldn’t take it for 



7074 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

granted. This is going to be a tough campaign and one that, as 

Leader of the Opposition, I’m very proud to lead this team into 

the next election, and I believe it will be a winning campaign on 

November 7th. 

 

I also want to thank the members from my team, the member 

from Coronation Park and his sidekick, the member from 

Regina Northeast. They have a very interesting time. I have as 

much trouble keeping them in order in caucus, Mr. Speaker, as 

you do here in the House. I don’t know what they talk about, 

but they talk all the time to each other. And I just say to both of 

them congratulations on a very, very excellent career to both of 

you. I’ve known you for many years, and we’ve had many road 

trips out to the rural area and campaigning in Regina. And I just 

say to both of you, thanks for all the work that you’ve done for 

your constituencies and for the people of this province. 

 

And of course to the member from Nutana who gave an 

excellent speech on the budget two nights ago, her speech was 

thought out, it was well-founded in the issue around deficit of 

this government and the previous Conservative government, the 

billions of dollars that were run up. The member from Nutana 

has spent 25 years, given 25 years of her life to the people of 

this province, and I know she is one of the most respected 

members that has graduated from this school of politics. And I 

just wanted to say to the member from Nutana and her family, 

congratulations on a job well done. 

 

I want to say as well to my family, and on behalf of all 

members of the Assembly to really all families of MLAs, that 

this is not the easiest life for families and for spouses and for 

children of MLAs or politicians. In fact it can be a very 

gruelling and difficult life. I just want to say that on behalf of 

my spouse Rubiela and my children, I want to thank them very, 

very much for putting up with me and allowing me the time to 

be an MLA and Leader of the Opposition. 

 

And it’s a long, long trek, the act of being an MLA. Tonight for 

example, we’re up to Meadow Lake. And I love to go up to that 

community because we have a very exciting nomination going 

on there tonight, exciting because we have two excellent 

candidates, Helen Ben and Tim McKay. They have a great 

team. I think it’s going to be one of our largest nominations so 

far. I think we’ve had about 45 nominations, but the one in 

Meadow Lake tonight I think will take the cake. I think it’s 

going to be the largest one, even larger than Nutana’s. We’ll 

see. There’s a bit of competition going on. 

 

But I can tell you both candidates, either the best woman 

winning or the best man winning out of that team, will mean a 

lot to the people of Meadow Lake. And I think we’ll get back to 

good representation. And I hear the member from Meadow 

Lake, the member from Meadow Lake yipping from his seat. 

And he often says in this House, Mr. Speaker, when he gets 

under pressure, I’m a lawyer, in terms of defence of himself. 

When he doesn’t have anything to explain what he’s doing here, 

he will shout out from his seat, I’m a lawyer. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, after the nomination tonight and the election on the 7th 

of November, he can go be a lawyer. And that’s our 

commitment. 

 

And I say that in a jocular way because of course the member 

from Meadow Lake is a good person. I don’t think that he has 

. . . or any member goes into politics with thoughts of doing 

something that isn’t credible for their community. We may 

disagree in many ways on philosophy or policy, but I’m sure 

that all members get nominated and do their work because they 

want to do the best for their community including the member 

from Meadow Lake. And I wanted to give him credit for that. 

 

The reason we’re going to win the constituency of Meadow 

Lake is because we’re going to have better policy. We’re going 

to have big ideas about what to do for the future of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And now I want to move to the budget because my view of the 

budget — and this is told to me by many other people — is that 

it lacks . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, the member from 

Kindersley, the last . . . I want to tell you a story about the 

member from Kindersley because he keeps talking from his 

seat. But when I was in Calgary working for Nexen, he used to 

phone me about once a month. And he would say, Link, can 

you get me a job? Can you get me a job? And then he would 

phone and say, can you get me a contract? Can you get me a 

contract? He would say that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. 

No, you did. Yes, you did. I can prove it. I can prove it. And I 

can prove it.  

 

He can ask . . . I told other people when he called me. I would 

phone other people and tell them. And he would say . . . I would 

give him the way to get a contract. I would send him, I would 

tell him who to interview, but he had to tender. And he would 

say, Link, I don’t want to go through the tendering process; I 

just want a contract. And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? 

That’s the approach he takes in other parts of his business as 

well. 

 

So the member from Kindersley can talk about government and 

his interest in good government, but I can tell you this. Any 

individual who’s out $3 billion on potash revenue in his 

estimate needs to take a lesson not only in welding to be an 

engineer, but some economics as well. I can tell you that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about this budget being lacking, 

lacking in vision. Of all the budgets I’ve heard in this 

Legislative Assembly, I’m not sure what I was expecting, but I 

was expecting a budget with vision to be a beacon of light for 

Canada, and I found it flat. Now maybe I’m just biased, but I 

found it flat. And I’ll tell you this too. So did the media and so 

did the public because on the day of the budget, the day after, 

there were three stories coming out of the Legislative Assembly 

the day after budget. There was the fact that the government 

hadn’t protected medical records of thousands of citizens in this 

province. And the lead story the day after the budget was 

medical records in a dumpster along Albert Street. That was the 

lead story; it was a national story. 

 

The second story was a $1,000 membership to an elite 

organization that the Sask Party had set up. And it was very 

similar to a club that the Devine government had. It was called, 

I think, the Metro Club. You remember the Metro Club where 

people put in money. It was a secret group of people. And 

they’ve got another one going. But they’re not the old Tories; 

they’re the new, improved brand. Their membership is 

different. The $1,000 membership gets them access to ministers 

and MLAs that somebody on minimum wage I don’t think 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7075 

would have, I don’t think they would have. 

 

So I found the budget to be flat. So did the media. Normally the 

day after the budget, the press is full of glowing reports about 

everybody’s budget, even ours. And I remember as a young 

MLA in 1978 when Blakeney had a budget and the first five 

days of glowing reports and then it started to have little nicks. 

But usually five days the government gets, before the negative 

press starts to happen. 

 

Well this one didn’t get any press. It just was like a balloon that 

the air went out of it as the minister was reading it. It just sort of 

floated away, and nobody even knows there was a budget. 

 

Now we can say that this budget should have had many things, 

and I want to go into just a few of them. This budget, when it 

comes to agriculture, and I want to talk about that for a moment 

because it’s my area and where I’m the critic or the proponent 

of new plans and new ideas. But agriculture was, I don’t know 

if it got one or two lines, but it was almost silent. Our main 

industry, our main renewable industry and economy in this 

province is agriculture, but it got next to no, no attention. 

 

And many, many people in this province are doing very well in 

agriculture. The member from Kindersley will know that, that 

there are many of us who, in various parts of the province, who 

had wonderful crops last year and the price has gone up, are 

doing extremely well. But agriculture is really a tale of two 

cities this year. There are those of us who had — and I’m sure 

the member from Kindersley is part of that — but had good 

crops. The price is good, and we’re doing very well. 

 

But there’s another group, there’s another group, that 10 million 

acres that didn’t get seeded last year, where there is huge, huge 

difficulty and families are sweating it out because they were 

flooded out last year. And if you drive around that same 

country, they’re going to be flooded again this spring. If I drive 

south of Regina, if I drive to Yorkton, we have the potential of a 

disaster waiting for many tens of thousand of farmers. And 

there’s nothing in the budget. Twenty-two million dollars, that 

wouldn’t take care of one community if this flood occurs that 

we’re looking at. There’s no plan, no plan to deal with the 

disaster that’s waiting and started last year. 

 

Now there was something in the budget to deal with the 

flooding, and it was called an increase in crop insurance rates. 

Now the average across the province was 22 per cent increase 

in crop insurance premiums. But in the area where the flood 

occurred, the area where the flood occurred, it’s double that. 

That’s the helping hand that farmers in that area have received 

from this government. 

 

I was in Yorkton the other day and met with a group of farmers. 

There were probably 10 or 15, and they were showing me their 

crop insurance statements that they have just received. Some of 

their increases were as much as 50 per cent. Not in the area 

where we got the big crops; ours didn’t go up very much. But in 

the area where the damage was done, theirs went up by 50 per 

cent. That is not the way government should work. 

 

And the former minister of Finance knows that. He knows full 

well that when people are having difficulty on the farm, it’s a 

responsibility of the government to protect families, not to as 

they’re starting to get up off their knees to hit them over the 

head with a baseball bat, which is what you’re doing with these 

crop insurance premiums. And many of these members on the 

other side know that, Mr. Speaker. And we need to do 

something about that. And so we’ll be talking about that in the 

weeks to come. 

 

And also we will be talking about spot loss hail because that 

was a commitment. They did their study after the election in 

’07. The recommendation came back that they should 

reimplement it, and they haven’t got around to that. And many 

people were disappointed in this budget that they didn’t take up 

on their own recommendation. And they’ve got so many studies 

out there. They’ve got more studies out there than Carter has 

pills, but none of them get implemented. 

 

[11:00] 

 

We saw it on the ambulance yesterday: big recommendations, 

19 recommendations, not one of them implemented. We saw it 

on crop insurance. We saw it on the film industry. Over and 

over again, tens of thousand, hundreds of thousands of dollars 

on studies, recommendations coming, but none of them, none of 

them implemented. Somebody mentions even a domed stadium. 

I think there’s been a million dollars spent on studies around a 

domed stadium, but nothing happening. 

 

But that leads me back to the failed budget that we’re talking 

about, which is that this government had a vision. They talked 

about many big ideas two years ago, three years ago — ideas 

like isotope reactors, ideas like domed stadiums, ideas like the 

Montana-Saskatchewan CO2 exchange, clean coal, and all of 

them are laying on the floor in ashes. 

 

And this budget has given up. It’s a government that lacks in 

hope, ideas, and I would say, approaches to a government. I 

don’t know what they’re fearful of, but it’s a government that is 

in bunker mentality and can’t get out of that. It reminds me of 

the Harper government. Now they’re out on the campaign trail. 

And there’s a reason why the polls are changing federally is 

because when the leaders get out and you really get to see who 

they are, then things start to change. And that’s going to happen 

over the next six months, I can guarantee that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on health care, I’m not going spend much time 

because I don’t have very much time, but you will know and we 

had experienced yesterday with the ambulance paramedics 

coming to the Assembly telling us that in Saskatoon, one of our 

major cities, that for 40 minutes every day if you call for an 

ambulance, there’s no ambulance available. That’s sad in a 

province as wealthy and rich as we are. I’m not sure what the 

government, the Sask Party government, expects a family to do, 

to plan their heart attack so that there’s an ambulance available 

or car accidents are only supposed to happen in certain times of 

the day. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, this is not acceptable that ambulances are not 

available 24 hours a day, every minute of the day, just as police 

or nurses or doctors in the hospital are available all the time. 

And we need to make sure that in the area of health care, that 

we do a much better job on recruitment and retention. Nothing 

could be more obvious than where we should be going with 

recruitment and retention is to our university, where we’re 



7076 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

training a record number of doctors, but 50 per cent of them 

plan to leave because this government’s treatment and no 

contract for our interns and residents in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We have the situation of hospital closures on a 

regular basis on weekends in towns like Shaunavon, Leader, 

Wakaw, across the province because they lack money. 

 

So in health care, there needs to be a better job done of 

recruitment and retention, getting those waiting lists down. And 

our party, over the next weeks and months, is going to be 

bringing forth a full-fledged health policy debate and structure 

that will take us into the next election and into the next phase of 

medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. And I can guarantee 

you it won’t include privatization like this government is doing 

in health care. 

 

I want to talk a bit about housing, although it’s been talked 

about a lot in the Assembly. But I do want to add my voice to 

those who were worried about and complaining about the fact 

that there’s no money in the budget. Well there is. There’s $2 

million of new money for housing. And $2 million we shouldn’t 

ignore, but when you compare it with the reduction in price of 

beer at $5 million, that’s the money that’s included in this 

budget. 

 

Two million for housing while we have a housing crisis, and 5 

million to lower the price of beer. That’s not performance. And 

I think the government, in reaction to that, after the press and 

people in the communities were saying, what’s the deal here? 

How can $2 million . . . They dusted off a press release from 

last year that they never implemented during the year and said, 

oh well, we’re going to have this plan for $200 million of 

Immigrant Investor Fund that the taxpayers of the province 

have to backstop, and we’re going to build some $300,000 

condominiums and that’ll solve the problem. That’s their 

policy. 

 

But for sure, people who are on minimum wage and have their 

wages frozen by this government for two years . . . Imagine 

that. In the richest province in Saskatchewan, the poorest of the 

poor have had their wages frozen for two years. Those above 

them, nurses and . . . are doing a bit better. Health care workers 

on the front line in home care got a 1 per cent increase. CEOs 

get 20 per cent, and the head of the Potash Corporation, nobody 

can count how many dollars he receives, how many houses he 

has. Oh I know he’s got a $300,000 condo in Saskatoon, but I 

don’t think he leaves his home in Chicago worth 10 or 12 

million to spend very many nights in Saskatoon. I don’t think 

so. But he’s told the Premier he now lives in Saskatoon and he 

has this home, and the Premier believes him. 

 

But I want to say that when it comes to housing, we have a lot 

of work to do. We need rent control like 80 per cent of 

Canadians have rent control. And The StarPhoenix, if they 

would look beyond and where the investors come from in many 

of the places where the investors come from in The 

StarPhoenix, they have rent control — Ontario, Quebec, 

Manitoba, British Columbia. In fact 80 per cent of Canadians at 

this time have rent control or some form of rent control. So this 

is not an unusual protection that governments give to families at 

this kind of opportunity. Manitoba for example, they had record 

numbers of new construction. They also had rent control that 

capped rent last year, 2010, at 1 per cent. So they accomplished 

both. And we’re going to do that here. 

 

When we form government we’re going to implement rent 

control. It will have exclusions, like number of new 

construction will be given an exemption from rent control for a 

period of time. We’re figuring it out. We have experts working 

with us. We’ll exclude some of the mom-and-pop operations. If 

you have one or two rental units, they won’t be captured in the 

rent control. If you’re doing major renovations, you’ll be able to 

make an application to the board and we’ll figure it out. But 

we’re going to have a form of rent control, and it will use the 

Manitoba model and other models across Canada. 

 

The members opposite say, this is going back. Look, this is 

common practice across Canada that you protect your families 

with rent control. 

 

And then we’re going to have a massive program of affordable 

housing — not $300,000 condominiums, but housing that 

people can afford. What we’re going to have is a housing 

program that means something to families in this province. And 

we’ll lay out the detail of that platform item as we get closer to 

the election. 

 

People say, well how are you going to pay for all of the 

promises: the increase in daycare, the seniors’ care, keeping the 

nursing home open in Wawota and the other hospitals in Leader 

and Wakaw? Well there’s one source of revenue that this 

Premier and this government won’t look at, and that’s potash. 

And I want to say, we’re going to have a potash review. We’re 

going to look at the fact that the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan in the last two years, in 2010 and 2009, made a 

gross profit of $2.8 billion. 

 

Now we got a little bit, about a nickel of every dollar of potash 

production. That’s what we got. That’s what we got in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Now the Premier and the members 

opposite say we can’t get a penny more out of that. That’s it. 

Well I can tell you governments all over the world are looking 

at royalty structures. Any country that has resources is looking 

at capturing some of the record profits that companies are 

making and the windfall profits coming from the demand for 

resources. 

 

Now let’s say the Potash Corporation, that if by magic they had 

not made 2.8 billion in gross profit but had made 1.4, would 

they be happy? No I don’t think I’d get a hug from Bill Doyle 

for doing that. I wouldn’t think that I would get kudos from the 

Premier, from the Premier. But I can tell you this: Danny 

Williams, when he was dealing with Chevron, wasn’t getting 

any hugs from Chevron. That’s for sure. He was tough. And 

what he did, what he did with Chevron, with the Hebron field, 

he said, I want 5 per cent of the company that’s doing the deal. 

He wanted ownership for the people of his province and he 

wanted more royalty. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did he get it? 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well not right away he didn’t get it 
because they threatened to leave, and they did. They left for all 

of 10 months. And you know what they did after? Back hat in 

hand, where we should we sign, Mr. Premier? And Danny 

Williams got for his people 5 per cent of the Hebron field 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7077 

directly and a higher rate of royalties. That’s how you do deals. 

 

And I’m not out to make Bill Doyle happy. That’s not the point 

of being the leader of this province. He’s got lots of help 

already. He doesn’t need the Premier over advocating for his 

income and his salary. The Premier of this province should be 

advocating for the people of the province and that’s not being 

done. 

 

Now would the Potash Corporation pack their bags and leave if 

they were only making 1.4 billion? I don’t think so. I’ve worked 

in corporations and when you can make 1.4 billion, it’s not as 

good as 2.8 and I’m not going to be as happy because my bonus 

isn’t going to be as great and my share options aren’t going to 

be as great, but I would take 1.4 billion. I wouldn’t leave. And 

what are they going to leave with? If they leave, are they going 

to take the potash with them? I don’t think so. That’s what 

Danny Williams said. He said, look, come if you want. It’s our 

oil, but you’re going to come on our terms. 

 

And my view is that this Premier that we have is not standing 

up for the people of Saskatchewan and getting enough for the 

resources that we have in this province, and that’s what we have 

to do. 

 

My final comment is on the issue of the economy and deficit. 

Now the Sask Party continues to talk about paying down the 

debt, and they did with the money they found in the till when 

they became government. I’ll give them that credit. If you look 

at their chart on page 61 of their budget document, you’ll find 

that, yes, in 2008 they paid down some debt. But he has to 

admit, the Premier has to admit that the money was in the till. 

 

It’s a little bit like finding a wallet along the highway and then 

pretending you’re a hero because you have some money. It 

doesn’t work that way. You can buy lunch for your friends but 

you have to admit you found the wallet. 

 

Now we did pay debt down, but look at this chart. Look at that 

chart. Paid down in the year with NDP money and then a 

continual growth every year, every year in the deficit of the 

province out as far as the chart goes. 

 

Now look, this is the best of times for Saskatchewan because of 

resources, but we’re not doing . . . There’s no vision for a dream 

of what’s going to happen. There’s no paying down of the debt. 

There’s no future fund for future generations. This is why this 

deficit that we’re building here will create the same situation 

over time, and especially in the Crowns. Because in the 

Crowns, the debt in 2009, 3 billion; in 2015, 6 billion. Can you 

imagine that? 

 

Here’s the situation, and here’s how I get there. They told the 

Crowns they can’t grow. Like this, hands tied. But the debt is 

increasing, doubling over that period of time. Now think if that 

was your farm and you weren’t growing your farm, in fact you 

were selling bits and pieces — which they’re doing of our 

Crowns — but the debt on your farm over that period of time 

doubled. That is a recipe, and the member from Kindersley 

knows that, of the end of those companies. It’s called 

bankruptcy. That’s where it’s going. 

 

And when the Premier talks about the fact, talks about the fact 

that there’s no extra money in potash, I want to tell him that it’s 

like our farm. Let’s take our farm, for example, where you rent 

it out and the price of grain is $3. Let’s say price of grain is $3 a 

bushel. And you rent it out at 2,000 a quarter, and the price of 

grain goes up by 400 per cent. Let’s say the price of grain goes 

to $12. What farmer in their right mind is going to say, I can’t 

change the rent? That doesn’t even make sense. 

 

Potash has more than tripled since we made the original 

arrangement with him. Why should all the increase in profit go 

to the shareholders that don’t even live here? It doesn’t make 

any sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying where I started. I’m 

going to be voting for the amendment and against the budget, 

because this budget doesn’t deal with the flooding that we’re 

facing in this province in 2011, and it didn’t deal with the 

flooding in 2010. There’s not enough money for health care. 

We all know that. In child care and early learning, we are now 

bottom of the class in Canada on the issue of child care by 

many studies and analyses that are going on. 

 

I’m voting against it because there’s no help for those farmers 

who are seeing increase in their premium of up to 50 per cent in 

the flood area. There’s no money for the contract for teachers 

who are now in . . . I guess they’re not in negotiations. The 

negotiations have broken down. 

 

And finally, I am voting against this budget because there’s no 

review of potash and there’s no meaningful housing program. 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members of the Assembly to vote in 

favour of the amendment, and failing that, to vote against the 

budget presented by the government. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to be able to enter 

the debate today on the budget presented by the Deputy Premier 

and the Minister of Finance, the member for Canora. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to first say thank you to my constituents. I, 

like every member in this House, have the unqualified honour 

of being able to represent their views and hopefully advocate on 

their behalf and be an effective representative for them when it 

comes to provincial government matters and so, Mr. Speaker, I 

just want to say that I’m very . . . I am grateful to them. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The members should be 
aware of the rules. When the Speaker’s . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The members should be aware of the 
rules and when the Speaker’s on his feet, the Speaker’s 

supposed to . . . is allowed to speak without interruption. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 



7078 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

to thank my constituents again for the chance to serve them in 

this way. I want to be, I want to also get on the record a thank 

you to my family for their ongoing support so that I could do 

these jobs, do this job, Mr. Speaker, as well. And I want to 

thank my colleagues in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Is the member from Regina Rosemont 
questioning the Speaker? I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge 
my colleagues. And we are a team on this side of the House and 

we work together to try to represent the best interests of the 

province. And I want to thank them again, as I enter this debate, 

for all of their support and for the team that we have over on 

this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the budget, there is only one 

budget in all of Canada that is balanced from a General 

Revenue Fund standpoint and a summary financial standpoint. 

There is only one budget in Canada that actually posts a surplus 

from a General Revenue Fund standpoint and a summary 

financial statement viewpoint. There’s only one budget in the 

nation that accomplishes that while paying off more general 

debt of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There is 

only one budget in Canada that achieves both of those things, 

balanced and debt reduction, and also provides tax relief to 

absolutely everyone in the province of Saskatchewan — tax 

relief to property owners, Mr. Speaker, on the farm and in our 

communities. Mr. Speaker, income tax relief as well for every 

family right across this province. Small-business tax relief as 

well, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve cut the small-business tax rate 

by more than half, Mr. Speaker, and also small-business tax 

property tax reduction where we have reduced that middle tier 

of the EPT, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All of that while also achieving a significant increase in 

investment in Saskatchewan people — an increase for health 

regions right across this province, an increase for education, 

Mr. Speaker, an increase for a number of very important social 

issues and challenges that we face in this province because of 

growth, challenges that we welcome compared to the old 

challenges of out-migration and of economic atrophy, but 

challenges nonetheless. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget also 

represents significant investment in a lot of those social issues. 

 

I want to say by way of highlight before we get into what I want 

to offer up as a bit of an analysis on choices this budget 

represents, I do want to get into some highlights of the budget. 

Here’s the specifics, Mr. Speaker. The spousal exemption and 

the exemption for children have increased effective January 1 

past, January 1, 2011. So a family of four pays no tax on their 

first $45,550 of income. That’s just quite simply the very best in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of this budget 

cumulatively combined with the budget from a couple of years 

ago, 114,000 low-income earners are no longer on the tax rolls 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  

 

I know the Minister of Labour is talking today about minimum 

wage, as he should be, as our government looks towards 

indexation and different formulas that will achieve that. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s an interesting difference between this side and that 

side when it comes to how we’re working to make sure 

low-income people can have a . . . take a little bit more home at 

the end of the day. The NDP model was always to have ad hoc 

minimum wage hikes. And sometimes they kept up with 

inflation and sometimes they didn’t, but they had these ad hoc 

minimum wage increases. But they never changed the basic 

exemption, Mr. Speaker, not meaningfully. So what was 

happening is they’d make the small-business sector pay a higher 

minimum wage, and they as government would claw more back 

in higher taxes for low-income people. That’s part of the old 

Saskatchewan and has no place in the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Phase 2 of education property tax reform happened in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker — lower taxes for farm families and 

homeowners right across this province. Mr. Speaker, on an 

average farm they’re looking at saving approximately 80 per 

cent in their education tax since this government came to 

power, since this government said, it’s time to stop talking 

about education property tax, which is what we got from 

members opposite, and it’s time to start doing something about 

education property tax. Mr. Speaker, though, our plan also 

includes the residences in municipalities, in towns and villages 

and cities across the province, representing a 32 per cent 

reduction in their education property tax. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if past conduct is an indication of future 

behaviour, as the caucus Chair on this side, the member for 

Estevan, also often points out, the people of this province will 

know, property owners will know that with a Saskatchewan 

Party going forward, there will be more education property tax 

relief as it’s affordable by the treasury, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember in the campaign in 2007 when this 

was debated a lot, this issue of property tax, it was a big issue 

then. The government had brought in some rebate programs, 

sort of an interim, band-aid fix, and they were better than, Mr. 

Speaker, it was better than nothing. And we recognized that 

when the NDP government of the day brought them in. They 

had these rebates, and they were sort of an interim fix. And so 

each party in that ’07 campaign offered a longer term solution 

for the problem. We on this side of the House said the longer 

term solution must include property tax relief for all people. 

That was our vision. 

 

Remember what the NDP said, Mr. Speaker? What the NDP 

said then and what they say now, apparently, is that education 

property tax relief ought not to be extended to farmers, where 

the problem is most acute in the first place. There’s another 

difference, Mr. Speaker, a choice that this budget highlights for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already highlighted, this budget lowers the 

debt by $325 million. Mr. Speaker, this measure will bring 

down total government debt to its lowest levels since the late 

1980s — $3.81 billion. Three billion dollars in debt reduction. 

 

The budget features improvements in health care, funding up to 

$259 million or 4.7 per cent in this budget and $40 million more 

to reduce surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker, as a part of the 

budget. This is going to allow us to meet the goal we’ve set. 

We’re a government that works hard to set goals and objectives 

and then works to meet them. We’ve set a goal, and we’ve said 

to the people of the province that within four years you ought 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7079 

not to wait more than three months for surgery. That will be . . . 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, we’re making progress in this regard. 

We will meet this target, and that will very much be a feature of 

the brand new Saskatchewan versus the longest wait times in 

the country under the NDP in the old Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $12.6 million more for Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency; $5 million for this province to have an emergency 

helicopter air ambulance service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Meewasin’s shaking his head. 

And we ought not to be surprised because, while I wasn’t here 

for it, I’ve certainly seen in Hansard and been told by members 

about the ridicule that was heaped on the STARS [shock trauma 

air rescue service] program by members opposite who were 

critical, not just critical of the program, but basically ridiculing 

it. 

 

I also know the member for Estevan was able to add a little 

light to the debate and highlight for those members opposite 

who may not understand the realities for ambulatory care 

outside our major centres, who may not understand the realities 

of a growing economy where workers each and every day are in 

oil fields and in mines and out in rural Saskatchewan where 

they are susceptible to accidents and where, Mr. Speaker, they 

need to know that after the closure of 52 hospitals by members 

opposite, that they will have timely care. That’s what STARS 

will bring to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $2 million to revitalize the kidney transplant 

program. That’s also a part of the budget.  

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, we’ll get into housing in a 

moment. But there’s a number of initiatives related to the 

budget and announced subsequent to the budget that are going 

to help us deal with the housing plan. By the way, Mr. Speaker, 

a housing plan that has been lauded by both the major daily 

papers in the province and welcomed by the mayors, and the 

cause of a lot of depression on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, because this was one of their issues they thought that 

they were going to be able to raise and play a little politics with, 

Mr. Speaker. And you needn’t look any further than the 

comments of the member for Saskatoon Fairview — well there 

they are right here — when he was . . . in his budget debate . 

This, Mr. Speaker, highlights what the NDP concern was on 

housing. Was it actually a concern for affordable housing needs 

in the province or was it about politics? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Housing announced the plan 

to the province, when the mayors supported it, when SUMA 

supported it, Mr. Speaker, when the major dailies weighed in 

and said this is a comprehensive plan and much better than 

old-fashioned rent control, which hasn’t worked anywhere, Mr. 

Speaker, including in Winnipeg where new units are not a part 

of that initiative, Mr. Speaker, what happened to the NDP’s 

comment in the budget debate on housing? Well the minister or 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview said, first of all, that the 

Saskatoon mayor wasn’t happy. That’s what he said. And you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? I understand he responded to this last 

night at the North Saskatoon Business Association, and he 

invited the member for Fairview to consider not speaking for 

the mayor of Saskatoon, just as the mayor of Saskatoon would 

never want to speak for the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

So the NDP’s attack, the NDP’s attack on our plan, Mr. 

Speaker, according to the member for Fairview and now maybe 

the member for Lakeview who’s chirping from his seat — 

maybe he agrees — they said this, Mr. Speaker. Basically I’ll 

get into the quotes, but the summary of his remarks in the 

budget debate speech was, there will be far too many houses 

built in this housing plan. That’s unbelievable. For months 

they’ve been saying, we need more units. We need a bigger 

inventory.  

 

On this side of the House, we know that means more student 

housing. That’s up 1,000 per cent. The first student housing at 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] since 1976, Mr. 

Speaker. It means more help for those who rent, and so we’ve 

indexed rental allowances for those who are most vulnerable, 

Mr. Speaker. It means more units through Sask Housing: 850 

opened, 1,000 more under construction, Mr. Speaker.  

 

It means also providing a higher inventory of affordable homes 

for the first-time homebuyer. This is the objection of the 

member for Fairview because he said this. The only thing that 

. . . And I’m reading a direct quote, Mr. Speaker, so some of it 

is . . . Well I’ll just read the direct quote. 

 

The only thing that is, might, so is after there are now . . . if we 

can: 

 

. . . go back to those 50 MLS listings in this area, in 

Hampton Village, if those young people that bought those 

homes will now see an extra 50 houses . . . there . . . what 

will that do [he says]? What will that really do to the 

prices? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it might, it’ll probably lower housing 

prices down a little bit. That’s what happens when you increase 

the supply of housing, which is what the NDP have been calling 

for, for about six months, Mr. Speaker. Oh, that’s his point. So 

he’s against it. So you’re against, in terms of the continuum of 

housing, one of them being new housing, new houses for 

first-time couples, your concern is you don’t want those new 

houses available. Then you would oppose the city of Saskatoon 

proposal, Mr. Speaker, which we’re matching. You’d oppose 

other municipal initiatives aimed at first-time homeowners.  

 

Mr. Speaker, our vision in this budget is to deal with the whole 

continuum: student housing, Mr. Speaker, brand new houses for 

those who want to buy that first one, but can’t afford $300,000, 

and new rental of properties, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And the NDP’s point three days ago was we need more 

housing. And now their point is that’s way too much housing, 

Mr. Speaker. I don’t think the London School of Economics is 

going to be sending any applications over there any time soon, 

Mr. Speaker, or to the Finance critic. And we’ll get to his great 

wisdom about taxation and how he believes an economy can be 

grown, along with the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, another very important feature of the 

budget — and incredibly it was raised in question period today 

— is how we fund the municipal sector in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. The Municipal Affairs critic for the opposition raised 



7080 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

issues in the House today. Mr. Speaker, for well over a decade 

the municipal sector has been waiting for somebody, either the 

NDP when they were in power or now this government, to deal 

with revenue sharing in Saskatchewan. It was removed from 

them by the NDP government in the 1990s. You know, the hon. 

member who asked questions today in the House — and she’s 

an able member and knows her files generally, and that’s why I 

was surprised — seemed to completely forget about the history 

of this issue. 

 

The history is this: the NDP government year after year after 

year downloaded onto the municipal sector, and they’d give an 

ad hoc amount here and an ad hoc amount there. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, what happened? What happened when we campaigned 

in ’07 is this: we said, this province needs a permanent solution. 

This province needs revenue sharing that the municipal sector 

can bank on. Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on it, and in three 

budgets, it is now fully implemented in the province. And that’s 

why the municipal sector, while they’ll always say well we’d 

like a little more here and there, that’s why they are pleased 

with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues that we should be 

dealing with in this particular budget debate because it frames 

an important debate to come later this year. There’s going to be 

a provincial election in Saskatchewan later this year, and we’re 

going to be able to have a choice put before the people of the 

province. We’ll need to have a choice put between the people of 

the province about what it is they prefer. This budget sets that 

choice up for both sides because obviously the New Democrats 

don’t support lower taxes for families. They didn’t support 

lowering the debt. They don’t support a balanced budget. I 

think they actually deep down do support it, but they’re just 

very frustrated by the fact that this is the budget they’re going 

to have campaign against in the fall. 

 

Still, Mr. Speaker, it sets up some interesting choices. Let’s 

consider for example, Mr. Speaker, a choice in agriculture. And 

I noted that the Leader of the Opposition weighed in to the 

agriculture subject when he was up on his feet in the budget. 

Mr. Speaker, under this government, under this government, 

both in good times financially in ’08 and this year and also in 

tight times in 2009 when the budget was tight, under this 

government on every occasion when asked, that Minister of 

Agriculture and this government have been there for producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can consider the record which is sort of the 

culmination of which is evidence in this budget. The record is 

we now have the AgriStability suite of programs being 

administered, and administered more efficiently and from a 

Saskatchewan perspective right there in Melville, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was a loan program for the stock growers of this 

province, for cattle producers when they needed it. There was a 

cash program for cattle producers when they needed it. Mr. 

Speaker, there was help for those that were devastated by 

flooding this spring when they needed it. There was 

long-awaited improvements to crop insurance also represented 

here. And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget as in every 

Saskatchewan Party budget, the agriculture programs of this 

province aren’t on a wing and an NDP prayer. They are fully 

funded in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

And the member for Regina Walsh Acres chirps from her seat, 

Mr. Speaker. She ought to check with her leader. She ought to 

ask the veterans over on that side of the House, why is it that 

rural Saskatchewan rejects our party? The reason, Mr. Speaker, 

is twofold. Number one, rural Saskatchewan rejects that party 

because that party has rejected rural Saskatchewan. And the 

member for Walsh Acres ought to know that the second reason 

why they do so terribly in rural Saskatchewan is that this 

government has represented and served the interests of rural 

Saskatchewan. That’s what this budget’s about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP leader, in his remarks on the budget just moments 

ago, talked about a potential disaster looming in agriculture. 

There is no greater disaster for farmers in this province that 

would loom over them than that leader and that party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and so we can move forward and so . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the hon. member is asking what happened 

to hope beat fear. Here’s an update. Hope beat fear in ’07 and 

it’s beating it every day since, Mr. Speaker. But I want to 

welcome her interventions. But I want to welcome her 

interventions because they’re timely and they help make the 

case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question that this budget poses for agriculture 

is, do we want to continue to move forward with a plan that 

supports agriculture, forward with a vision for innovation in 

agriculture, in biotechnology, in being there at the farm gate, or 

do we want to go back to the days when farm programs were 

ripped up and the property tax issue ignored, Mr. Speaker? We 

on this side of the House will vote for the budget. We choose 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about highways? What about highways? Mr. Speaker, in 

this budget again there is a significant investment in highways 

in the province. There is, just before the budget, an additional 

significant investment in rural roads in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The cumulative effect of this budget on all of the 

other budgets means this: historic investments to fix the 

highways infrastructure deficit left behind by our friends on the 

other side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact it wasn’t very long ago when that Leader of the 

Opposition was the deputy premier. And he spelled out the 

highways program for the NDP. Mr. Speaker, compared to this 

budget, here’s what a news article from The StarPhoenix said in 

June 8th of 2000 about highways budgeting, Mr. Speaker, on 

point: “Pothole patrol catches on: Deputy premier [that would 

be the current Leader of the Opposition, deputy premier] 

proposes turning more roads over to volunteers.” 

 

It’s quite a plan. The article goes on, and I’m quoting, Mr. 

Speaker, “Val Marie’s pothole patching volunteers may have 

stumbled upon the solution to fixing Saskatchewan’s crumbling 

. . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I believe there’s 
been one member’s been recognized to speak, and I recognize 

the Premier. 

 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7081 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Val Marie’s pothole patching volunteers may have 

stumbled upon the solution to fixing Saskatchewan’s 

crumbling rural roads [I would parenthetically add this is 

under the NDP] and giving citizens a sense of 

empowerment to boot, deputy premier Dwain Lingenfelter 

said on Wednesday. 

 

I remember that, Mr. Speaker, when the deputy premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, confronted with the worst highways 

infrastructure deficit maybe on earth, said to the people of the 

province, said to the member for Cypress Hills, fix your own 

roads, Mr. Speaker. That was the NDP plan in 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consider this budget. Consider historic 

investments in highways. We have the radical notion that goes 

something like this: if you pay taxes to the province of 

Saskatchewan, it should probably be the province of 

Saskatchewan that fixes the roads, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the infrastructure deficit we inherited from the member 

for Regina Rosemont is big. It’s about $1 billion, according to 

the CAA [Canadian Automobile Association], just in highways 

alone. So it’s going to take some while for us to catch up. We 

can’t fix all the roads overnight but, Mr. Speaker, we are 

making progress. I think that fair-minded people across this 

province agree and municipal groups are agreeing with that as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re going to have a choice in the next election: forward 

with a five-year — by the way, first time in the history of the 

province — a five-year rolling plan, transparent plan, and 

money to fix the roads, or backwards to a time when the Leader 

of the Opposition said in government, fix your own highways. 

We’ll support the budget. We’ll choose forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about education, Mr. Speaker? What about education? In 

the last . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Over time, 
the Speakers have recognized that an appropriate heckle 

certainly has been part of debate, but an ongoing dialogue from 

members who have already spoken is unacceptable. I recognize 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would also want to say that in education, over three years and in 

this budget again, there has never been the amount of capital 

investment in education in the recent history of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. Here again, we inherited a huge deficit. 

 

And this budget, with nine new schools, building on previous 

budgets, with capital investments and also in terms of the 

maintenance investments that were neglected so long under the 

NDP — block funding as they’re called, Mr. Speaker — we 

have I think over $450 million in capital investment in three 

years in education and more to come with operating funds for 

school boards also. We’ll choose forward investing in education 

versus backwards when the NDP downloaded onto the local 

sector, Mr. Speaker. 

In social services, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of very, very 

important issues that aren’t, as the critic would say, a child care 

thing. They are important child care issues that we know we 

have to deal with better in this province. They’ve been around 

for a long time, including under our government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the child in care issue has been a top priority 

of the minister and all ministers and MLAs in this government. 

The budget represents our priority in this regard, Mr. Speaker, 

as it adds more people, more staff to intervene on behalf of kids 

in care, kids who are vulnerable in the province, with more to 

come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also it continues with a very significant development that 

our party started, the previous Social Services minister initiated 

and now continued under the current minister, which is this: 

there is a wait-list for people who have intellectual disabilities 

who would like the dignity of a home and have wanted one for 

a long time. And the wait-list, I think when we started was over 

450 or 440. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we announced 

a plan to eliminate that wait-list in four years. And I can tell you 

this: we are on track to achieve that goal, Mr. Speaker. In some 

parts of the province, including in the Southwest, wait-lists have 

gone from 25 for some regions to zero in three years, with more 

work to be done, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So with all due respect to members opposite, we are going to 

choose forward dealing with the issue rather than the way it 

used to be, backwards when they just talked about some of 

these issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other choices that this 

budget frames in terms of the coming election when it comes to 

the economy. First of all, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to need 

balanced budgets going forward if we’re going to continue the 

Saskatchewan advantage. This budget speaks to that. As well it 

takes a longer term view. We brought back four-year planning 

to the government, something eliminated by the NDP, so people 

could see the sustainability of our finances in the longer term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, compare that with what is going to be the choice 

on the other side, where they have already admitted to what we 

think is about a billion four in new spending in their policy 

document, about a billion four. When asked how will you pay 

for that, the Leader of the Opposition said, well they’re going to 

do a couple of things: one, they’re going to jack up royalty rates 

— more on that in a moment — and also they’re going to get 

$800 million from the federal government. That’s their plan. 

They have an $800 million hole in their plan, 800 million in 

deficit and higher taxes, and they’re going to deal with it by 

getting money, getting blood from a stone, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going to deal with it even though there is not a federal 

party today including their federal party that has said they’re 

going to deal with the equalization issue.  

 

It’s fantasy, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to risk the future of 

this province and our economy on a money tree, instead of 

stable budgeting you’ll see from this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. As far as I know, the money trees don’t exist, Mr. 

Speaker. Eight hundred million dollar hole right through the 

member of Regina Walsh Acres’ plan for this province. That 

means higher taxes and bigger debt, higher taxes, bigger 

spending. We’ll choose forward with a growing economy that 



7082 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

can afford sustainable growth in public service, reduced debt 

versus irresponsibility you’ll get going backwards with the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me just say, here’s the other risk. In 

this budget, a feature of this budget is royalty stability. Lower 

taxes for small business and royalty stability. Mr. Speaker, we 

have the highest potash taxes in the country. Let me say it 

again: the highest . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry, you’re 

right, the hon. minister has corrected me. The highest potash 

taxes on earth — that’s what we have today. Twice the rate of 

the next highest, which is Jordan. 

 

There are three pages . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

there’s also New Brunswick, does the hon. member think New 

Brunswick’s a pretty safe place? Mr. Speaker, there are three, 

there are three pages, three pages of projects around the world 

on the drawing boards for potash expansion. 

 

The previous premier, and maybe the current deputy leader of 

the NDP agreed at the time, the previous premier had the 

foresight to say we may not be able to change the overall potash 

tax rates, but we better put in some temporary incentives so that 

when expansions are planned they don’t happen in Chile, or 

Jordan, or New Brunswick but that they would happen in 

Delisle, that they would happen in the Regina area, that they 

would happen in the Saskatoon area, that they might be built in 

Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today the largest potash mine proposed in the world is 

currently being worked on for the Humboldt area, for Jansen 

Lake. Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the entire project would 

be risked if that party ever got to be in power, jacked up the 

royalty rates. The 12 billion in expansions and thousands of 

jobs are gone. The new mine at Jansen Lake are gone, and the 

economy is poorer for it. That is not an economic plan; it’s a 

recipe for another NDP disaster on a larger scale even than 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], if you can imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And the member for Lakeview knows he’s got a big problem 

with this issue, Mr. Speaker. The member for Lakeview knows 

that the Leader of the Opposition’s gone further than potash. 

He’s also said he’ll jack up uranium rates. It was in their 

caucus-paid ad. Mr. Speaker, in uranium we have a pretty 

sensitive industry right now.  

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, the largest uranium mining company on 

earth located in Saskatoon. I think 44 per cent of their 

workforce are First Nations, are Aboriginal people, Mr. 

Speaker. And what that company needs now more than ever is 

stable royalty rates. And we would say to the member for 

Cumberland and the member for Athabasca to stand up to his 

party’s position, his leader’s position that he will risk northern 

jobs, First Nations jobs in the uranium industry by jacking up 

royalty rates, Mr. Speaker. We’ll go forward with stability and 

avoid backwards with economic disaster for northern 

Saskatchewan and for First Nations. 

 

One final point, Mr. Speaker, and one final point with respect to 

royalties. The Leader of the Opposition has also openly talked 

about increasing oil royalties, even though when he was a junior 

executive at Nexen, he participated in the Alberta oil royalty 

review. And we’ve got the debt. We’ve got the slide show. And 

Nexen went to that slide show in Alberta and said, what Alberta 

ought not to do is mess with royalties. And you know what? 

Nexen was right. If he had anything to do with it, he was right 

at the time. 

 

But now he’s back, and he’s saying, Mr. Speaker, on December 

13th, 2010 — the member for Wakamow should pay attention 

so she can maybe correct the Leader of the Opposition — he 

said this, “If I become Premier in November of 2011, I would 

institute a review of oil royalties in the province, whether it’s 

potash, uranium, oil, or gas.” It’s right here. That’s what it says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well now 

the member says, so what’s wrong with reviewing them? Mr. 

Speaker, are the NDP even faintly aware of what happened in 

Alberta over the last two years, Mr. Speaker? Are they aware of 

what’s happening in Britain today? The British government . . . 

And the Leader of the Opposition has used this as an example, 

unbelievably, has said, we’re going to jack up oil royalties in 

the UK [United Kingdom]. Do you know what Nexen, his 

former company, said, that has a play offshore of the UK, do 

you know what they’ve said? They may review, they may back 

off from their plans to invest in that country and create jobs 

because of royalty instability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the debate that this budget 

frames. It frames a question of, do you want to move forward in 

the fastest growing province in the country, the fastest growing 

jurisdiction in Canada today that is, one by one, dealing with 

the challenges we have in rural and urban and northern 

Saskatchewan, because we have the economic capacity to 

finally deal with them? That is meeting health care recruitment 

targets, that’s reducing wait times, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Do you want to move forward with a budget and a party that’s 

saying we need to continue to support agriculture, to invest in 

both our cities and in the country? Do you want to move 

forward with a budget, Mr. Speaker, and an overall plan for the 

economy that says our vision is to grow the innovation sector? 

 

And as the Finance minister rose and spoke on budget day very 

eloquently of our plan for the next economy, Mr. Speaker, the 

question is clear. The question couldn’t be clearer. On this 

budget and the vote we’re about to have and on the future of 

this province and what will happen on the 7th of November 

later this year, do you want to move forward, building the best 

place in Canada, built by not a government but by the best 

people in Canada? 

 

Or do you want to go backwards to a time when the headlines 

said people were leaving the province in droves, Mr. Speaker, 

when we had the worst job creation record in the country, Mr. 

Speaker, to a time when our economy was underperforming and 

we couldn’t afford health care and we couldn’t afford social 

services to the extent we can? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say the vast majority of the people of the 

province, and I think the consensus of members on this side of 

the House, is quite simply this: we choose the Saskatchewan 

advantage. We choose forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7083 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I must remind 
members that the Minister of Finance is standing to close 

debate. If anyone else wishes to enter the debate, they must do 

so now. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
indeed an honour to rise in this Assembly and close debate on 

what I have listened to as . . . have been some great comments, 

especially from this side of the House. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

I will make some comments about some of the material that I 

heard from members opposite to ensure that the correct 

message, the accurate message is in fact on the record, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But before I do that, I just want to quickly thank my colleagues, 

but especially the members from Kelvington-Wadena, 

Martensville, Humboldt, Thunder Creek, and Saskatoon 

Greystone. Mr. Speaker, the members that represent those five 

constituencies are on Treasury Board with me. And I must tell 

you that, as a new member, it was indeed a great privilege to 

work with these five individuals to ensure that we listened to 

our ministers, that we listened to all the ministries present their 

material, and thus be able to develop a budget for cabinet. 

 

I also want to express my appreciation to my chief of staff who 

has joined me back on November 1st of 2010. You know she 

has fitted in very well and is doing just a great job, and a thank 

you to Dianne Ford. 

 

I also want to thank the many people over in Finance. The 

development of a budget takes, you know, literally the entire 

year, and we’re working on that already. So I want to extend 

my appreciation to the dozens of individuals in Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to begin by quoting from a very useful 

document, one that I’m sure the opposition should look at more 

often. Mr. Speaker, it’s on page 79 of the document, and it’s the 

auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. It’s the auditor’s report, the 

Acting Provincial Auditor, Brian Atkinson, and he says this: “I 

have audited the summary statement of financial position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as at March 31, 2010.” 

 

Next paragraph his opening line is, “I conducted my audit in 

accordance with Canadian generally-accepted auditing 

standards.” And his final statement, Mr. Speaker, is this: 

 

In my opinion, these financial statements present fairly in 

all material respects the financial position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as at March 31, 2010 and 

the results of its operations, the changes in its net debt, and 

its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with 

Canadian generally-accepted accounting principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then on the day of the budget I was interested to 

see the release from the New Democratic Party. The New 

Democratic Party release, and I quote directly from the release. 

It’s a quote from the Leader of the Opposition, and it says this: 

 

The Finance minister’s claim that this budget is balanced 

on a summary basis would be accepted nowhere else in 

Canada. It has deliberately not followed 

generally-accepted accounting principles to achieve this 

deception. 

Mr. Speaker, can you imagine the Leader of the Opposition 

would say, you know, Mr. Atkinson, you have conducted the 

audit for years and you’re going to do the same thing on the 

same budget as we have done as we have in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. And oh by the way, I know better than you, Mr. 

Auditor. You’re not following generally accepted accounting 

principles. How ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. How ridiculous. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the remarks of the critic, 

the member for Regina Rosemont. And he says this, and I’m 

quoting from page 6879 on March 23rd: 

 

We have a government that reports from an outdated, 

improper set of accounting rules [Mr. Speaker]. By public 

sector accounting standards followed by every other 

province, every territory, and the federal government, this 

budget is a summary deficit [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Absolutely wrong. Absolutely wrong. 

 

I’m even going to go back a little further, Mr. Speaker. When 

the members opposite were in government, and in fact we 

developed the summary financial basis, this is the message from 

former auditor Fred Wendel. It’s a report of 1996 and it says 

this: “The government’s summary financial statements are first 

class.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we followed the exact same principles for the last 

number of years introduced in this year’s budget exactly the 

same way. And members opposite stand up and say, you’re not 

following generally accepted accounting principles. We know 

better, Mr. Speaker. The former auditor, Fred Wendel, didn’t 

know what he was talking about. Mr. Speaker, the current 

Leader of the Opposition says this is not a summary budget. 

You know, this is absolutely wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so for the members opposite to suggest to the 

public of the province of Saskatchewan that suddenly the 

General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, which will have a surplus 

of $115 million, the summary financial statements, Mr. 

Speaker, the summary financial statements which will have a 

surplus of $54 million, Mr. Speaker . . . But the member for 

Regina Rosemont says, you’re not following proper accounting 

principles because I know better. Mr. Speaker, absolutely 

ludicrous. Absolutely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other comments that has been made 

about the budget and whether or not it has a summary comes 

from the member of, from . . . representing North Battleford. 

And he talks about Crown, Crown dividends. The fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that last year . . . And the minister responsible for 

Crowns, I think, made this pretty clear in answers to questions 

this week. The member from North Battleford says, you’re 

stripping 100 per cent of Crown dividends and as a result they 

have to borrow. 

 

And I quote, I quote from The Battlefords News-Optimist and it 

says this: “I think it’s important for the public to realize that the 

Sask. Party government is balancing its budget by stripping 100 

per cent of the Crown corporation profits and are now forcing 

our Crown corporations into debt, said Taylor.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, for that to have any validity, people would have to 



7084 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

forget this fact. People would have to forget this very important 

fact that in 2010, in the annual reports of all of the Crown 

Corporations, and I’m sure members — well no, they probably 

didn’t read them — they would recognize that SaskPower 

earnings in 2010 were $159.5 million, million dollars earnings. 

Dividend taken from SaskPower, zero. Zero, Mr. Speaker. And 

in the projections, and in the projections for 2011, the 

anticipated earnings from SaskPower are again going to be over 

$100 million, well over $100 million. The projection for the 

dividends taken from SaskPower, zero. 

 

So the member from North Battleford prints in the paper that — 

and you know, he’s a respected MLA; he’s been a Member of 

Parliament — he prints in the paper and says the government is 

taking 100 per cent of everything. Wrong. Absolutely wrong, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know, we know who took more than 100 per cent in times 

. . . Well lets go back to 1999, Mr. Speaker, sorry, 1998 

dividend taken, $200 million, 114 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of 

earnings; 2001, 200 million taken in dividends, 181 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker; 2002, Mr. Speaker, dividend taken, $300 million, 

114 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, again wrong 

information, Mr. Speaker, wrong information in the record that 

we need to correct. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other comments made by the Leader of 

the Opposition was around child care. And he said this: I think 

the shortage at the University of Saskatchewan is over 500 

families waiting for daycare at the university. They need to be 

dealt with. 

 

Five hundred families, Mr. Speaker. Reality? We’ll get to that. 

The Ministry of Education tracks all of the requests across the 

province, and there are two requests from the area of the 

University of Saskatchewan, two organizations. The request is 

174 spaces, Mr. Speaker, 174. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now the interesting thing is one of these submissions has been 

made since 2007. And each and every year when the ministry 

allocates the number of child care spaces, the answer has been, 

when the Saskatoon regional office contacts them, the response 

to this is, we’re not ready, and they declined them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to suggest that there 

are 500 families in Saskatoon at the university waiting for child 

care when in fact there’s only 174 applications . . . And we 

were pretty proud, Mr. Speaker, to be able to meet a challenge 

— and it is a challenge — when we added additional dollars, 

we added additional dollars to ensure that we added 500 new 

child care spaces. Mr. Speaker, 500 new child care spaces will 

mean that since we have become government, 12,700 child care 

spaces in the province of Saskatchewan — 3,000 more than 

when the NDP were in power, Mr. Speaker, 3,000 more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get into the specifics of all of the 

ministry’s budget because such a terrific job has been done by 

all speakers. All the MLAs on this side of the House have 

highlighted how there will be tremendous benefits in this 

budget. There’ll be benefits in health care, Mr. Speaker. 

There’ll be benefits in education. There’ll be benefits in 

advanced education. You can go on and on and on about all of 

the positive things that this budget is introducing. 

 

What I’m going to comment on, Mr. Speaker, for a few minutes 

is some of the reaction by others. What has happened, what has 

happened to this province, Mr. Speaker, over the last three 

years? What has happened as a reaction to positive budgets that 

we’ve introduced in the past, and then of course, continued 

positive responses from people today? 

 

We’re going to go back, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to go back a 

little bit because we have to realize what is happening in this 

province regarding growth, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 2009 

. . . For the first time, Mr. Speaker, since 2009 . . . And this is a 

very important statistic. Members opposite have to understand 

this because they planned for decline. Throughout their 16 years 

they planned for a declining province. We’re planning for 

growth. And you know why we have to plan for growth, Mr. 

Speaker? In the year 2009, 14,536 babies were born in the 

province of Saskatchewan — first time, Mr. Speaker, that we 

had over 14,000 births since 1992, first time. 

 

Now let’s move forward to the year 2010, Mr. Speaker. Back in 

’09 of course I was pretty excited as the former Education 

minister because that means students in our classrooms. But in 

2010, Mr. Speaker, the number of births that occurred, 14,978 

— 22 short of 15,000. Now let’s take those two years, Mr. 

Speaker, well over 14,500, first time since 1992. In our school 

systems, Mr. Speaker, across the province we have about 

11,500 students that range in each of our grades: grade 2, grade 

3, grade 4, grade 5 — about 11,500 and now we’re having 

births of 14,500. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, the difference when we look 

ahead, when we have that vision of what we need in the future 

. . . In the past of course, the only time that there was 14,000 

births was way back in ’92 and you know, I think they’re 

20-plus years old or 19 years old. They’re already through the 

school system. But we only have 11,000 in our schools now. 

Why? Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? Families, families 15 

years ago, 10 years ago under the NDP, couldn’t find work, 

couldn’t have opportunities, and they moved. They moved, Mr. 

Speaker. They left. Now in some instance, a particular 

individual decided to return. He didn’t bring any extra children 

back with him, but he returned. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, now we have a situation where because of the 

job creation in this province, because of the fact that we’re 

moving forward, there’s a high likelihood that in five years time 

the school systems are going to be seeing 14,000 students in the 

school. They know that the grades that are going to be leaving 

are 11,000, and they’re going to be replacing them with 14,000. 

That’s a positive growth. That’s a Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the other statistics that the members opposite never want 

to hear is, of course, a growth in population. In fact a number of 

years ago . . . And I’m going to repeat what one of our members 

or probably even more than one of our members have said. You 

know, there was comments by the NDP when they were on this 

side of the House. They said, you can’t grow at the national 

average. How ludicrous could we be in the opposition at that 

time to suggest that the province could grow at a 1 per cent 



March 31, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7085 

rate? It was just not . . . it was impossible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the statistics are out last week that show that the 

province of Saskatchewan, the population is 1,052,000 people 

— the largest ever population in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many, many things that have 

occurred in this province. We’re seeing it all over the province. 

We’re seeing communities, Mr. Speaker, that haven’t built new 

lots or haven’t improved lots for the construction of homes for 

decades, Mr. Speaker, and now they’re taking advantage of 

government programs to ensure that they develop those kinds of 

situations. 

 

We’re seeing the growth of businesses, Mr. Speaker. The fact 

that we lead the nation in so many things, we’re either number 

one or number two in growth in population, in retail sales of 

vehicles, Mr. Speaker. We’re leading manufacturing, we’re 

leading in so many components. 

 

And the result is, as I’ve been involved in travelling across this 

great nation, people are looking at Saskatchewan in a different 

way. They are looking at Saskatchewan as a place of 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. They know that since we’ve made so 

many changes — and the Premier summarized many of them 

along with others — the fact that we have reduced the small 

business tax to 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker, very, very positive 

because, you know, in this province we know that business, 

especially small businesses create our jobs, Mr. Speaker. They 

create our jobs. We want to be competitive, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think there’s evidence of that. 

 

I want to make one comment about agriculture because I had — 

no, I didn’t have to, but I did — I listened to the member 

opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, talk about agriculture. 

And I know the Minister of Agriculture on this side of the 

House has made it pretty clear about how we have improved 

agriculture. And I listened to him talk about, about the fact that, 

you know, we weren’t really there for farmers. There’s nothing 

in this budget. Mr. Speaker, $321 million in agricultural budget. 

Mr. Speaker, a 13 per cent increase fully funding AgriStability, 

AgriInvest, crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know what he said? Oh, there’s going to be a big 

flood, going to be a big flood. You know what, Mr. Speaker? 

When my dad was alive, and he farmed for just about 50 years, 

he used to always say you never lose a crop in April. You never 

lose a crop in April, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, as a 

result of that, you know, farmers are, they’re optimistic, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, weather could change that. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, in co-operation with the 

federal government last year, made available $360 million more 

than what was in last year’s budget. 

 

I think it’s pretty clear who’s there for the agriculture 

community, Mr. Speaker. All you have to do is look at farmers 

and ask them what’s their tax assessment, what their taxable 

assessment is. And you can take any number, Mr. Speaker, 

because people know what their taxable assessments are 

because years ago we used to have a tax revolt in this province. 

People knew that they could not pay the kind of tax that the 

former NDP government was forcing upon them because they 

were unfunding education, Mr. Speaker. They were not funding 

it properly. Mr. Speaker, that kind of development has changed. 

We know that agricultural land will receive an 80 per cent tax 

break, Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a great five days for the people of 

Saskatchewan because we’ve presented a budget to the people 

of Saskatchewan. It’s an opportunity for people to take a look at 

the budget, to understand that everything from the personal 

income tax cut to the business tax cut to the fact that now we 

are being able to improve our highways. 

 

Two hundred and fifty million dollars in health care, additional 

$250 million in health care, 9 per cent increase. There are 

tremendous things that are going to happen, Mr. Speaker. And 

as I said in my speech, opening speech, we’re going to see 

improved colorectal cancer screening programs. We’re going to 

see improvements at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are all very positive things. And I look forward 

to everyone in this House voting for the budget because it’s the 

budget for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The question before the 
Assembly is the amendment presented by the member from 

Regina Rosemont: 

 

That the motion be amended by removing all words 

following the word “Assembly” and adding: 

 

condemns this government for a budget that ignores 

Saskatchewan people and families; and furthermore, 

 

That this government no longer has the confidence of this 

Assembly and of the people of Saskatchewan because, 

despite a record level of revenue, this budget is doing 

nothing to help people and families deal with the rising 

costs of housing. It does nothing to implement rent 

control. It does not help struggling families that deal with 

the growing cost of living. It does nothing to improve the 

province’s education system. It fails to get a fair potash 

royalty deal for Saskatchewan people. And it is not telling 

Saskatchewan people this government is actually 

increasing the province’s debt. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, all those in 
favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Call in the 
members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:12 until 12:14.] 

 



7086 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2011 

The Speaker: — I call members to order. And I’d ask members 
to allow the vote to proceed without interruption. Those in 

favour of the amendment, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 19] 
 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Atkinson Nilson Forbes 

Vermette Broten Furber 

Morin Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

[12:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment, please rise. 
 

[Nays — 37] 
 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

McMillan Harpauer D’Autremont 

Harrison Hickie Reiter 

Hutchinson Brkich Elhard 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Ross 

Wilson Gantefoer Michelson 

Wyant Ottenbreit Chisholm 

Kirsch Bradshaw Tell 

Heppner   

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Those for, 19; 
those opposed, 37. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is defeated. 
 

The question before the Assembly is the motion presented by 

the member from Canora-Pelly, the Minister of Finance, 

seconded by the member from Martensville: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 
members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:17 until 12:18.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members allow the vote on 
the main motion to proceed without interference. Those in 

favour of the motion, please rise. 

 

[Yeas —37] 
 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

McMillan Harpauer D’Autremont 

Harrison Hickie Reiter 

Hutchinson Brkich Elhard 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Ross 

Wilson Gantefoer Michelson 

Wyant Ottenbreit Chisholm 

Kirsch Bradshaw Tell 

Heppner   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 
 

[Nays — 20] 
 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 37; those 
opposed, 20. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I move that the 
House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 
adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. Enjoy your 

weekend. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:21.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7065 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7065 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7065 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7065 
  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7065 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7066 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Autism Awareness Day 
  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7066 
 Kidney Health Month 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7066 
 2011 SaskTel Tankard 
  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7066 
 Cupar Canucks Win Bantam C Championship  
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7067 
 Dress-Sharing Program 
  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7067 
 Affordable Housing 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7067 
 Fossil Fools Day 
  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7068 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Mother Baby Unit 
  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7068 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7068 
 Support for Film Industry 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7070 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7070 
 Funding for Municipalities 
  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7071 
  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7071 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 622 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2011 
  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7073 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATE 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7073 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7077 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7083 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 7086 
 Recorded Division (motion) ....................................................................................................................................................... 7086 
 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


