




















































Hansard: May 19, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 65A  THURSDAY, MAY 19, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7677 

 May 19, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour today to be able to introduce to you and then through 

you to all members of the Assembly a special guest that’s 

joined us in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

introduce and welcome Her Excellency, Sheila Sealy Monteith. 

She is the High Commissioner of Jamaica in Canada. She’s 

with us today obviously in your gallery as part of her official 

visit to the province of Saskatchewan. We welcome that visit. 

 

Ms. Sealy Monteith has served her government for 24 years 

with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of 

Jamaica, and in doing so, she’s become an expert in the 

formulation, implementation, and management of foreign 

policy for her country, Mr. Speaker. Throughout her career she 

has spent six years in the permanent mission of Jamaica to the 

United Nations in New York, two years with the Embassy of 

Jamaica in Venezuela, another six years as director in charge of 

international organizations in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

and Foreign Trade in Kingston, Jamaica. It goes without saying, 

Mr. Speaker, that she brings a wealth of experience to her 

position as the High Commissioner of Jamaica in Canada and to 

this official visit to our province. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all 

members in the Assembly, on behalf of the province of 

Saskatchewan we welcome Her Excellency here today. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to join with the Premier in welcoming Her Excellency, 

Sheila Sealy Monteith from Jamaica here to the Assembly. I 

had the privilege of visiting Jamaica for the first time ever in 

January of this year, and it’s a beautiful country and hope to 

return again soon. But welcome to Saskatchewan and all the 

success in your visit. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to make an extended introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very pleased today to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly two guests who 

are seated in your gallery. With us this morning are Shirley and 

Larry Schneider who I know will need little introduction to 

most of us as they have both been extremely active in many 

areas of public life. 

 

Larry has served his city and his country in so many ways as a 

businessman, as the mayor of Regina, a Member of Parliament, 

a minister of Western Economic Development, and as well as 

Chair of the Regina Airport Authority, as the honorary consul 

of Mexico, and most recently as the honorary colonel for the 

10th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery. 

 

Shirley has just finished co-chairing the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] Charity Ball which took place last 

Saturday here in Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, it was my great 

pleasure to be one of the 400 or so people in attendance. She 

chaired the event on behalf of the Mackenzie Infant Care 

Centre, an organization that she helped to establish in 1986. The 

centre was established as a home for the special tutorial 

program at Balfour Collegiate which was created in 1972 to 

give young teenage moms the opportunity to complete their 

high school education. 

 

The program is now in its 39th year of operation, Mr. Speaker, 

and in fact it’s the longest continually running centre of its kind 

in Canada. It will graduate 20 students again this June. This past 

February, it was renamed the Shirley Schneider Support Centre 

in honour of Ms. Schneider’s dedication for so many years to 

this worthy program. Over the years the centre has provided 

guidance and counselling to young moms and given 

professional care to hundreds of infants who got a better start in 

life because they were fortunate enough to be there. 

 

In the two years that the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre was the 

charity recipient, the RCMP gala has raised $300,000 for the 

organization, which of course is a tremendous support for them 

and helps to ensure that they can continue to provide this much 

needed service in our city. Please join me in welcoming Shirley 

and Larry to their legislature and in thanking them for their 

amazing contributions to their community, to their province, 

and to their country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 

two distinguished individuals and community leaders to their 

Assembly here today. Mr. Larry Schneider certainly served in 

many capacities in our community and still continues to this 

day. And Ms. Shirley Schneider, who the minister highlighted 

some of her efforts, but they go a long ways to improving the 

lives of many young people in our community as it relates to 

the Mackenzie Infant Care Centre. 

 

It was my pleasure for my wife and I to join the Schneiders at 

the RCMP Charity Ball this past weekend, and I simply 

commend Shirley and her committee for the exceptional work 

that they put together to deliver this important fundraiser. It was 

a fantastic evening and the dollars go to a great cause. An 



7678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

impressive amount of money that they have raised over these 

last two charity balls that we’ve had the pleasure of attending 

— I believe over $300,000 and not without an awful lot of hard 

work. I know that because my mother-in-law also sits on that 

board and works alongside Shirley and speaks so highly of 

Shirley Schneider. So I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming the Schneiders to their Assembly 

and thanking them for their contributions to our city and our 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while still on my feet I’d like to introduce, 

seated in your gallery, Jaime Garcia who’s a candidate for the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] in Regina Coronation Park. 

Jaime is an individual who dedicates himself to the betterment 

of others and improving the community around him in all 

aspects through his work, through his focus on working people 

and the wellness of families. I know as a candidate he’s held 

even forums, Mr. Speaker, community forums as it relates to 

affordable housing, recognizing how important it is for young 

families and for seniors to have the dignity of a place to live, 

raise their family with a quality of life and a place for which 

they can afford. 

 

Jaime and his family are dedicated to the community, dedicated 

to the cause of running as the candidate in Regina Coronation 

Park. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina 

Coronation Park would be incredibly well served with the 

service of Jaime Garcia. I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming Jaime Garcia to his Assembly here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And with 

your endurance, I’ve got three introductions to do. First and 

foremost is a class, a grade 12 class from A.E. Peacock 

Collegiate in Moose Jaw in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, 24 

students. And I want to acknowledge their teacher, Carrie 

Kiefer, along with the chaperones, Kathie Berry and Alma 

Kaus. 

 

I want to say a few words about the teacher, Carrie Kiefer. 

Carrie has been very diligent in bringing the grade 12 class here 

every year. And I’m glad they’re here today because one more 

day, they would have missed it. But she takes this very 

seriously about teaching the students on the parliamentary 

system as it is in the legislature and brings them every year. So 

we’re very pleased to see them here, and I’d ask all members to 

welcome the A.E. Peacock Collegiate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also in your gallery, in your gallery is a couple of 

friends of mine and good citizens of Moose Jaw, Greg 

Lawrence. Greg is a customer service technician with SaskTel 

in Moose Jaw. He serves as the vice-president of the 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Local 3. Greg’s 

involved with the community as he teaches martial arts at the 

YMCA [Young Men’s Christian Association]. He also serves as 

the president of the Southern Plains Métis Local 160. He 

recently served as the military reserve as the deputy 

commanding officer of No. 40 Royal Canadian Air Cadets in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Greg is particularly impressed by the Saskatchewan Party 

government’s commitment to the Métis people in Saskatchewan 

in 2010 when we declared the year as the Year of the Métis in 

Saskatchewan. He is the Saskatchewan Party candidate for 

Moose Jaw Wakamow and he’s looking forward to being here 

in the next session on this side of the House. So please welcome 

Greg Lawrence. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker . . . Thank you. With Greg is his son Ryan. 

Ryan is the president of the Métis Youth Drug and Heritage 

Patrol, where they have put together two drug- and alcohol-free 

concerts, a program that started the SADD [Students Against 

Drinking and Driving] program in the Riverview Collegiate in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Ryan has been involved with the leadership of the air cadet 

squadron for the past three years, and this year has achieved the 

highest ranking officer as a warrant officer first class. Through 

air cadets, Ryan has achieved two highest scholarships: his 

glider licence and his private power licence in air traffic. Ryan 

has also done some mentoring for less fortunate youth in Moose 

Jaw for the past two years. He is also the captain of the football 

team for the last two years and a honour roll at Vanier 

Collegiate. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome 

Ryan and his dad, Greg. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the member from Moose Jaw North in welcoming 

Peacock Collegiate, the 24 grade 12 students, their teacher, and 

chaperones to the legislature. It is very commendable that the 

teacher is dedicated in bringing the class each year to view the 

legislature and to impress upon these young people that 

democracy and what happens in this Assembly is very 

important to you, not only now, but in the future. So thank you 

very much for your participation, and a warm welcome. 

 

And also while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome 

Greg Lawrence and his son Ryan to the Assembly. I know Greg 

is the nominated candidate in Moose Jaw Wakamow for the 

Saskatchewan Party. And I truly hope that he enjoys his seat 

from the visitor’s gallery because that’s precisely where I intend 

to keep him, Mr. Speaker. Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, I want to 

introduce four people today who are very important to me in the 

Speaker’s gallery. I’m going to start with my oldest son, Tim. 

Tim is on the management team at Doepker Industries. My 

wonderful daughter-in-law Pattie. Pattie is a public health nurse 

in Melfort. And then, my second oldest grandson, Grant. Grant 

is here today to see the, spend his day with us because this is 

probably the last day that he’ll have both of his grandparents 

sitting in the legislature. 

 

I don’t know how many people knew that Pattie is the daughter 

of the member from Melfort. And so politics has been 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7679 

especially kind to the member from Melfort and I because we 

not only have enjoyed a great political career, but we have a 

wonderful family because of that. And with them today is 

Carole Gantefoer, who is a very special friend of ours as well. 

And I want to ask everybody to please welcome this family that 

I love dearly to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

Minister of Social Services in welcoming the family to the 

legislature. I especially want to welcome Carole. And you’ll 

note, colleagues, that I didn’t say current wife. I will pay for 

that forever I am sure in this Assembly. But it’s great to have 

you here. Thanks for coming. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly a grade . . . 

actually not a grade — an English as an additional language 

class from Holy Cross High School in the constituency of 

Eastview. There’s 47 students up in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, accompanied by their teachers, Rita Wolfe and 

Yvonne Musey Johnson, and educational assistants, Maureen 

Bzdel and Sheila Kohle. I would very much like to welcome . . . 

They were going to leave at quarter after, so we just get this in 

in time. So welcome to the Assembly, and I’d like all members 

to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly a long-time friend of mine who is seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. That’s Mr. Terry Martin from Parkside. 

He’s here to visit with us today. 

 

Terry and myself first met many years ago, much longer than 

we both care to remember, back in university when we were 

students at the College of Agriculture. We maintained a 

friendship throughout these years. Terry spent his working 

career in Winnipeg in the ag industry, but he’s retired from that 

position and has become a world traveller, Mr. Speaker. I won’t 

hear from him for quite some time and then he’ll call and he’ll 

tell me about his trip to Antarctica or up the Amazon River and 

those sorts of things. He has friends all across the world. 

 

But his latest passion, Mr. Speaker, he’s devoted his time, and 

not only his time but his resources, to a charity that’s based in 

Vancouver, and this charity provides nutrition to malnourished 

children in North Korea. And as part of that effort, Mr. Speaker, 

he was here in Regina and met with a Korean congregation last 

night to inform them of the good work that this charity, First 

Steps, is doing. And I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that about a 

year ago at this time, as part of his work with First Steps, he 

visited North Korea with the executive director and he tells me 

that their organization, First Steps, is currently feeding 80,000 

malnourished children on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. So I’d 

encourage all members, or ask all members to welcome Terry to 

his legislature. 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to join the member for Rosemont in welcoming 

Jaime Garcia, but more today . . . I did that more formally 

yesterday than I intend to today. Today I wanted to particularly 

note Rick Pollard in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Rick is my 

constituency assistant and just does a terrific job on behalf of 

not only myself but the people of Regina Coronation Park. And 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming my constituency 

assistant, Rick Pollard, to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of this honourable Assembly Mr. Mark 

Docherty, the Saskatchewan Party candidate for Regina 

Coronation Park. Mr. Docherty is a proud alumni member of 

the University of Regina where he earned three degrees 

including a Bachelor of Science, a Bachelor of Human Justice, 

and a Master of Social Work. Mark is very involved in his 

community. He currently sits on the board of Street Culture 

Kidz Project Inc., and has also served on the board of North 

Central Community Association. Mark is deeply committed to 

representing Regina Coronation Park in the provincial election, 

provincial Legislative Assembly. We want to welcome Mark to 

this wonderful Assembly. We also want to wish him happy 

birthday. My understanding is that Mark is celebrating his 50th 

birthday. So I wish all members to join with me in welcoming 

him to this Assembly. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

introduce, to you and through you, Richard and Joanne Lepp 

and Patricia Fraser. These three individuals are proud 

representatives from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley constituency. 

Along with them, with Richard, Joanne, and Patricia, is Murray. 

These four members are from the House of Prayer, and they sit 

here day in, day out, providing strong counsel to both sides of 

the House. So I would wish each and every one of us here to 

show them our appreciation for their strong counsel here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

tradition of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, we leave no one behind. So 

in your gallery, sitting with Jaime and Rick, is Eric Anderson 

who does my member’s statements, Mr. Speaker. And I wanted 

to welcome him to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, to you and through 

you to members of the Assembly, also join with members who 

have welcomed a very special family that’s seated in your 

gallery. Mr. Speaker, to Tim and Pattie and Grant, and 

especially to Carole, we want to welcome them here again to 

the Assembly. 



7680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

We want to very specifically for this family thank them for 

sharing not just one but two MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] with the province of Saskatchewan. We know that 

there’s a sacrifice that families make for all of us to serve. And 

this family has made a sacrifice in the case of two parents and 

two grandparents. And so we want to thank them for that. 

 

We especially want to acknowledge the fact that they’re going 

to be getting one of those MLAs back, but we want to thank 

them especially for sharing the member for Melfort with this 

Assembly and with the province of Saskatchewan for such a 

very long time. We extend that especially to you, Carole. Thank 

you very much. And if it’s any solace, you can, for today at 

least, refer to your husband as the current MLA for Melfort. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I request 

leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

member. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 

gallery, someone that is no stranger to the legislature by any 

means. And she is seated in the third row. Her name is Shaheen 

Lotun. 

 

And Shaheen began — I just want to give you a little bit of 

background — Shaheen began a Bachelor of Arts degree 

program in 2004 with a major in political science and a minor 

in indigenous studies. Her honours thesis focused on women’s 

political engagement in the Middle East. She convocated with 

an Honours Bachelor of Arts degree in 2009. 

 

In 2006 Shaheen was one of five Canadians selected to 

participate in the 2006 Canada-Washington Parliamentary 

Internship Program in Washington, DC [District of Columbia]. 

And this program was sponsored through the Senate of Canada. 

She was placed as a public policy intern with a government 

relations firm. Her position entailed writing for the firm’s 

weekly newsletter and attending Senate and congressional 

hearings on behalf of the firm’s clients. Also in 2006 Shaheen 

was employed as a research assistant with the Saskatchewan 

Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation. This position 

provided an opportunity for her to be selected to represent 

Canada as a youth delegate to the 16th Conference of 

Commonwealth Education Ministers in Capetown, South 

Africa. 

 

Entirely in love with the African continent at this point, 

Shaheen took a volunteer position during the summer of 2007 

with a student-operated and -managed non-government 

organization in the Iganga District in eastern Uganda. With a 

small team of volunteers from Uganda and the United States, 

she helped to deliver public health and education programming 

in small towns and rural areas. And Shaheen’s volunteer 

activities, Mr. Speaker, go on and on. The list is long and she’s 

still actively involved. 

 

During the fall of 2009 and spring of 2010, Shaheen served as a 

legislative Page for the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, 

where we all got to know her very well. Following completion 

of these duties, she enrolled in a Bachelor of Arts degree 

program in African studies at Carleton University. She is 

interrupting these studies to participate in the 2011 

Saskatchewan legislative internship program, which is what 

she’s participating in in the legislature at this moment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I was very fortunate to have Shaheen select me as an MLA to 

work with, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been an absolute phenomenal 

relationship so far. We started working together on 

approximately April 15th. She has done amazing research for 

me on some of the Bills that came before the House, as well as 

other tasks that I’ve assigned her. She’s currently doing some 

research for me on renewable energy projects that are taking 

place across the country and elsewhere, and I look forward to 

working with her for the next two months. 

 

So I’d ask all my colleagues in the legislature to welcome 

Shaheen and thank her for the service that she has provided, not 

only to the MLAs that she’s selected for the Saskatchewan 

legislative internship program, but the service that she’s 

provided to Saskatchewan people throughout her very short 

lifespan so far in the many volunteer activities that she has 

participated in throughout Canada and elsewhere. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly I’d 

like to introduce a gentleman seated in the west gallery. Warren 

Steinley is one of our caucus researchers and he does an 

exceptional job. But after the November election, Warren will 

be the MLA for Regina Walsh Acres and I’d like all members 

to join me in welcoming him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I did not 

recognize that Mr. Steinley was in the gallery and I too would 

like to welcome Mr. Steinley to the legislature today, and with a 

wish for a very respectable campaign going forward. And of 

course I have the same wish as my colleague from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, that Mr. Steinley enjoys the view from the gallery 

where he is seated for a very long time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also while I’m on my feet would like to welcome and thank 

Mr. and Mrs. Joanne . . . Richard and Joanne Lepp as well as 

the other members from House of Prayer, Murray and Patricia, 

that are with us today. They do great yeoman service to the 

legislature and we’re very, very, very fortunate in this province 

to have dedicated individuals like this who will come to the 

legislature on a daily basis in a non-partisan way, Mr. Speaker, 

and offer guidance through prayer for all the members of the 

legislature to ensure that we are doing the best we can in our 

decision-making processes on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7681 

So I would very much like to, on behalf of the official 

opposition, thank you for the wonderful service that you are 

providing to the legislature on a continual basis and look 

forward to seeing you again in the future. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, as well I have a couple 

introductions I’d like members to . . . and individuals who have 

joined us today, we’d like to acknowledge. Seated in the front 

row of the Speaker’s gallery we have Alice Nenson from 

Hansard in the Speaker’s gallery. She’s here to observe 

question period on her last day of work before she begins her 

well-deserved retirement. 

 

Alice and Hansard go back a long time. She was an editor from 

’84 to ’86 and in 1996, Alice returned. And I’m told she’s 

brought her fine editorial judgment, her sense of humour, and 

her heart to the job every day. Her co-workers describe Alice as 

a great team player, a truly delightful person, and an excellent 

baker. The Hansard team will miss her very much. And I’d 

invite Alice to stand and allow us just to give her our thanks and 

appreciation for her work in the years in Hansard. 

 

Joining us as well today . . . This coming weekend, visitor 

services will assume summer hours and as a result they have 

invited more people to come and join them so they can provide 

the many visitors who attend, come to the Legislative Building 

the opportunity to get to know the building. So as I call out 

names I’m wondering if people could just wave and let us know 

who they are. Seated in the gallery we have Marita Clark, 

Alyssa Pittet, Brittany Love, and Troy Smith, who have been 

here before, joined us again this year. And new to the team this 

year we have Alyssa Bredohl and Daniel Fortier, and they’re 

joined by full-time staff Arnold McKenzie, Marianne Morgan, 

and Lorraine deMontigny. I invite members to welcome these 

guests to their Chamber. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to rise today and to present a petition talking about the 

Northern Trappers Association: 

 

And wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize that the Northern 

Trappers Association maintain the traditional values of 

hunting and trapping and also brings in millions of dollars 

to the provincial economy every year from the proceeds of 

the fur harvesting combined with the economic spinoffs of 

the tourism sector and to the local economies; and in so 

doing, Mr. Speaker, to cause this government to stop 

turning their backs on not only the trappers association, 

but all the people who live and work in northern 

Saskatchewan; and in so doing, to cause the provincial 

government to immediately reinstate the funding to the 

Saskatchewan Northern Trappers Association. 

 

As in duty bound [Mr. Speaker], your petitioners will ever 

pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these many, 

many petitions from all throughout the land include Stanley 

Mission and Regina, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of maintaining educational 

assistants. We know that all Saskatchewan children have a right 

to learn in a supportive and stress-free environment that ensures 

that they have the best possible chance to succeed in school, 

and that by the government’s own data, we know that a growing 

number of students require additional support to succeed in 

school. Mr. Speaker, educational assistants provide that support 

to students with special needs including learning disabilities, 

behaviour problems, and ensure that their behaviour doesn’t 

disrupt the learning environment for other children. And they 

are an integral part of the professional team that deals with 

students who have a different support need requirement, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

provide funding for the required number of educational 

assistants to provide special needs students with the 

supports they need and maintain a positive learning 

environment for all Saskatchewan students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these many petitions are signed by residents of 

Saskatchewan from Carrot River, Lanigan, Aberdeen, LeRoy, 

Martensville, Vanscoy, Delisle, Saskatoon, Warman, Regina, 

Dundurn, Humboldt, Watson, Radville, Muenster, Middle Lake, 

Spiritwood, Wynyard, Elfros, Blaine Lake, Rosthern, North 

Battleford, Melfort, Vonda, Regina, Moose Jaw, and Star City. 

And there are many others that I didn’t take note of 

individually. But, Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition on behalf of residents of the province of Saskatchewan 

who wish to bring to our attention that the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association has approximately 180 senior centres 

throughout the province with the vast majority of them situated 

in rural Saskatchewan and that these centres provide much 

needed recreation and social activities as well as important 

health clinics and workshops, which themselves contribute to an 

enhanced quality of life for the many seniors who use them and 

that due to the skyrocketing costs of utilities, insurances, taxes, 

garbage disposal, and exterior maintenance, approximately one 

quarter of these centres may close in the last 18 months and that 

the closure of these centres will lead to the deteriorating mental 

and physical health of seniors which will lead to additional 

stress on long-term care and hospital facilities. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 



7682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

The signatures on these petitions today, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the communities of Shellbrook, Prince Albert, Kindersley, 

Watrous, Green Lake, Big River, Leoville, Chitek Lake, and 

Holbein. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know in Saskatchewan the income gap between the rich and the 

poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of Highway 102: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention that 

Highway 102 is the only road access for communities like 

Grandmother’s Bay, Sucker River, Stanley Mission, 

Missinipe, Southend and that the current road has huge 

potholes and ruts that pose a real danger to anyone who 

dares to drive on it and that this road is in dire need of 

upgrading. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to recognize that Highway 102 

is used extensively by the mining resources and tourism 

industries, which contribute millions of dollars to the 

provincial economy every year, and that the people who 

travel this road must be able to travel in safety, and in so 

doing, commit to immediately providing the repairs 

needed to Highway 102 and paving the remainder of the 

highway to Southend. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Air Ronge, La Ronge, Stanley 

Mission, Sucker River, Brabant Lake, Glaslyn. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to once 

again present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in 

the neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the petition is 

about the need for a new elementary school for their children. 

The petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families, that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property tax, that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village from throughout the 

neighbourhood, including the streets of Allwood Crescent, 

Klassen Lane, Hargreaves Crescent, Coad Crescent, Korol 

Crescent, West Hampton Boulevard, McKague Crescent, Coad 

Manor, Greenfield Crescent, Pulles, McClocklin, East Hampton 

Boulevard, Denham Crescent, Denham Place, and Denham 

Rise. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to present this petition on 

behalf of my constituents. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the people of Saskatchewan are owners of a 1,000-year strategic 

resource and, as the owners of that resource, deserve to receive 

the maximum benefit of the resource, Mr. Speaker. Additionally 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of PotashCorp has said that 

there is a new norm in the world markets for potash moving 

forward. And I believe that their $732 million first quarter 

proves that. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from the 

cities of Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Regina. I so present. 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7683 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

the last opportunity for me to rise to present a petition that’s 

been presented every day of the House so far, regarding 

restoring funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina 

Catholic schools receive $275 less per pupil than Regina public 

schools, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in total 

for the 2009-2010 fiscal year. And that debt is growing, Mr. 

Speaker, because this inequity has not yet been corrected, and 

this inequity affects all of Regina . . . I mean all Catholic school 

divisions across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That funding inequity places program delivery and staffing 

levels at risk, and we are already seeing program delivery being 

cut for the fall of 2011. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

denied Catholic school boards in the province representation on 

the government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Humboldt, and Shaunavon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions once again today on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan, as it relates to the 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. 

 

They allude to a record that includes the running of deficits and 

increasing of debt at times of record highs in revenues. Mr. 

Speaker, they reference the fact that debt has increased for three 

consecutive years, well over $1.3 billion of debt. They reference 

that this year alone debt’s increasing by $548 million. They 

reference that this province fails to comply with the 

recommendations of the Provincial Auditor and fails to comply 

with public sector accounting standards and continues to report 

their finances in an inappropriate fashion, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents and 

good folks from various communities that include Stanley 

Mission, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Estevan, Kisbey, Kenosee 

Lake, Oxbow, Aberdeen, Langham, Moose Jaw, North 

Battleford, Hafford, Swift Current, Shaunavon, and Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased today to present a petition on behalf of citizens here in 

Saskatchewan who are calling on the government to do 

something about exorbitant rising rents that we’ve heard about 

here in this legislature and that I know we all have heard about 

on many, many occasions in our constituency offices where 

people are actively making the decision between paying rent or 

putting food on their table or buying needed medications. I’d 

like to read the petition, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to consider enacting some form of rent control 

with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters from 

unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Contract Negotiation with Teachers 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan teachers have been without a contract since 

August 31st, 2010. Despite teachers’ best efforts to negotiate in 

good faith, present alternatives, and remain open to flexible 

solutions, the Sask Party government again and again has 

disrespected them. Now government tax dollars are being used 

to bully teachers in the media in an attempt to sway public 

perception. The people to whom we entrust our children are 

battling negative advertising bought with their own tax dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, teachers, like so many other people in our 

province, are seeing that while the Sask Party government is 

flush with cash and our economy continues to grow, they are 

not benefiting from that success. Further, teachers are 

concerned about the long-term recruitment and retention of 

future co-workers and the increasing burdens being placed upon 

their profession. 

 

To remain competitive . . . neighbouring jurisdictions and to 

ensure the quality of education in Saskatchewan remains at the 



7684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

highest level, fairness and respect must be brought to teacher 

bargaining. Teachers can no longer be taken for granted and 

must be recognized for the valuable work they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, teachers have clearly grown frustrated by the 

government’s rhetoric both at the bargaining table and in the 

media. If their message is not heard at the bargaining table or on 

the steps of this legislature, it will surely be heard on November 

7th. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Fundraiser for Tsunami Victims 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we all 

know, a ferocious tsunami, spawned by one of the largest 

earthquakes ever recorded, slammed Japan’s eastern coast this 

past March. This killed hundreds of people as it swept away 

boats, cars, and homes while widespread fires burned out of 

control. 

 

Though time has passed since this disaster, the people of 

Saskatchewan have not forgotten. Mr. Speaker, the generous 

gift and . . . or generous spirit of the people of Saskatchewan 

was on full display this past weekend. Some of Regina’s great 

musicians have volunteered their time and talents to play at a 

two-night Japan earthquake tsunami relief concert fundraiser 

called Kanpai 2 Recovery. There were a total of eight sets 

scheduled, including performances from Fur Eel, Nancy 

Ray-Guns, Colby Nargang, and two-time Gemini Award 

nominee Jack Semple. 

 

All of the net proceeds generated from this event were donated 

to the Canadian Red Cross. There were four musical sets staged 

nightly, combined with a silent auction from a wide array of 

Saskatchewan and Regina businesses. Mr. Speaker, in one 

weekend, Kanpai 2 Recovery raised over $4,700 for Japanese 

aid efforts. 

 

I would like to recognize all who were involved and who 

participated in this event, and a special recognition to my son 

Regan who played a huge part in organizing this great event. 

You have all played a part in directly influencing the amount of 

aid provided for the unfortunate people of Japan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Rent Control 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout this 

session, advocates for affordable housing and rent control have 

been coming to this legislature. The people of Saskatchewan are 

struggling to make ends meet. Massive rent increases, higher 

utility costs, and elevated food prices in the Premier’s new 

Saskatchewan are leaving families behind. The Premier himself 

referred to these increases as unacceptable. And what is the 

Premier’s solution to the housing crisis, Mr. Speaker? The Sask 

Party government offers taxpayer-backed loans to developers to 

develop $300,000 homes, has increased the debt on the 

government books, but it’s doing nothing to address the real 

issue of families who can’t keep up with such steep rent hikes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan need next-generation 

rent control, a modern approach to curbing excessive rental rate 

hikes while continuing to encourage the development of new 

rental units. One need only look at the successful Manitoba 

model which saw Winnipeg create, from 2007 to 2009, five 

times more units than in Saskatoon and Regina combined. We 

need to examine those years and apply those principles of that 

success to a made-in-Saskatchewan approach. We are seeing 

more and more families being economically evicted from their 

homes because they cannot afford to pay 30, 40, 60, or even 

100 per cent rent increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families deserve more than the 

Premier’s lip service to this housing crisis. It’s time that the 

Sask Party government move ahead with a next-generation rent 

control system to help reduce the financial burden families are 

carrying, while planning continues to help increase new 

building starts. What kind of premier would allow these 

unacceptable rent increases under his watch? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Riding to Break the Cycle 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In a 

few weeks, Saskatoon Greystone’s own Emily van der Kamp 

will be part of a spirited group of young people bicycling 4000 

kilometres across Europe, from Amsterdam to Istanbul, to raise 

awareness of global poverty in the ride called Riding to Break 

the Cycle bike tour 2011. 

 

This past Saturday I was accompanied by my daughter 

Jacqueline in participating in a fundraising bike ride organized 

by Emily and her family to inform our community of her 

upcoming ride across Europe. The event was a great success. 

The bike tour was followed by a fundraising block party just in 

and around Garrison, where a number of neighbours came out 

to share an evening of good company for a good cause. All 

funds raised during this campaign go to Global Agents for 

Change, a Canadian charity that supports projects around the 

world focusing on poverty reduction. 

 

She’s going to be convocating in just a few days, actually in 

early June, and Emily is also helping to focus on specifically 

raising funds for a project in Uganda, focusing on providing 

Ugandan youth with the resources and knowledge they need to 

help fight poverty in their home communities. 

 

I’d like to congratulate Emily and her family, most especially 

her parents, Linda and Garth, on their hard work, and wish 

Emily and her team the very best as they bike across Europe to 

raise awareness for this very worthy global cause. Mr. Speaker, 

Emily van der Kamp is a model global citizen who takes global 

action to help ensure that there’s global justice. To she and her 

family and friends that participated, we offer our special thanks. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7685 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education’s failed college merger project says a lot about the 

Sask Party’s level of arrogance after just three and a half years 

in government. The minister arrogantly dismissed the concerns 

which I raised about the merger last May, and his office 

completely ignored at least two separate emails that showed 

staff were raising ethical concerns and board members were 

dismissing it as whining. Instead he plowed ahead and 

funnelled over $60,000 per student in infrastructure funding to 

this, his special project, even though the man in charge of 

merging the colleges had a history of fraud. 

 

A recent column in The StarPhoenix said, “Consider Advanced 

Education Minister Rob Norris’s cavalier dance around the fact 

that he knew 11 months ago of Glen Kobussen’s criminal past, 

yet trusted Kobussen’s decisions on the St. Peter’s-Carlton Trail 

merger more than staff members who were ringing alarm bells.” 

 

Now that it’s all gone off the rails, taxpayers have to pay almost 

half a million dollars just to investigate and clean up the 

minister’s mess. And all of this could have been avoided if the 

minister had simply listened to the concerns that were raised 

last year, Mr. Speaker. That’s a shocking level of arrogance, 

and taxpayers are paying the price. Saskatchewan people 

deserve better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Laughing Gas 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Late last year the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres issued a news release 

promising to introduce a private member’s Bill on acid rain. It 

was so important that she called for immediate action, yet it 

took her more than 150 days to introduce her Bill, and she did 

so with only four sitting days left in this session. There’ll be no 

time to actually debate the Bill in the House, and it will die on 

the order paper. Not only was it introduced at the last possible 

moment, but there are some serious questions raised by this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week we learned that the member for 

Athabasca failed high school accounting. Now it appears that 

the NDP member for Walsh Acres failed high school chemistry. 

In the Bill, the member identifies nitrous oxide, the chemical 

name being N2O, as a contaminant that has acidic disposition. I 

would like to take the chance to point out to the member that 

nitrous oxide is not one of the top 20 contaminants emitted from 

the oil sands in Alberta. In fact, Mr. Speaker, nitrous oxide is 

the technical name for what is commonly known as laughing 

gas. 

 

In light of the fact that this Bill was obviously written on the 

back of a napkin at the last possible moment and it contains 

many significant and laughable errors, will the members 

opposite agree to withdraw it today? Or do they honestly expect 

our government to pursue compensation from Alberta for 

laughing gas? Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that this is no 

laughing matter, but the member opposite has made that 

absolutely impossible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Circus 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 

close this session of the legislature, a circus tent is about to rise 

in south Regina. It’s a sure sign on the southern horizon, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of this city will soon be offered quite a 

show, featuring every kind of antics, acrobatics, and 

contortions. But, Mr. Speaker, the view from the North is that 

however good the circus is in town, it will pale in comparison to 

the three-ring circus that this Sask Party government has been 

bringing across the province over the last four years. 

 

Sask Party antics include speaking out of both sides of the 

mouth at once, Mr. Speaker, on issues like housing, highways, 

and health care. They promise one thing, then they do another, 

Mr. Speaker. And with the greatest of ease, Mr. Speaker, they 

flipped and flopped like the best of acrobats on their campaign 

promises to ensure economic development and education in all 

regions of the province. And we’ve seen them tie themselves 

into knots, Mr. Speaker, with contorted explanations of new 

voting rules that will put seniors, students, and First Nations in 

a bind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are getting ready to 

deliver a message to this three-ring, travelling circus, and that 

message is: Wall and brothers, move on. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before we move on to question 

period, I want to remind the member, even in members 

statements, members are not to refer to members of the 

Assembly by their names but by their position or responsibility. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

Negotiations with Teachers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there have been many 

important issues raised in the session. And one of the most 

historic things I think that has happened during this session is 

that, for the first time in 78 years, teachers in this province have 

had to take job action in order to get the government to pay 

attention to their needs and to show some respect for the people 

who look after our children in our schools. In fact 12,000 

teachers have voted to take job action, over 3,000 who showed 

up here at the Legislative Building in order to try to get the 

Premier and the government to pay attention to their needs and 

the needs of students. And in fact, in light of that, no one from 

the government came, even took the opportunity to come and 

talk to the teachers. 

 

I want to ask the Premier, the minister, why is it that at a time of 

record profits in this province we have a situation where the 

teachers, for the first time in the history of the province, have 

had to take job action for the first time in history in the 

province? 

 



7686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the hon. 

member’s question is false. The teachers have taken job action 

in the past. When I, in 2002 I remember as an MLA meeting 

with our local teachers who were taking job action. They were 

reducing the hours that they were available in schools to make 

their point to the then NDP government about their contract 

negotiations. So, Mr. Speaker, we should deal in truth with 

respect to the preamble to questions in the debate that’s going to 

happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want our teachers to be compensated fairly. 

We want to have competitive wages for our teachers . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we want our teachers to have 

competitive wages relative to every other province in Western 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, we know with the settlement trustees 

have put on the table or the offer that’s put on the table, we will 

close some of the gaps that exist, but we know there are other 

gaps, Mr. Speaker, with respect to first-year teachers and some 

who are further on in the tiers in the grid of teaching. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, there are negotiations happening right 

now. We think, Mr. Speaker, that the trustees want to be 

flexible, Mr. Speaker, flexible on some of those points where 

we need to be more competitive. But overall, Mr. Speaker, with 

the offer that’s on the table, our teachers will be the second 

highest paid in Western Canada. There is more work to be done 

with certain teachers certainly who have different levels of 

experience. We’re prepared to do that. We would say to both 

sides, let’s resolve it at the bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier tries to explain 

to the teachers why they’re wrong and he’s right, and that’s just 

unfortunate. What’s worse than not coming to speak to the 

teachers, the 3,000 who came here to lobby the government, 

was last weekend we saw the government use taxpayers’ money 

— money they say they didn’t have for teachers, money that the 

taxpayers paid — to run attack ads against the . . . [inaudible] 

. . . in fact talking very negatively about the teachers of this 

province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, teachers do not understand where, at a time 

when they are asking for a reasonable amount of money, the 

government is offering only 1.5 per cent per year, that at a time 

when they’re giving CEOs of the health boards up to a 60 per 

cent increase, and even their own political staff are being given 

20, 30 per cent increases in the Premier’s office. How is that 

logical, fair, or moral where teachers are being offered 1.5 per 

cent and others in his own office are being offered much more, 

in fact 20, 30, 40 per cent? Why is that fair? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are years in the past 

where the NDP members opposite, when there was some 

resources in the treasury, offered zeros to teachers in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s a fact of the matter. Mr. 

Speaker, there are other examples where teachers have felt they 

needed to take job action to make their point to the Government 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the offer that’s on the table from trustees, and the 

offer that’s forming the basis for negotiation and the basis for 

obviously some distance between the two sides, is one that will 

ensure the competitiveness of what we pay our teachers. We 

need to be competitive. Now in areas where there’s a bit more 

of a gap, I think the government in the past has shown 

flexibility in other contracts. That’s why 90 per cent of public 

employees have settled with the government, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve collectively bargained in good faith. We think that’s the 

answer in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a dangerous thing to simply compare the 

situation in Alberta because there’s been editorials even in 

Alberta in the papers there, in Medicine Hat for example, with a 

message to all of us in Saskatchewan that we may not want to 

replicate the policies of the province of Alberta because it’s not 

serving teachers very well. 

 

We want smaller, we want effective classroom sizes. We want 

competitive wages. Mr. Speaker, the answer to this issue will be 

at the bargaining table. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Potash Royalties 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

owners of a 1,000-year strategic potash resource and, as the 

owners of that resource, deserve to receive the maximum 

benefit of the resource. I’ve presented petitions throughout this 

session to that effect. There are people across this province that 

want to see a potash royalty review, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And leading economists agree with the people of Saskatchewan. 

Dr. Jack Mintz says the potash royalty system is “actually a 

poor rent collector.” So does Dr. Sylvain Charlebois who said 

that a review of the potash royalty structure is “dearly needed” 

and would be better for both the companies and for the people 

of Saskatchewan. Yet this government plan seems to be to 

defend only the interests of potash companies. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, for the first three months of this year PotashCorp 

cleared nearly $800 million. They’re doing very well, thank you 

very much. 

 

To the minister: this government is failing to defend the 

interests of Saskatchewan families. When will they listen to the 

voices of the Saskatchewan people and the experts across the 

country, step forward, and ensure that we receive the maximum 

benefit from our potash resource? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting 

that the member finally, on the last day of session, rises in his 

place to ask some questions about potash. He wouldn’t do it for 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7687 

about several months, but now on the last day he gets up and 

asks some questions. 

 

It’s unfortunate as well that he isn’t acquainted with what his 

Leader of the Opposition is saying with respect to potash in 

Saskatchewan, that if the companies in Saskatchewan, after 

taxing them to the rate of 50 to 80 per cent, if they don’t like it, 

he’s just simply going to nationalize them. Because they’ve 

done it before and they’d do it again. And that’s what he’s said. 

Melville Advance — it’s right here in front of everybody. It’s 

unfortunate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the important question here is, is this system 

is working in Saskatchewan right now. It is the NDP’s tax 

system that we’re following, after all, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

system that is recognized across the world as a system that is 

generating huge investment into our province right now, 

thousands of jobs being created. The greatest risk to those jobs 

is the member opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. In reference to 

the jobs that he says are at risk, how is it that the workers at 

those potash mines also back the potash royalty review? 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the potash industry admits that higher prices, 

or prices higher than $400 a tonne are the new norm moving 

forward. In fact PotashCorp CEO Bill Doyle is taking billions 

of dollars out of Saskatchewan and leaving virtually nothing for 

the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the Chicago way. 

 

Projections this year put PotashCorp on track to see $3 billion 

in profits. With a better return on our potash, we could build 

better roads. We could repair the health care system and recruit 

more doctors. We could build sufficient housing, and instead 

we’re getting a nickel on the dollar on a return for our potash 

resource. 

 

So to the minister: when will this government take the steps 

needed to ensure the Saskatchewan families see the return that 

they deserve for their potash resources? 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 

we’re going to take any counsel from the member opposite 

who, when he rose in an earlier speech in the legislature, said 

that in Saskatchewan people don’t even use potash. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the extent of his knowledge 

has been exemplified in the legislature here in graphic form. He 

said that potash isn’t even used in Saskatchewan, when in fact 

there are thousands of tonnes of potash used in Saskatchewan in 

seeding operations that are taking place right across 

Saskatchewan these days. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, in addition to that, said that he’s 

been out speaking to potash workers out at Kamsack. Well I 

dare say to the Leader of the Opposition, there isn’t even a mine 

in Kamsack, but there might be one in Colorado because that’s 

presently where the member’s car is occupied. What is the 

reason for your car being down, your CVA [central vehicle 

agency] vehicle being down in Colorado? Are you looking for 

some potash down there? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Rent Control and Affordable Housing 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, rental prices are rising . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please allow the member to place her 

question so we can hear the question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, rental prices are rising fast. And 

we’re seeing more and more people suffering economic eviction 

because they can’t afford to pay the 30, 40, and 60 per cent 

rental increases. Rent control is needed and it’s needed sooner 

rather than later. Renters of Saskatchewan want rent control but, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some that would like the opportunity to 

buy a home. However with their paycheques drained away with 

these large rental increases, their ability to put together a basic 

down payment is really taken away from them. 

 

To the minister: when will this government move to help 

Saskatchewan renters who are being forced from their homes by 

rental rate increases that even the Premier has admitted is 

unacceptable, but won’t do anything about? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP hold out the policy 

of rent control. Their example is Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. They 

hold this policy out even though, when the housing shortage 

was even more acute than it is today, they rejected rent control. 

The member for Eastview was asked to study it. They rejected 

rent control. That’s a matter of the public record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think they probably rejected rent control at the 

time under Premier Calvert because they looked at the 

Manitoba model. Here are some facts. The Manitoba policy 

does not apply to buildings under 20 years old or to units that 

rent for more than $1,120 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, so when they talk about this 

particular policy they are not talking about new units developed 

as a result of loopholes in the rental policy. A public policy 

institute in Manitoba has said, and I quote, “More and more 

properties, because of rent control, are boarded up, abandoned, 

and have to be acquired by the city for default of taxes.” 



7688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation] report fall of 2010 says the Winnipeg 

rental market universe has experienced a net loss of units in 

seven of the last . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier isn’t that far from 

this desk, but I’m having difficulty hearing the Premier’s 

comments. I’d ask the handful of opposition members to allow 

the Premier to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the policy they advocate for 

rent control, according to CMHC, fall of 2000, has resulted, for 

that city, rental market universe they say has experienced a net 

loss of units in seven of the last 10 years. Just last fall, Mr. 

Speaker. Compare that to our policy: 800 new public units built, 

1,000 under construction, 4,600 more to come, two cities 

already applied to that housing program for another 2,600 units. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s good public policy. We’ll leave the politics 

to the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier likes to talk about 

the new Saskatchewan, but yet he justifies all his lack of 

decision and lack of action on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 

by using old quotes from a situation that is quite different. He 

needs to look at the new data that is out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Manitoba legislature took steps to 

further strengthen their rent controls and protect renters in their 

province. With a critical housing shortage here in Saskatchewan 

and very little new construction, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan have turned to their government for help. They 

are told that their concerns aren’t as important as the concerns 

of people who will happily gouge their tenants. While the 

Manitoba government works to protect their people, this 

government does nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will this government finish its time in office doing 

nothing while the people of Saskatchewan are suffering due to 

unacceptable rent increases and gouging? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Apparently, Mr. Speaker, according to that 

member, a quote from CMHC on this rent control program they 

propose from fall of last year is an old quote. How about then, 

how about a newer quote? From their NDP candidate in P.A., in 

Prince Albert Carlton, who said in the media that he supports 

the government’s, he thinks the government’s policy is 

advantageous in terms of dealing with the housing shortage, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are addressing, Mr. Speaker, we are addressing the full 

continuum of housing issues in this province. On the rental side 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — On the rental side, Mr. Speaker, we see an 

increasing number of supply in the units in terms of new home 

availability. We see more new homes being constructed. We see 

an easing in the vacancy rate from when those members were in 

power, Mr. Speaker. The vacancy rate, the housing market was 

tighter under the NDP. They looked at rent control then 

objectively, and they rejected it. What is the difference today, 

Mr. Speaker? The difference is they are . . .  

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think it would be appropriate 

for the member from Prince Albert Northcote . . . Order. Order. 

The member from Regina Rosemont will also . . . Order. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker from their seats they say, 

what’s changed? Well actually what’s changed is the vacancy 

rate’s gotten a little larger. I mean it’s still a challenge in many 

communities, but it’s better than it was under the NDP when 

they rejected rent control. So it begs the question then, why did 

they reject rent control then? Because they understood it was 

bad policy. Manitoba’s finding out it’s bad policy. Why would 

they change their position? Because, Mr. Speaker, they’re in 

very desperate straits as a political party in this province. Rent 

control might look good on a billboard, they might think it 

might be good for them politically but, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

people of the province will side on the side of good public 

policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Provision of Health Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government has failed the people of Saskatchewan in protecting 

the health system. There has been a 40 per cent increase in 

doctor vacancies, and communities are spending as much as 15 

per cent of their municipal funding in bidding wars for doctors. 

Hospitals and acute care services are closing in Spiritwood, Big 

River, Wakaw, Kamsack, Leader, and the list goes on. Now 

we’re looking at Kindersley and Rosetown. Long-term care 

beds have been closed in Wawota, Muskeg Lake, Melville, and 

Canora. There’s no support for mental health and no funding to 

build the hospital in North Battleford. The kidney transplant 

program is decimated, funding has been cut to chiropractic care 

and West Nile mosquito control, and over 100,000 personal 

private health care records have been left in dumpsters, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve far more than the empty 

promises and empty rhetoric from the minister. Will the 

minister today admit that all his hot air and broken promises 

have failed the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what that minister and this 

government inherited from the NDP went something like this 

when it came to health care. What we inherited were the longest 

wait times for surgery in the country, Mr. Speaker. What we 

inherited was one of the most acute doctor shortages in the 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7689 

country, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the NDP left. What the NDP 

left is a province with a thousand too few nurses and as a result, 

with closing beds, Mr. Speaker. What the NDP left this 

province was their legacy of 52 hospitals closed, 1,100 

long-term care beds closed, Mr. Speaker. In three and a half 

years, Mr. Speaker, we now see more doctors . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the Premier 

should be allowed to respond to the question without a lot of 

interference as the government members have allowed the 

member to place the question. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — They don’t want to hear this, Mr. Speaker. 

The good news is this. The good new is this. Wait times in the 

province of Saskatchewan are down. Those people waiting 18 

months or longer, down 75 per cent; 12 months or longer, 55 

per cent; six months or longer, 32 per cent down; three months 

or longer, 21 per cent down. There are more doctors practising 

today, specialists and GPs [general practitioner]; 840 more 

nurses practising today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government is dealing with the challenges that we have in 

communities, and they still exist. You cannot fix 16 years of 

neglect in three and a half years, but we’ve come a long way, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Most things I have read, Mr. Speaker, are 

failures that they cannot fix and they have not fixed. Their list 

of closures is growing and they seem to be quite proud of that. 

Hospitals now are looking in Kindersley and Rosetown. 

They’re happy about that? 

 

Going back to 16 years, if he wants a history lesson, Mr. 

Speaker, the legacy left to this province was by Grant Devine 

— deficit, deficit, deficit. And from then on, it’s been digging 

out of that hole. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, not only has the minister failed to provide 

Saskatchewan families with the health care they deserve, he has 

consistently disrespected and undervalued the people that work 

in the health care system. With the hammer of Bills 5 and 6, the 

government bullied, threatened, and finally rammed through 

contracts for health care providers that gave them less than the 

cost of living and, Mr. Speaker, the government’s been 

continuing that tactic with the health science professionals now. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: how can he possibly think that he 

can recruit and retain professionals, keep hospitals and acute 

care services open, open the kidney transplant program, keep 

the ambulances running, when he’s disrespecting and 

undervaluing all the people that work to deliver those services? 

How can bullying work for this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member says how can we 

have the right complement or more health care workers in the 

province of Saskatchewan? There are 20 per cent more 

front-line health care workers in the province today under our 

government than under their government. There are more 

doctors working in the province today — I think over 200 — 

under our government versus their government. There are 

840-plus new nurses working in the province today compared to 

what happened under their watch, Mr. Speaker. Wait times are 

less for people waiting for surgery now versus their 

government, Mr. Speaker. Ninety per cent with respect to 

collective bargaining, 90 per cent of public employees or 

thereabouts have settled with the government, Mr. Speaker. 

There remains work to be done. 

 

The health care deficit left behind by those members, left 

behind by those members was very significant, including if you 

can believe it, our College of Medicine under probation under 

those members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province recognize 

that there’s more work that’s needed to be done, but they will 

take a record of progress on this side over a record of neglect 

from the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, throughout this session, details of 

the Minister of Advanced Education’s failed college merger 

project have slowly emerged. And there’s now an army of 

accountants on the ground trying to get to the bottom of his 

mess. 

 

Unfortunately it’s taxpayers who are paying the price for the 

minister’s incompetence and arrogance. So far, so far $400,000 

has been dumped into the investigation and cleanup of his mess. 

My question to the minister is this: will that $400,000 cover the 

full cost of the investigation and cleanup, or will Saskatchewan 

taxpayers be forced to pay even more to clean up his mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, under this particular minister, 

with respect to post-secondary education, we have seen record 

investment in the post-secondary institutions of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. We have seen an historic graduate recruitment and 

retention program implemented in this province and now 

working for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 

have seen tuition rates that have been maintained inside the 

spectrum of affordability. When you compare them with other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, we see innovation . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, prior to the 2004 imposed 

tuition freeze, the NDP raised tuition by upwards of 30 per cent 

in only two years. Those days are gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regional colleges, Mr. Speaker, that’s the member’s question, 

our campuses at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 



7690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

Science and Technology] . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres to allow the Premier to respond to the 

question. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And, Mr. Speaker, the campuses at the 

University of Saskatchewan, the research parks there 

understand this government’s priority with advanced education. 

 

This particular proposed merger didn’t happen. That’s entirely 

the point. The minister’s done his job, and he continues to do 

his job on behalf of the government to make post-secondary a 

priority, the likes of which it was never under the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to check Hansard, but 

did I just hear the Premier say that the minister did his job on 

this file? Mr. Speaker, this is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Please allow the member 

to place his question. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the height of arrogance. I 

expect the member from Regina South to stand up and give him 

a standing ovation for the Minister of Advanced Education, but 

for the Premier, the Premier to say that the minister did his job 

on this file? Almost half a million dollars has been wasted 

cleaning up his mess, a mess that he directed and had the 

blessing of your government, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of taxpayers’ dollars have been dumped into 

this project, first to try to make it happen and now to investigate 

it and clean it up. Taxpayers deserve answers. Yet the 

minister’s track record on releasing independent reports is not a 

good one. He sat on the initial Meyers Norris Penny report for 

weeks and was so arrogant he said, in this House, he was 

refusing to release it because “. . . that way we can make sure 

that local stakeholders are positioned and prepared . . . ” His 

delay may very well have jeopardized the investigation by 

allowing key evidence to be destroyed. And this Premier says 

the minister did his job. 

 

So to the minister: will he commit publicly today to fully 

release all the information gained through the multiple, multiple 

investigations into the minister’s failed merger project, and will 

he release that information as soon as it is received? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Maybe the minister was not as thorough as 

the member in his undoing of Dr. Ryan Meili in the New 

Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. Maybe he wasn’t that thorough, 

Mr. Speaker, but I’ll tell you . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Please allow the 

. . . Order. Please allow the Premier to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But you see, Mr. Speaker, the difference 

between the two sides of the House is that this government 

reacts and deals with situations as they’re presented. Compare 

that to the record of members opposite when they were in 

government. Compare that to the record of the Opposition 

Leader, Mr. Speaker, who when scandals were presented to him 

in his government as minister like Channel Lake, like 

SPUDCO, and we’ve got the correspondence . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would anticipate the 

members would at least like to hear the answer. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the difference is that NDP 

government stopped precisely nothing. They let things continue. 

They let the losses mount. And they weren’t necessarily 

forthcoming about the facts of it until forced to by court cases, 

Mr. Speaker. Maybe this will be the same. Maybe it’ll be a 

mystery similar to the one that the member of Energy and 

Resources has referenced relative to the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a track record on this side of the House of 

moving Saskatchewan forward in a historic way. We’re leading 

the country today in terms of our economy. We’re leading the 

country today in terms of a place to invest and live, Mr. 

Speaker. That has happened under the watch of this 

government. We look forward to the next election to compare 

our record to theirs of 16 years. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Bill Nos. 907 and 625 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to orders of the day, I do 

have . . . Order. I do have a ruling that I need to make in regards 

to — order — a Bill on the order paper. 

 

I would like to draw to the attention of members that this 

Assembly had under consideration two Bills with provisions of 

substantially the same purpose: Bill No. 907, The Congregation 

of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order Regular of St. 

Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011 in the name of the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest and Bill No. 625, The 

Saskatchewan Respectful Language Act in the name of the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. Both Bills propose means to 

remove the same anachronistic phrase from existing legislation. 

 

According to Erskine May Parliamentary Practice, 23rd 

Edition, p. 578: 

 

There is no rule or custom which restrains the presentation 

of two or more bills relating to the same subject, and 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7691 

containing similar provisions. But if a decision of the 

House has already been taken on one such bill . . . the 

other is not proceeded with if it contains substantially the 

same provisions . . . 

 

This Legislative Assembly has numerous precedents on the 

subject of the “same question rule” with respect to Bills. 

Speakers have consistently ruled that if the Assembly has 

agreed to one Bill that contains similar provisions in another 

Bill, the Speaker must then prevent any further consideration of 

the second Bill. 

 

Yesterday the Assembly passed all stages of Bill 907, The 

Congregation of the Sisters of St. Elizabeth of the Third Order 

Regular of St. Francis of Assisi Amendment Act, 2011. Given 

the decision by the Assembly to pass this Bill, it is my duty to 

ensure that the Assembly does not come to two different 

decisions on the same question. For this reason, it is necessary 

that I order that item 5 under private members’ public Bills and 

orders, second readings, Bill No. 625, The Saskatchewan 

Respectful Language Act, be removed from the order paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 2 — Housing 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Forbes.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and add comments to the motion that calls on 

the Assembly to urge the government to immediately assist 

emergency shelters to increase their capacity and provide some 

desperately needed services during especially the cold winter 

months, and to immediately begin the process of developing a 

comprehensive affordable housing strategy and a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to address the 

underlying causes of this crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter what information or what data 

you will look at when we look to determinants of health and 

look to the well-being of citizens, which ties into, quite clearly, 

Mr. Speaker, the reduction of poverty. One of the major planks 

that have to be in place is quality, stable housing 

accommodation for people. Mr. Speaker, the impacts are huge, 

and it is mentioned again and again and again in a variety of 

forums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the main reasons that the opposition 

has been calling for rent controls throughout this session, earlier 

through last summer and into this session, Mr. Speaker, was 

that it is something we have heard across the province over and 

over again. And it’s not just in the big cities or the main cities, 

but it is in communities right across this province. 

But many people, many citizens of this province and families 

are being squeezed, and it’s putting a huge strain on the people 

of the province that are caught in this difficult position of seeing 

their rental accommodation costs increasing well beyond their 

means. And in many cases, they are being caught in what is 

now referred to as economic eviction, where their income will 

not cover the new increase in their rental accommodation and 

they are being forced to downsize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we met with a family here in Regina that had been 

renting a two-bedroom apartment — the husband and wife and 

their two children — and they could no longer afford . . . Now 

they were working, Mr. Speaker. This is not an unusual case 

that this family was working, but the wages that they were 

bringing home was not covering the increased rent that was 

being put on their budget by the accommodation that they were 

in and by the landlord. Mr. Speaker, they ended up downsizing. 

So here was this family with two children, ended up moving 

into a . . . downsizing into a one-bedroom apartment so it would 

better fit their budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s unacceptable when we have a government 

that talks about a booming economy. They are enjoying some of 

the highest revenues ever in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we are seeing very little, if anything, done 

for these citizens. Mr. Speaker, seniors are facing this same 

pressure of economic eviction. I’ve had calls in my home 

community of Moose Jaw where senior citizens are spending 

well over 50 per cent of their income on their rent, and there’s 

no options for them to move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some huge wait lists when it comes to 

public housing in the province of Saskatchewan, wait lists that 

my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has documented here in 

this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, this government has not only 

ignored the issue but almost, Mr. Speaker, they’ve refused to 

even admit that the circumstance exists in what they are calling 

their new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has announced a housing plan, 

and the minister has stood a number of times and defended it. 

But, Mr. Speaker, what it is, it’s guaranteed loans to developers. 

It’s some small grants to municipalities who have plans in 

place, and it is some renovations of already owned government 

stock to bring them up to a more acceptable standard. That’s 

nice, Mr. Speaker, but an investment in current government 

stock does not provide any new doors, does not provide any 

new units for families across the province. It’s just a 

re-development of existing units, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the minister has taken great pains to provide $200 million 

in loan guarantees for developers and, like I say, a small grant 

to municipalities who have taken it upon themselves to develop 

housing in their own communities. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask 

you, what’s missing out of this whole plan? What is missing? 

We’ve looked after the developers. We’ve helped them. We 

have given a token incentive to municipalities to put in the work 

and develop the housing projects in their community. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what’s missing is tenants and citizens — the people 

who need the housing, the people who are caught in this crunch, 

and the people who are suffering the poor policies and 

initiatives of this government. 

 



7692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, I mean, when you step back and take a closer look 

at the government’s plan, the minister announced the plan in 

June so that means that municipalities will have to put together 

a plan for housing developments or increases in their 

communities. Many municipalities don’t have the capacity. 

House planning and building development is not something that 

municipalities are well versed in. They will have to find the 

people to develop plans. They will have to do assessments on 

their communities to see what exactly type of housing is 

needed. Is it seniors? Is it rental accommodation? Is it more 

affordable housing? Where will it be built? Infrastructure will 

have to be put in — sewers, streets, sidewalks, power, gas, all 

of the things that go with a new housing development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a quick process. I mean, everyone 

in this House is well aware a program was announced in June. 

You will see municipalities now, right before the summer break 

for most councils across the province, looking at what 

opportunity there is for their community. You will need to find 

the people to develop plans. You will need to work with 

developers to make sure everything is in place for developers to 

move ahead. Then we will look at the building season starting 

next spring. Who knows if we are going to have another wet 

spring next year? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking at a year to a year and a half — 

and I’m being optimistic here — a year to a year and a half 

before we will see any progress on this plan that the minister 

announced with great fanfare. And in the meantime we have 

tenants, families, seniors, Mr. Speaker, citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan who are going through economic eviction. 

They are struggling to find accommodation to live. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I didn’t even use the words looking to find quality 

accommodation to raise their children in. They are just at this 

point looking for any accommodation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has forgotten citizens in this whole 

process, in this program that they’ve put forward. How do you 

reduce poverty? How do you solve the issues of homelessness 

and families dealing with and struggling with some of the very 

basic issues of necessity? How do you ever expect them to be 

able to move ahead and build a life for their families or 

themselves when you cannot find a home to live in, when you 

cannot find accommodation in the province of Saskatchewan 

that you can afford? 

 

[11:30] 

 

And the minister says, well that’s fine. We’re going to build all 

these thousands of homes and units, and she said they’re 

starting at 180 to $300,000. That’s where these housing units 

are going to be priced. Well that’s nice, Mr. Speaker, but let’s 

take a quick look at this. You talk to any real estate agent in the 

province of Saskatchewan and there is a requirement for 5 per 

cent to be put down on any new home, on any home. Any 

purchasing a home, you need 5 per cent down. So on $180,000 

— which is the low end of the minister’s program and the 

Premier’s program that they have talked as being so wonderful 

— 180,000, that means on minimum you need $9,000 to put 

down to be able to move into that $180,000 house. If you were 

moving into a $300,000 house, you would need $15,000 in your 

bank account to be able to put down to be able to purchase that 

home. 

Mr. Speaker, if I had $9,000 or if I had $15,000 cash sitting in 

my bank account to put on a down payment on a home, or any 

variation of the amount in between that, I will be able to afford 

my rent. I will not be one of the people that need, in many 

cases, rent control and are looking to the government to offer 

some solutions and offer some help for myself and my family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did not the minister look at that issue before she 

announced this? $9,000 down, plus you will need fees for any 

lawyers’ documents that need to be done with the transaction, 

plus there would be real estate fees, Mr. Speaker. Any of us 

who have purchased a home, no matter what the cost, know that 

there are fees and costs that go along with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of these young families in the province, they 

don’t need the government to support developers to build a 

house. They need support to be able to enter the housing 

market, Mr. Speaker. That’s where they need the support, 

because they are paying very high rents that have increased 

substantially over the last couple of years. They are having 

trouble making ends meet. They are not . . . I mean how do you 

. . . They don’t have the additional income or disposable income 

to be able to save for a down payment to purchase a house. 

 

So when the minister stands up and says, well we’re supporting 

developers; we’re guaranteeing their loans to the tune . . . $200 

million in loans we’re guaranteeing to build accommodation 

between 180,000 and $300,000 so Saskatchewan families, 

they’ll have lots of choice. They’ll just be able to move in, be 

off the street, be out of rental accommodations. Life will be 

wonderful. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work that way because many 

people . . . And many people, whether on fixed income, whether 

they are working families, they will never be able to save 9,000 

or $15,000 to put as a down payment. So, Mr. Speaker, part of 

this motion speaks to the issue that the minister and that this 

Saskatchewan Party government needs to actually sit down and 

get real and look at the issues that Saskatchewan taxpayers are 

dealing with. 

 

Well now the minister also stands and says, well we cut 

114,000 people off the tax rolls, and that’s just wonderful. Well 

you know, Mr. Speaker, we could have a bit of a debate on our 

numbers because, I think, she’s just adding to. But we’ll leave 

that alone. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if someone is off the tax rolls already, if their 

income is so low that they are not on the tax rolls, how does a 

tax cut help them? And, Mr. Speaker, the right wing 

conservatives, Saskatchewan Party, whatever you want to call 

them, they assume that’s always the number one issue that they 

talk about — tax cuts. Tax cuts are the panacea for absolutely 

everything. Slow business, cut tax. Too busy, cut taxes so you 

can put more into your business. Prices are too high, cut taxes 

because I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, it’ll filter through into all of us 

as consumers. 

 

Well, doesn’t happen. It’s not the panacea for everything. And 

the minister, to stand in this Assembly and say that 114,000 

people have been taken off the tax rolls, is appalling and shows 

an absolute misunderstanding or lack of knowledge when it 

comes to this issue of Saskatchewan families struggling to be 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7693 

able to find accommodation and to move into accommodation 

that they can afford, where they can afford groceries on the 

table, where they can afford their utility rates which, Mr. 

Speaker, have gone up under this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a real disconnect when it comes to this 

program and the needs of Saskatchewan people. And there is a 

disconnect between the minister’s explanation of how this 

program works and her understanding and her answers in 

responses to questions in this Assembly over the last number of 

weeks and what actually happens to families and seniors and 

constituents of ours across this province. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister has to sit down and look at a broader concept — the 

actual impact of these programs and what’s needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again refer to determinants of health. Housing is 

one of the main determinants of health, and health determines 

our future. Mr. Speaker, to have that solid base for a home, a 

quality, affordable accommodation, means not only better 

health. It means better outcomes for children in school, which 

just leads to better outcomes later in life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, housing is one of the main components of success 

in our society. And, Mr. Speaker, whether we are talking about 

immediate help of shelters, whether we are talking about 

immediate help of rent control until more appropriate 

accommodation is built, Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister, you 

have forgotten the one and a half to two-year gap that this 

province and citizens of this province will see before anything 

of this program comes to fruition. 

 

The debate as to whether the program is appropriate, the debate 

as to whether it will actually work, I’ll leave that aside, Mr. 

Speaker, because what we’ve talked about with rent control, 

what we have talked about over the last many months with 

people right across the province, is that there needs to be some 

immediate action, an immediate action that citizens feel — not 

guaranteed, government-backed loans for developers, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what we need to see. 

 

And if we truly want to address the issue of poverty, if we truly 

want to improve the life of Saskatchewan residents, and if we 

wish to continue talking about how successful Saskatchewan is, 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister and members of this 

Assembly to review these programs and to make sure that all 

citizens in this province are feeling the success, the economic 

success that we are seeing so much about in the recent months 

and, Mr. Speaker, really reassess the programs to make sure that 

they are impacting citizens in this province that need a hand up 

and they need some help to get on their feet and to be able to 

contribute not only to themselves, to their families, but to the 

province as a whole. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

delighted to be able to stand in the House today to address the 

motion that was brought forward by the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I’m 

going to be bringing forward an amendment, but I’d like to start 

to speak for a few minutes about housing in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province has experienced phenomenal growth 

under the new government, and we have a Saskatchewan 

advantage. And you know, we know there is challenges to meet 

the needs in the new, vibrant Saskatchewan. 

 

When I listen to the members opposite, I have no doubt why 

their polling numbers are down. Their depressing attitude over 

there about the options people should have to move from the 

few units that are left in this province, moving around instead of 

the idea of actually building more units and giving people 

opportunities to choose so there actually are . . . have something 

to wake up in the morning and determine, I have some choices 

in life. I don’t get to move from one unit to another that’s 

already in existence in a province that has more people, when 

obviously the members opposite’s great desire is to make sure 

we don’t have more people. Maybe that would be a way we can 

do it: control the number of people, then we don’t need new 

houses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have, before this spring, we spent an amount 

of money to make sure that we have completed 860 new 

affordable rental units since November of 2007. We have 1,100 

more units under development at this time. We’ve helped nearly 

400 people achieve home ownership, and we’ve helped nearly 

3,000 households improve the health and safety and the energy 

efficiency of their home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But then this spring we did announce the Saskatchewan housing 

advantage plan. The five-point plan outlines housing initiatives 

that’s going to invest $252 million into provincial housing 

markets in the next five years. These initiatives are going to 

make sure that we have a minimum of 4,600 new rental and 

home ownership units in the province housing market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite spoke about the plans and 

said that in their opinion, in their humble opinion, they believe 

that this isn’t going to work for a year and a half. Well to the 

member opposite, they should know that in the first week, the 

first week where there was an opportunity for people to actually 

apply and to get information on this program, there was 26 RMs 

[rural municipality] and towns and cities applied and said, I 

want to be part of this, Mr. Speaker. And these applications are 

anywhere from the North to the southern part of our province, 

from small towns and small cities to the larger cities. Mr. 

Speaker, these individuals know that they need new doors 

because there is more people coming to our province. 

 

The housing plan that we announced consisted of programs that 

involve municipalities. They involve industry. They involve 

developers. They involve builders and low-income housing 

providers. Together we’re able to partner with these participants 

to ensure that the growing demand for rental and home 

ownership in our province is met. Since we’ve announced this 

plan, we have had overwhelming interest from the 

municipalities. 

 

In April of this year the Sask Housing Corporation, together 

with CMHC, hosted a three-day summit in Saskatoon. Mr. 

Speaker, the summit created an opportunity for housing 

stakeholders to come together for a profit . . . or for non-profit 

agencies to come together to discuss the future of housing in 

our province. The discussion covered the continuum of housing 

from spectrum that’s right from rentals and shelter units, right 



7694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

through home ownership, rental purchase units, and the homes 

that many people in this province are living in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was common ground. The common ground 

is that we had partnerships to make sure that we could have the 

RMs and developers could work with government. I had the 

good fortune of attending the summit and enjoyed the frank 

discussions that took place. However what really stood out for 

me, Mr. Speaker, is that everybody was excited to be part of the 

solutions. They know that there’s a challenge, but there’s also 

solutions, and it’s not limiting the number of homes that are 

built in this province. 

 

I was excited at the summit, Mr. Speaker, to hear about the 

solutions. And recognizing the answers for addressing our 

housing file was not a cookie-cutter solution. And that is why 

we announced the Summit Action Fund — $6 million that 

stakeholders could tap into to pursue creative ideas. This little 

fund is an incubator for good ideas for something that could be 

uniquely Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the challenge that our 

province seeks as we look at the housing shortage. The world 

has heard of the Saskatchewan advantage and as a result our 

province has become a beacon of opportunity for people that are 

looking at the province from right across the world. Our 

government will continue to meet the challenge of building new 

Saskatchewan and will come with more opportunities for 

developing. Mr. Speaker, we’re developing housing units, but 

more importantly we’re developing homes — more 

importantly, homes for people who want to come to the best 

place in the world to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put forward the amendment now, an 

amendment that says: 

 

Remove all the words after the word “government” and 

add: 

 

to continue the plan to improve the accessibility of 

affordable housing throughout Saskatchewan and take 

steps to ensure that the knowledge that was gained from 

the most recent housing summit be implemented to help in 

taking strides towards addressing rent and affordable 

housing issues facing people in our province. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved: 

 

That the motion be amended by removing all the words 

after the word “government” and add: 

 

to continue the plan to improve the accessibility of 

affordable housing throughout Saskatchewan and take 

steps to ensure that the knowledge that was gained from 

the most recent housing summit be implemented to help in 

taking strides towards addressing rent and affordable 

housing issues facing people in our province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

pleased to speak to the amendment. 

 

I kind of feel that after all these days that we’ve been talking 

about this motion about rents and affordable housing, and 

we’ve come to this point in the session here today and the 

government . . . This is what, this is what really speaks to how 

this government operates. The last minute, the last minute it 

proposes an amendment just in the closing hours of the session. 

And this speaks to what it’s done around its strategy. We’re still 

waiting until July. We hear now July that actually a strategy 

will come out. 

 

And I have some real concerns about this because people, 

people are up against the wall when it comes to housing. And 

we’ve seen that numerous times in this session where people 

have come to the House to say, we need action right now. And 

we could have had that action in the past weeks when we’ve 

been sitting. It doesn’t cost any money. And we’ve seen that 80 

per cent of Canadians live with rent control. And in fact we 

learned that yesterday in fact Manitoba now is in fact 

strengthening their rent control regulations. 

 

And for the first time, we saw today actually the Premier stand 

on his feet and talk about rent controls as well when those 

questions were posed. No, actually I’m wrong on that. We did 

know that the Premier did answer some questions on rent 

control earlier when he talked about how unacceptable it was. 

 

And so I have some real, real concerns about the amendment 

that’s put forth to us because it clearly, clearly misses the point. 

And it shows, it shows how these folks have missed the boat in 

terms of the urgency of this and in fact will like to stall, will 

like to stall on this. 

 

And so when we take a look at the motion that we see that’s put 

before us, and I’ll read the motion: 

 

Remove all words after the word “government” and add: 

 

to continue the plan to improve the accessibility of 

affordable housing throughout Saskatchewan and take 

steps to ensure that the knowledge that was gained from 

the most recent housing summit be implemented to take 

strides towards addressing rent and affordable housing 

issues facing people in our province. 

 

And I find that a very interesting summit because we’ve heard 

essentially a couple of mixed messages from the government 

side, one from the minister who said that she had brought some 

people together and the issue of rent control wasn’t raised. But 

we know how this government works. If it’s not raised, it must 

be a positive. Well did she ask the question or didn’t ask the 

questions? I don’t think she asked the questions because many 

of the groups that she was dealing with actually deal with 

people who are actually building homes, and rent control isn’t 

necessarily an issue for them. It isn’t an issue for them. 

 

But we also heard then also from the Minister of Justice who 

said when renters were asked directly, what do you think we 

should do about rent regulations, he was very upfront, very 

upfront and said that in fact renters just want rent control. It’s 

really straightforward. It’s really straightforward. And it does 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7695 

make sense because 80 per cent of Canadians do live, do live 

with rent controls, and this is not an unusual thing. In fact we 

see it right around the world, right around the world. 

 

We know that in New York, we know that in New York on 

June 15th, they’re coming up to a deadline where the rent 

controls that have been place for many decades in New York 

state could be lifted, and of course the Governor Cuomo is 

working hard to get that reinstated. In fact the impact of what 

that will mean would be huge. We see it in New York. We see 

it in California. We see it in Bombay, Mumbai. We see it in 

New Zealand. It’s very interesting actually as you take a look 

around the world that in fact, people say it’s only reasonable to 

have some form of rent regulations. 

 

And of course from their summit they avoided the question. In 

fact people were out in front handing out information, and it 

was referenced, it was referenced in the summit by questions. 

And I remember I was there and one speaker was asked, so 

what would we do in the absence or what can we do in the 

absence of rent regulations? And the speaker said, she said, I 

think I’ve stepped into something I didn’t really want to talk 

about. 

 

And that’s the issues because we have things where this is a 

pretty straightforward issue, the old issue around rent control. 

And so when the minister says that they’re going to take the 

knowledge gained from the most recent housing summit . . . 

And there were some interesting things put forward, some very 

interesting things, and one of them of course was co-op 

housing. And I’m very looking forward to seeing what that may 

mean, what that may mean to this government . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, and you know it was an interesting thing 

— who was invited to the housing summit and as well the 

consultations that happened in leading up to that. I don’t know 

if the 10 or 12 consultations are part of this because they said at 

that time it was. It seemed to be expanding, then contracting. 

And of course we had heard at the summit that in fact the 

president of CHC was talking about how the strategy that was 

to be released in June may be delayed into early July because 

. . . And when we questioned the minister about it, she says she 

wants to get it right. 

 

Well we’ve seen that pattern before. We’ve really seen that 

pattern before where we’ve seen . . . Especially I think about the 

Pringle report around the children in care. And we had said two 

years ago, two years ago that I was worried. We were worried 

that it was going to be delayed, that it should be released before, 

before the session not after the session. And surely it was 

released the week before Christmas, a week before Christmas. 

And this is really, really a concern. Really a concern. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have some really grave concerns about this 

amendment. I think it’s a delaying tactic for the government 

because we wanted to see how the government felt, really felt 

about two things, really felt about what was happening with the 

Salvation Army hostel in Saskatoon. Because when I wrote the 

original motion back in December, November or December, the 

issues around the Salvation Army was dealing with 

overcrowding, and they were seeing right away, right away that 

in the winter months they were being filled up to capacity if not 

overfilled. And we saw that right across the continuum. 

 

And of course when we talk to this government here, the whole 

issue around shelters and homelessness and those in the 

near-homelessness that are being doubled up, tripled up in 

housing that’s just not built for that kind of capacity, that’s not 

part of this discussion. That’s not part of this discussion. What’s 

part of our discussion are $300,000 homes with the loans 

guaranteed to developers and this trickle-down or trickle-over 

effect which . . . We don’t have the time for that. We don’t have 

. . . This is an urgent issue. This is urgent. And when you talk to 

the people who are providing shelter to those who are homeless 

across the province, we see the issue is that the summer months 

offer a different challenge, offer a different challenge. Just 

because it’s warm outside doesn’t mean that they all go away. 

No, it’s very much a real thing, very much a real thing. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would urge the government, actually, to 

withdraw this amendment, and let’s just get on with this, and I 

think . . . Because people want to know where this government 

stands. It’s important where this government stands. It’s 

important that we recognize what the issues are, what the issues 

are and that we do something constructive . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask . . . Order. I would 

ask if members have a debate between themselves, that the 

members go sit behind the bar and allow the member from 

Saskatoon Centre to be heard. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And so 

with that, I would urge this House, urge this House to defeat 

this motion and talk about the original issues. I mean this really, 

this amendment really changes the intent of the motion, really it 

changes . . . Because we wanted to talk about rent control and 

get these folks on the record, get these folks on the record. And 

to change the motion in this way is not productive. People have 

been watching this debate for a long, long time, and I think that 

it’s really a shame that this government would put in at the last 

moment a plan about continuing the plan. I find this very 

interesting. As you really have to ask, what is the plan? What is 

the plan here? 

 

You know, we saw the Pringle-Merriman report that came out. 

And that’s an interesting history for the Pringle-Merriman 

report too because here we had a report, a task force just 

appointed the day before their first budget when they realized, 

when they realized they had nothing in the budget around 

housing. And they realized, what are we going to do? What are 

we are really going to do? And so they said, let’s have a task 

force. Let’s have a task force, and it will report after the House 

is concluded in June. Well it did, Mr. Speaker, and many of 

those recommendations are still left, are still left on the floor. 

And we haven’t seen, we haven’t really seen the solution to the 

housing crisis because of that task force. 

 

And I think of one. Actually one innovative idea was the whole 

idea of rent bank and how people, if they were being 

economically evicted, they would have somewhere to go to help 

them stay in their homes, stay in their homes. And I think this is 

an issue that this government doesn’t understand is that we have 

two different world views of what rental units are. Are they a 

home or are they investments? And this government sees that 



7696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

they’re an investment. They’re not homes. So they’re not 

talking about people’s homes. Well we are, Mr. Speaker. We 

are, and that’s why we have to have fair and progressive rent 

regulations that protect people from economic eviction. 

 

And this government just doesn’t get that. Doesn’t get it. 

Doesn’t get it that when seniors have chosen to live in a rental 

accommodation, that actually this is their home. And they think 

they’re going to be there for a long, long while as they enjoy 

their senior years and that they aren’t looking to move. They 

aren’t looking to move. And when the theory comes out, no we 

all want to own a home . . . And many of us do. Many of us do. 

And we think that’s a good goal for many people but not for 

everyone, not for everyone. And especially as we move into a 

society where we see better urban planning and people wanting 

to live downtown where there’s exciting things, this whole issue 

of rent is more and more complex. 

 

So we look around and say, so what are the best practices 

around Canada? What are the best practices around Canada? 

Well we don’t have to look too far. We see BC [British 

Columbia] doing well. We see BC doing very well, having put 

on the Olympics, and they seem to be doing all right. 

 

We look at Manitoba. And in fact it’s very interesting that quite 

often we hear these folks interestingly talk about the Manitoba 

rent controls, and they are the second generation rent controls. 

And in fact this morning we heard quotes about CMHC from 

last year. But we know we have a very thorough report on an 

analysis of the Manitoba circumstance done in January of this 

year, done in January this year: Hugh Grant’s work, An 

Analysis of Manitoba’s Rent Regulation Program and the 

Impact on the Rental Housing Market. 

 

And you know, Hugh Grant was on the radio on CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. It was early April. And 

what he said, I think, was right on the mark. He said, rent 

controls are fair and they work. They’re fair and they work. It’s 

very simple. 

 

Now we heard the Premier say today about the exemptions. 

And I know the minister quite often will try to spin this as well, 

say, well their exemptions aren’t part of the regulations. Well of 

course they are. That’s what makes them work. That’s what 

makes them work — the exemptions. 

 

And so it’s only fair we say, so how can we have a 

made-in-Saskatchewan rent control regime, the next generation 

that reflects the Saskatchewan experience where we can talk 

about the mom-and-pop operations? Because they take a lot of 

pride in their ownership, and they take a lot of pride in building 

their communities. And they see their role of providing rent 

accommodations, providing rent accommodations. 

 

[12:00] 

 

But it’s a real . . . And in fact what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is 

those folks often talk about — and if the minister had been 

listening at the summit, and I know in Yorkton they talked 

about it — is the whole issue around taxes and tax regime and 

capital gains on rental property. And how are we going to deal 

with that? How are we going to deal with that? How are we 

going to deal with the changing face of the landlords in 

Saskatchewan? We know over the last 20 years, 10, 20 years 

the emergence of major landlords such as Boardwalk and 

Mainstreet who’ve come in and said, you know, this place can 

really work. And they’re here, but they own a significant 

amount of the market. And how do we deal with that? 

 

You know the minister yesterday got up and spoke, and I think 

this is interesting because it speaks right to the housing summit. 

But she was talking about, this was something — talk about 

exemptions that she doesn’t talk about — is where you have . . . 

Over the last four years, how much money has been spent on 

the rental supplement? A very good program. We were proud to 

have started that. That was a transitional program to allow 

people to, when they got themselves into a place of high rent, 

that they would have some support. But I don’t think anybody 

saw it growing from 5 million to 31 million without any idea of 

how you’re going to control that kind of spending. How are you 

going to control that kind of spending? 

 

And it’s not because there’s six times more people on it. I think 

there were about 4,000 at the beginning. That would mean there 

would be 24,000 people on it now, and there is not. I think there 

is about 8,000 people on it. I think there is about 4 or 5,000 

families and maybe 4,000 people who are living with 

disabilities who qualify. We’d have to check those numbers but 

I think that . . . but it definitely is not 24,000. 

 

And though when we ask the minister, we say, so, minister, 

who’s getting this $30 million? Well we don’t know. We don’t 

know. We know the tenants are getting it for about five 

minutes, and then they have to give it to the landlord. Well I’d 

be curious to know who’s getting that $30 million. That’s a big 

chunk of money. That’s a big chunk of money that the minister 

has lost sight of. And for that to happen and then to say, next 

year at this rate of growth, who knows where it will be? Who 

knows where it will be? It could be in the 40 millions. Maybe at 

that point we start saying, you know what? We’ve got to start 

building more social housing, more social rental housing. 

 

And in fact we even asked that question: what has been built by 

Sask Housing in the last four years all by themselves? All by 

themselves, not a partnership. We think the partnerships are 

great, but has there been any individual project by Sask 

Housing? Well we find out that no, not really. There’s been an 

addition to a project here in Regina, but really essentially Sask 

Housing is winding down their own work of building Sask 

Housing units. And that’s really, really unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think there is a role for public housing, a 

huge role . . . [inaudible] . . . especially for those who are hard 

to house. And while partners do a fantastic job, fantastic job, 

and they will always be there — the NGOs [non-governmental 

organization] — and we have to honour them and thank them 

for their good work, but we can’t leave it totally to themselves. 

 

And this government has really vacated . . . if we do what this 

amendment says, continue the plan. Well one part of that plan, I 

see, is how this government has moved away from any 

leadership role, any leadership role at all in terms of improving 

accessibility of affordable housing through Saskatchewan. They 

see themselves as more of facilitators of the private market but 

not any kind of responsibility at all in terms of the real 

leadership of housing issues, such a core value, a core 

responsibility of the province. 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7697 

You know, when you talk about . . . When you visit the 

municipalities, they say, yes, we’re happy. We want to make 

sure our communities are strong and vibrant. We absolutely do. 

We absolutely do, but it’s not our responsibility. We’ll be there 

as partners. We’ll be there as partners, but we don’t want to see 

the Government of Saskatchewan downloading by the back 

door, by the back door a system by which the Government of 

Saskatchewan is vacating its responsibility. 

 

That’s really unfortunate because I think Saskatchewan has a 

proud record of doing such a good job of leadership in this area, 

whether it’s leadership in terms of co-op housing, leadership in 

terms of this whole thing around the rental supplements, joining 

that area. But you know, we have to really look at this plan that 

this amendment talks about. We really have to look at this plan, 

you know. 

 

And what the original motion said, and this is what they’re 

taking out because of that amendment: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to recognize 

the urgent nature of the housing and affordability crisis 

across the province as evidenced by the fact that the 

Salvation Army is having to turn people away from the 

emergency shelters in Saskatoon due to overcapacity for 

the first time, and further; 

 

In making this call, the Assembly urges this government to 

do the following: 

To immediately assist emergency shelters to increase 

their capacity to provide desperately needed services 

during cold winter months; and 

To immediately begin the process of developing a 

comprehensive, affordable housing strategy and a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to address the 

underlying causes . . . 

 

So what this government with this amendment really does is 

takes out the word urgent. So they feel it’s not an urgent 

situation. Well I have to debate that. I have to say, I think 

there’s a lot of people — and we have seen it throughout the 

session — many people who have come to this House to call on 

the government. And we just have to think of the renters from 

Portnall street. I think they would call this an urgent situation. 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow today eloquently 

talked about the issues in Moose Jaw. I think you have to 

underline the issue. This is an urgent situation — urgent. Why 

they would want to take out the word urgent and say, it’s 

business as usual in Saskatchewan, I think that’s a shame. 

That’s a real shame. And not really recognizing and just 

ignoring and turning your backs on the emergency shelters who 

are, as I said back in December, experiencing for the first time 

the type of crisis where they’ve never had to turn people away 

and now they are. Now we’ve passed through the winter months 

and we’re into the summer months. Of my understanding, you 

know, things continue on. People still have the same issues, still 

have the same issues. And we have a real, a real dilemma here, 

Mr. Speaker. So this amendment really, really misses the mark. 

 

And then I have to say, I don’t know why they would be so 

against developing a comprehensive, affordable housing 

strategy. I mean the summit . . . If the logic of the minister is the 

summit’s going to inform that, then right on. Let’s all work 

together and get this together and work on it and pass it and be 

done. And that’s very good. So I don’t know why she’s so 

against that. 

 

I mean and then she talks about this plan. Now was that the plan 

that was in the budget, that $1.7 million plan? Or is it the 

five-point plan where they’re guaranteeing loans for developers 

for $300,000 houses? Is that what she’s really talking about? 

And you know, the biggest chunk of that change for the 250 

million, 200 for the loan guarantees and 34 million for repairs 

which should be . . . You know, they’re in their fourth year. 

This should be part of their process. 

 

And I know they like to use the blame thrower and say it’s from 

the past and they’re catching up. Well I’ve got to tell you, we 

understand that in some years they did very little. In fact they 

moved money around in Sask Housing, some $17 million. They 

could have gone for renovations and now all of a sudden it’s 

become an issue this year because the deadline for the budget, 

the federal budget, was March 31st. How can that be? How can 

that be? All of sudden they realized that there’s a deadline and 

about two weeks before, two weeks before, they do this kind of 

thing. 

 

And of course, you know, the other key pieces, and then every 

day, every day, every day I have been standing up here with 

petitions when I’m in the House, talking about a comprehensive 

poverty reduction strategy. And you know, I think this is 

something we really need to do, we really need to tackle. 

 

Now why this government or why this minister would say, let’s 

just cut that; that’s not very important, I think that’s shameful. 

Let’s get behind that and let’s develop a comprehensive poverty 

reduction strategy that includes people who live in poverty, that 

includes people who live in poverty because you know, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the questions we have when we debated this 

issue is the use of stats. And we see the government bringing 

out their stats. I don’t know how many people work on stats in 

the Ministry of Social Services, but they must have quite a few 

because they sure seem to have a lot of stats. They don’t like to 

share them. They don’t like to share them because we know in 

written questions this year, particularly when the minister talks 

about all the new construction over the last four years, and we 

asked about that, we asked about . . . Well we’d be curious to 

know about these new places that you’ve built or you’ve been 

partners for, for $5,000 out of the 200,000. I have to say that’s 

less than the PST [provincial sales tax]. They probably get that 

back in the PST that they collect on the building materials. But 

you know, Mr. Speaker, I just find it really odd that they can 

pump out the stats and then not share any. 

 

But my point, my point here is this amendment takes out the 

whole thing about the poverty reduction strategy. And on top of 

that, people would like to know what’s the true picture. What’s 

the true picture? Why can’t we have an agreed upon set of stats 

that people who are living in poverty, people who are working 

in the CBO [community-based organization] sector and with the 

academic community — because I know the minister likes to 

quote the academic community every once in a while — why 

can’t we have an agreed set of statistics about measuring 

poverty in Saskatchewan? And we say, okay we’ll do that. We 

do that with jobs, job creation. Nobody ever argues about that. 

Nobody ever argues about that. But why do we always get sort 



7698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

of a different variation, a different variation of the stats? 

 

And I have to find the most . . . The most interesting ones that 

the other side will often bring out are around food bank usage. 

A bit of a crisis, I would say, because we see seniors, seniors 

using food banks at an alarming rate, and yet we hear from the 

government actually the use of food banks is going down. But 

we hear from the food bank people that it’s going up. Who can 

be right? The people at the door who are counting people 

coming in? Are we saying they’re wrong? No, the real numbers 

are going up. The real numbers are going up, and the 

government likes to spin it because they use percentages. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am just so disappointed that we would have 

this motion come forward that really doesn’t address the issues, 

this amendment, because it’s just missing the key points around 

the urgency, the urgency of the housing crisis that’s before us, 

particularly when it comes to homelessness and particularly 

when it comes to the issue around rents. And we have some real 

problems here. We have some real problems because it totally, 

totally misses the mark and whitewashes the issue and says, 

let’s have business as usual. And I don’t think that’s on. 

Business as usual. And I don’t think that’s at all, at all a suitable 

solution here. Because business as usual is not on, is not on at 

all. And when we have that kind of an amendment before us, 

we think . . . We don’t think the plan that they announced . . . I 

mean the irony of that plan was, as I was saying of course and 

we all waited quite anxiously for the budget. It came out with a 

$1.7 million announcement for housing, and it didn’t even make 

it into the top priorities when the Leader-Post reported it. 

 

They did their little look-through at the budget and they said, so 

what clearly are the priorities of this government? Well we saw 

the hoteliers with their beer discounts. They got up there. They 

made it 5 million. That was a priority. But the housing was 

down at 1.7. But then lo and behold, the following week, and 

even in their handout, their material, their mailout about the 

Saskatchewan advantage, there was the $1.7 million. But all of 

a sudden the following week, I think it was on the Tuesday, we 

saw this five-point plan that added even more confusion. 

Because you have a budget; the budget’s supposed to be your 

plan. So which is your real plan? The one that happened on the 

Tuesday or the one that happened on the Wednesday? Which 

really was the true plan here? And then I’d have to say the 

minister’s not clear on this. And then we’re waiting for the 

strategy . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, after consultation with the 

Opposition House Leader, in order to conclude proceedings of 

this sitting day, I ask leave of the Assembly to suspend rule 

26(4) and further proceedings of motion no. 2 presently under 

debate, and that the said debate be reinstated to the order paper 

as an adjourned debate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also ask leave to proceed directly to 

personal statements by members so choosing to make 

statements. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to suspend 

rule 26(4) and suspend all, any further debate on the motion 

currently before the Assembly to allow the Assembly to move 

directly back to orders of the day, allowing for members to 

make personal statements. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

PERSONAL STATEMENTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So this is my last 

speech in this very honourable room, and I was thinking about 

this last night a lot, Mr. Speaker, and I thought of how I, in the 

past, had wronged my seatmate, the member from Thunder 

Creek, and I feel bad about it. However I’m not going to 

apologize. 

 

I would like to first of all say what an honour it has been to be 

the MLA from Saskatoon Sutherland and to thank the good 

citizens there for their support. Being an MLA is quite an 

honour, and it has been a very good learning experience. 

Unfortunately the time in my life, my health, and other things, I 

decided not to run again. 

 

But one of the things that I would like to share is how hard 

MLAs work. And we have a member, two members here that 

have been MLAs for 24 years. The Premier mentioned the 

sacrifice that the family gives, and it’s very true, Mr. Speaker. I 

congratulate all MLAs in this Chamber today on their hard 

work. I also recognize the extremely busy schedules that the 

minsters have and how they commit to the good people of this 

province. And I believe that our government and these ministers 

and especially our Premier is doing a fantastic job. 

 

I’d also like to thank my campaign team and the constituency 

executive. When I ran, I had a lot of my family members on my 

campaign team. And my sister was diagnosed with breast 

cancer in week 2 of the election, and the next day . . . We had a 

cry one day, and the next day she was back doing her volunteer 

job. And she’s an admirable woman, and a special thank you to 

her. I wish I was as strong. 

 

I’d like to thank my family, my love, Gary, my children, and 

my mom, Rita, who watches every day. Mom, turn it up. She’s 

deaf. She just cranks the TV. You go into her apartment, it’s 

just like . . . [inaudible] . . . But anyway, one of my first jobs in 

political retirement is to get her fitted for a hearing aid. Anyway 

I love you, Mom. 

 

And so the first day as an MLA, I remember walking into this 

building thinking that it was a dream. It’s such a beautiful 

building and it’s such an honour and the halls have seen so 

much history. Our Chamber, I mean it’s just a fantastic, 

beautiful place. 

 

I also would like to speak to our record as a government. One of 

the things that I am very, very proud of is the social conscience 

and the social issues that our government has addressed and is 

addressing. One particularly comes to mind. It was a constituent 

who has a 32-year-old son with Down’s syndrome, and he lives 

with his parents. He calls it his job in the afternoon, and what he 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7699 

does is he goes across the street and visits the level 4 nursing 

home there, and people just love him. Anyway they care for 

him, and they went to visit one of their children in Australia and 

brought their son with them, the Down’s syndrome son. And 

because he was gone longer than two weeks, he had to reapply 

for social services when he got back. And one of the things that 

the disabled people wanted was to be addressed differently and 

not have the same rules and umbrella that social assistance 

does. We’ve done that, and that was done actually, I think, in 

our first year. And that was so important, and it was important 

to them. 

 

Another issue that I’m very, very proud of is the fact that our 

government was the first to fund testing on the liberation 

treatment. And that would include the diagnostic procedure as 

well as the treatment itself, the liberation treatment. And that is 

going forward, and I think we’ve set the bar in Canada. And I 

think two provinces have followed and more will continue, I’m 

sure. 

 

To make that a little bit more real, a friend has MS [multiple 

sclerosis]. He was a paramedic but couldn’t work any more. 

And he, when the liberation treatment first came out, he went to 

Buffalo and paid to have the diagnostic procedure. They did an 

ultrasound of his veins and arteries, and he was told that he 

doesn’t have the stenosis, the narrowing in the vessels. 

However when he went to Costa Rica, they redid a test and did 

an angiogram, which is injecting dye, and he did have the 

stenosis. And so they followed it up with the liberation 

treatment, and he’s having good results. So you know, we do 

need to look at this and through scientific evidence make it so 

that people with MS can have this procedure. And that was a 

very, very proud moment. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, we’ve kept over 130 promises, 130 

promises. That’s a pretty good record for a government. 

 

I was a little taken aback with the behaviour in the House at 

first, but you get used to it. It doesn’t mean it’s right though. At 

one point I thought, wow, like it’s almost a disturbance, and 

maybe I should arrest someone. But I held my chair. 

 

The media, what also I’ve learned is the media is powerful, 

very, very powerful. You cannot fight a person that has a barrel 

of ink. For the most part, they’re very balanced, and that’s good 

because the media has a power, powerful influence on the 

public. People read their words and believe it as gospel. And so 

the accuracy has to be very, very good. So I thank them for 

doing their best to be non-partisan. 

 

I will talk a little bit about something that was kind of a bee in 

my bonnet, and that’s that in an article I read it said that Dr. 

Meili doesn’t have the stomach for politics. And that offended 

me in the sense that, should we have the stomach for politics? 

Should we have to have the stomach for politics? We’re here to 

serve. And sometimes it’s not nice how we behave, maybe the 

things we say, and I think we really have to work on 

concentrating on the debate. And I feel bad for Dr. Meili, and I 

hope he has a good medical career and continues to do his good 

work. I think rather than having a stomach for politics, it would 

have been better said that it shows man’s hunger for power, you 

know. And so that again is the behaviour and treatment of one 

another. 

Lastly I’d like to talk about my friend Serge, the former 

member from Saskatoon. You know, being a cop, oh, I was 

kind of hedgy. And one day I was in the car with him, and we 

were driving to Saskatoon. And he kept on looking in his 

rear-view mirror. And I said, only two people look in the 

rear-view mirror that much — cops and criminals. And he 

laughed. He laughed. And so having worked in the drug unit 

and, you know, we did a year, sometimes two-year-long 

investigations where we did a lot of surveillance and stuff like 

that. And the bad guys, when they try and shake their 

surveillance, they call it heat checks. So Serge was telling me 

the heat checks he used to do. And so when I go back to 

policing, I’ll be one up on the bad guys. 

 

Serge was a powerful person in my life, and he had a passion 

for justice. He said what was on his mind. And I think we need 

to recognize where he came from. He was in survival mode for 

most of his life. So when he would say things like, oh, I’d like 

to, you know, punch this or whatever, that is normal for the 

kind of people that grow up in survival mode because their first 

instinct is to fight. Their first instinct is anger, and then they 

sort it out from there. And Serge had to learn at a very, very 

early age that you can’t back down. You cannot back down 

when you live that life. There’s no retreat. There’s no second 

chance. You’ve got to stand your ground or you’ll be eaten 

alive. 

 

So I’d just like to say that I miss him and that I knew he had my 

back, and that through him and the member from Yorkton and 

the House of Prayer, I’ve begun a journey in reconnecting with 

Jesus Christ. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I didn’t 

think it would be that hard to give this speech, but I think it 

might be. But, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues know, I 

announced a while back that I would not be seeking re-election 

and therefore not running in the next election, and that’s after 

serving in this great Assembly for 16 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can say, at least for me, that I would have 

never been able to achieve 16 years had it not been for the 

support of my family. So I want to say to my wife, Carol, a very 

special thank you. Thank you for your love, your support, your 

encouragement, and I think mostly for your patience. Because 

when it comes to me, she has demonstrated unlimited amount of 

patience as she’s seen fit to support me for 43 years now. So 

that, Mr. Speaker, just simply goes to show that you can fool 

some of the people all of the time, or at least for a long time. 

 

I want to also thank my family, our daughters, our son-in-law, 

and our granddaughter Emma, who now brings us so much joy 

each and every day. I want to also thank my leader, the member 

from Regina Douglas Park, for the time that we’ve spent 

together, for his advice, his words of wisdom. The member 

from Douglas Park and I have been through a number of 

political battles together. One more would have been nice, but 

it’s just not to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has certainly been a very interesting 20 years. 

Yes, I say 20 years, although I’ve served in this Assembly 16 



7700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

years. It took me 20 years to get those 16. That, Mr. Speaker, is 

because I have been elected to this Assembly twice, re-elected 

to this Assembly twice, and defeated once. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to recommend the re-election; it’s much more fun than the 

defeat. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I realize when I leave here later today, I leave 

here for the last time as an MLA. But I leave here rich — rich 

in the friendships I have been able to develop over the years, 

friendships which I hope will continue on well past this House. 

I hope that my colleagues in this House and I have the 

opportunity to have our paths cross many times into the future. 

And when we do, I hope we not only acknowledge one another, 

I hope we take the time perhaps to have a cup of coffee and 

bring ourselves up to date on what’s new in our lives. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I leave this place later today, I leave here 

with a wealth of memories. Not only memories of individuals, 

but also memories of situations and circumstances. Memories of 

CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] trips where 

you get to spend a lot more time with your colleagues and you 

get to learn them and appreciate them. And I really have been 

very rich that way. There is one particular memory though, Mr. 

Speaker, that is recalled on occasions in our household. It’s a 

memory of an early morning, shared limo ride to a certain 

airport. 

 

To my colleagues who are not running again, I want to wish 

you all the best in your future endeavours. I want to wish you 

good health, and I hope we all get to do the things that we’ve 

always wanted to do. To my colleagues who are running again, 

I want to wish you all good luck in your re-election attempts. 

Mr. Speaker, more luck to the members on this side though, 

than that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to, as inadequate as it is, I want to say 

thank you to my constituents. Thank you for giving me the 

chance to serve in this Assembly. I am both honoured and 

humbled to have had the privilege of their support for these 

many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close with a paraphrase: old politicians 

never die, we just fade away. Thank you and God bless. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 

opportunity to address this Assembly one last time. Firstly, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a number of people I wish to thank. Thank 

you firstly to the people of Cut Knife-Turtleford for affording 

me the opportunity to represent them for the past seven and a 

half years, and to assure them that I will continue to serve them 

for the balance of this term. 

 

To my constituency office staff, thank you. It is through their 

endeavours on behalf of constituents that concerns are 

addressed, contacts made, and in many cases problems solved. 

To the Office of the Speaker, the office of the Clerk, the caucus 

office, and all the support staff in the legislature, thank you. To 

the civil service of our province, thank you for what you do for 

the people of this province. To the Premier, fellow members of 

caucus, and colleagues, I thank you. 

 

This opportunity to serve also provides the opportunity to get to 

meet many, many people within our province, within our 

country, and indeed beyond our boundaries and establish 

friendships that will no doubt extend into the future. And to my 

family, thank you for their support and encouragement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I made the decision to allow my name to 

stand for nomination and subsequently for election in 2003, 

things were very different in this province than they are today. 

In our area we had experienced in 2002 the most severe drought 

that even the old-timers had ever seen. Now excess moisture in 

the province is providing agriculture’s most serious challenges. 

 

Out-migration, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatchewan was 

prominent, as it had been for a number of years. Our children 

were leaving the province to explore opportunities that were 

simply not available here. Now we are experiencing 

in-migration, and the province is able to recruit and retain those 

young people that will be the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our provincial economy was stagnant, and we relied on our 

Confederation partners to subsidize our very existence. Now 

we’re leading our nation in economic growth and have become 

the place to be rather than the place to be from. Mr. Speaker, I 

take no personal credit for these positive changes in our 

province, but I can be assured that these are exciting times for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is said that history repeats itself, even relatively 

recent history. In 2003 in my first opportunity to address this 

Assembly, I said, I am however not a man of many words. The 

constituents of the new riding of Cut Knife-Turtleford, my 

community, and my family know that, and I thank them for 

understanding that. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I say thank you and farewell. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Who would have ever 

thought a quarter century would go by in a mere 25 years? 

 

My first words of course are to my wife, Lorna, who has kept 

me as solid or as on the ground as anyone possibly could. Any 

time I started to get a little bit ahead of myself, Lorna was 

always there to put me back in line. But the love of my life, 

Lorna; my family; my extended family, just the support that 

they give —I know all members in the Chamber know that from 

their respective families, but none would know it more than I 

do. 

 

My next words are of gratitude and thanks to my constituency, 

my NDP executive, my constituents in what was Regina North 

in 1986, Regina Albert North shortly thereafter, Regina 

Coronation Park, not because I moved or the constituents 

moved, just redistribution and mostly change of name of the 

constituency. The heart of the constituency has always been 

Argyle Park, Coronation Park. And I have enjoyed support of 

constituents far and beyond anything that I feel I’ve ever earned 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7701 

or deserved. And I want to express, in this most public way that 

I can, my deepest gratitude to my constituents. They are truly 

wonderful, amazing people, and I know that they will continue 

to thrive well into the future. 

 

I want to express gratitude to my colleagues, particularly on this 

side, but on the other side of the legislature floor as well. 

Throughout my soon to be 25-year career, there’s been many 

highs and a few lows — probably about as many lows as there 

are highs when you think about it, but I choose to remember the 

highlights, the good points, the things that we’ve been able to 

accomplish together. Politics is, as Roy Romanow was fond of 

saying, it’s about people doing together what they cannot do 

alone. So collectively we are truly greater than the sum of the 

parts. 

 

Throughout my career, Mr. Speaker, I have watched with 

sometimes interest, sometimes with a bit of concern, but 

watched myself grow in the job. I’ve watched myself grow. In 

fact I’m about 40 pounds heavier now than I was when I first 

came in here. The other thing that I know has happened, some 

constituents think . . . And we all have these, constituents who 

think we don’t listen. But I found out about three years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, that it’s official for me, and I now wear a hearing aid. 

So it might be a little bit late for me to have the hearing aid but 

I can now hear, and I’ve tried to listen to my constituents 

throughout the piece. 

 

Just two quick things. I’m not going to be parting with any 

particular advice. I do feel like I have to say, if I have any 

apologies, it’s to the constituents that I’ve tried to advocate on 

their behalf and not been able to, not just while the current 

government’s in office, while we were in office as well. I say 

this in truly in a non-partisan sense. Sometimes the train goes 

off of the track and you just can’t get the people that should 

know how to put that train back on the track, and I do have a 

few of those regrets although many more happier memories of 

people that we’ve been able to help over the years. 

 

In closing I want to say I am amongst the very luckiest of 

people on the face of this earth. I’ve had the opportunity to 

serve in this great legislature for 25 years. I’ve had the 

opportunity to meet some incredibly interesting people on both 

sides of the legislature and well beyond, Mr. Speaker. It really 

is lucky, but what I am the most lucky about is that when I 

leave here I’m going to my wife, my family, a family that not 

only can be loved but can love me as well. And I’m leaving 

here with the happiest of memories and best of wishes to 

literally everyone in this Chamber. Thank you. It has been fun. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish that after 16 years in this Assembly, I would have the 

necessary wisdom to definitively come out with the wisdom to 

impart to everyone how we could perfect this parliamentary 

system. Unfortunately, I do not. It’s been an incredible good 

fortune for me to serve in a wide number of roles in opposition, 

in government, and it’s given me a whole new appreciation for 

this process and the men and women who give themselves to 

the service of this province. 

 

I therefore wish to express my gratitude to a good number of 

people without whose support I wouldn’t have been able to 

serve. First of all I’d like to thank my wife, Carole, and the 

family. During the 16 years that I’ve been elected and the 20 

years in provincial politics, Carole has been steadfastly at my 

side. She has supported, advised, encouraged, often disagreed 

with, but always loved me. During this time our three daughters 

have married three wonderful men, had eight grandchildren and 

have likewise supported me, and I thank them all. They’ve also 

held me to account when I was indiscreet enough to, in a 

comment, say a reference to my current wife. Pattie met me at 

the door when I got home that Friday and said, “Dad, do you 

know what you’ve done?” And of course I didn’t, men being 

the sensitive people that we are. But she cleared it up for me 

and by Monday I was on the floor again, apologizing. 

 

It’s really great to have Grant Draude here today because he can 

witness what I think is kind of unique, to have two grandparents 

on the floor of the Assembly at the same time. And soon I’ll be 

sitting up in the stands, as Dan calls them, with you guys. 

 

Next I would like to thank the constituency, constituents of 

firstly Melfort-Tisdale and then of the Melfort constituency for 

allowing me to serve them these many years. I have met many, 

helped some, but have been proud of them all. 

 

The assistants in the constituency office, Laurie Hookway, 

Peggy Gordon, Faith Orr, Tammy Thompson, and Fred 

Fedosoff have provided great service to the constituents over 

those 16 years. 

 

I’d also like to thank all of the employees of the legislature. 

Over the years, they’ve been tremendously supportive of 

everything we do as politicians. And I’ve come to realize 

they’re the frame on which the true values of the political 

process are made real. 

 

I would also be remiss if I didn’t thank all the wonderful people 

at the Ministry of Finance under the leadership of then deputy 

minister, Doug Matthies. These extremely professional men and 

women were there with their advice, direction, and support. 

And I’ve enjoyed working for them, even when potash prices 

weren’t so good. 

 

Thank you as well to the staff of my minister’s office: chief of 

staff, Dick Carter; administrative assistant, Kim Jalbert; and 

ministerial assistants Krista Baker and Fred Fedosoff. 

 

The Premier and my colleagues have been incredibly 

supportive. In the opposition, in the Executive Council, and in 

backbench, they have understood and supported me. It has 

always been with a sense of pride that I recall the many 

successes, rewards, and challenges that we faced together. 

Beginning with a small group of eight, we have persevered and 

become the Government of Saskatchewan. That has been, in 

large part, due to the leadership of the Premier, the member 

from Swift Current. And I thank him for that leadership, but 

most importantly his friendship. 

 

Over the years we’ve had members leave: some permanently; 

some returned. Always they have brought their passion, beliefs, 

and principles to this Assembly. And I truly believe that I’ve 

been able to work with the finest men and women of this 

province. And I thank all of you for the privilege. And I will 



7702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

miss you. 

 

I will also miss the stories that we’ve had, the opportunities to 

think about gardening in retirement, rakes and hoes and those 

sorts of things. And I think it’s at this time that usually people 

invite their colleagues to come and visit them after this 

particular time, knowing that they rarely do and counting on 

that, I suspect. I extend that invitation to all of you in the 

knowledge that if you don’t come to see us, we’ll come to see 

you. Thank you. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

think I should announce to the whole Assembly that I’ve been 

in this building for 25 years, and I was very proud of myself for 

the past 25 years that I have never publicly or privately shed a 

tear. And I just embarrassed myself when I was talking to the 

press by wailing away. So I want you to know that I’m Irish and 

if I get a bit too sentimental and I start to cry, the member from 

Lakeview has permission to get out the big hook, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today’s an interesting day. I drove up to the 

legislature this morning, realizing that it will soon be 25 years 

this fall since I first entered this building. I was a newly minted 

member of the legislature representing the people of Saskatoon 

Nutana, and I must confess that the only time I’d ever been to 

this building was in 1979 when SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees’ Union] was on strike and 

I was there with my little “Government give us a fair deal” 

picket sign. 

 

I know that some of you will find it hard to believe, but I will 

never forget, in 1986, coming up those steps for the first time. 

And I note that there are some members of the legislature that 

were barely out of Pampers in 1986. I recall thinking the people 

of Saskatchewan have elected us and, regardless of which side 

of the House we sit on, each of our votes are equal. Well I 

learned, when we became government and in cabinet, that some 

people’s votes are a little heavier than others, Mr. Premier, and 

other premiers. 

 

I’ve had this thought after each election, that we’re all equal. 

And I’ve also had this thought: can you imagine 56 of us 

represent over 1 million people? And that’s quite an honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in six general elections, the people of Saskatoon 

Nutana have sent me here to this amazing building, this 

institution with all of its history and tradition, to represent them, 

and for this honour — you might have to get out the hook, John 

— I owe the people in Saskatoon Nutana a tremendous debt of 

gratitude and thanks. 

 

I want to thank the people in Nutana for allowing me to be their 

representative for close to 25 years. I have to thank them for 

sticking with me through thick and thin. Thank you for 

supporting me even when you knew that I knew that I was 

wrong. Thank you for phoning me up and giving me a piece of 

your mind. And I have to tell the public, I’ve never hung up on 

anybody. And the people in Saskatoon Nutana did this often 

and I also want to thank the people of Saskatoon Nutana for 

coming by and saying thank you. And, Mr. Speaker, I just have 

to say this: that I have been absolutely shocked at the number of 

people who’ve dropped into my office to say thank you, sent 

notes, sent letters, sent flowers, sent chocolates, saying thank 

you for representing them. 

 

I believe that the people in Saskatoon Nutana actually made me 

become a better member of the legislature. So, Mr. Speaker, 

being an MLA, in my view, is the best job a person could ever 

have and I have . . . This has been a difficult decision because 

I’ve absolutely loved being a member of the legislature or I 

wouldn’t have stayed here to . . . well too long, as long as I 

have. 

 

I just want to say this. As a child growing up, I lived in the 

Biggar constituency, which is now represented by . . . I won’t 

say his name, but I will; I’ll just say it — Randy Weekes. And 

you know, Biggar constituency was represented by former 

Premier Woodrow Lloyd, and Woodrow Lloyd was the longest 

serving minister of Education. He was the minister for 16 years. 

I think I have the distinction of being the second longest serving 

minister of Education at five. 

 

Well Woodrow Lloyd was my mom’s high school principal. 

And my mother’s family moved here from Prince Edward 

Island and they were Liberals. If you were Irish Catholic, you 

were Liberal. And as a result of the kindness of Woodrow 

Lloyd to my mother who had to leave the farm to go into Biggar 

to board, she and her sister, my grandparents, the Aylwards 

became strong CCFers [Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation]. And Woodrow Lloyd was one of my dad’s friends, 

and my mother campaigned, as her family did, in 1944 for 

Woodrow Lloyd. So as a young person, I got to see what a truly 

good member of the legislature was like and what service to the 

public was all about. 

 

I come from a family where public service is an important 

value. Public service means service for the overall public good, 

and public service is about the betterment of our community, 

our province, and our country. Public service is an essential part 

of the care we’re obliged to take to ensure we continue to have 

good governance and good democratic government. For the 

values of hard work, community activism, and public service I 

owe a huge debt of gratitude to my parents, Roy and Betty 

Atkinson. 

 

So I came to public life 25 years ago because I wanted to make 

a difference. I wanted life to be better, not just for some of us 

but all of us. And upon reflection I’ve been struck by a myriad 

of remembrances and thoughts. Twenty-five years ago I was a 

young woman in my early 30s working as a teacher with young 

people who had significant behaviour problems, which 

sometimes I’ve been accused of that myself, Mr. Speaker. But 

they had significant behaviour problems and they were 

experiencing lots of difficulties because of their backgrounds. I 

wanted an education system that met their needs so that they 

could stay in school because I know that a high school 

education . . . And if you can go on to post-secondary 

education, you can stop the cycle of any kind of dependence. 

 

Well I can report to the public that a lot has changed in those 25 

years. There are many alternatives to young people trying to get 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7703 

a high school education. And guess what? We now have child 

day care in our schools. 

 

Twenty-five years ago few women had been elected to this 

Assembly, but the people in our constituency took a chance and 

they elected me in 1986, 1991, ’95, 1999, 2003, and 2007. I 

remember the campaigns where people would say, well you’re 

too young to be a member of the legislature. Or you’re a 

woman, aren’t you supposed to be home, and all that sort of 

thing. Anyway I also remember their kindnesses of home 

preserves. I’d come in off the campaign trail and I’d be loaded 

down with jam and baking and books and lots of, you go girl, 

you go. And I’ve received that over the years. 

 

I’ve also had some important privileges. I’ve been privileged to 

serve with Premier Allan Blakeney who was the Leader of the 

Opposition in 1986. He took a group of us — and I’ve been 

trying to remember who we were, but I can remember being 

there — and he took us into his office, the Leader of the 

Opposition’s office, and he told us that we needed to understand 

annual reports, public accounts, and budgets. And he taught us 

an important lesson, and it’s a particularly important lesson if 

you’re a social democrat, that you can’t be in charge of your 

own destiny if you are beholden to the bankers and the bond 

dealers and the moneylenders. And you should rarely spend 

more money on the day-to-day operations of a government than 

you’re taking in in revenues. That can hobble a government, 

and we certainly learned that during the Romanow years during 

the 1990s. 

 

Now I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I never intended to come to 

government in 1991 and start cutting everything in order to get 

our debt and deficit under control. I do remember this, that 

interest on the public debt was the third highest expenditure of 

government, and there were lots of things that needed to be cut 

and there were lots of things that went undone as we tried to get 

our finances under control. 

 

During the Calvert era, things got a bit better. We continued to 

see our overall provincial debt reduced, which included GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] and Crown debt. We began to see the 

province turning things around. And after the 2003 election — 

which I think most of us were surprised to win, but we did, even 

though it was close — we began to put a number of policies and 

programs in place to ensure that young people who wanted to 

stay here could. 

 

And in 2006 we began to see our population increase. And I 

have to say that there have been many times some people in 

traffic jams in Saskatoon and Regina have commented to me, 

why did you put those signs up in Calgary and Edmonton? You 

know, those signs on the freeway, “If you were in Saskatoon, 

you could be home by now.” Or in the morning we said, “If you 

were in Regina, you could still be eating breakfast.” Anyway 

we started to see lots of people come back, and I believe that the 

Calvert policies have led to the growth that we’ve witnessed in 

the last five years. 

 

I’ve had a front seat to politics for 25 years, and I’ve witnessed 

— I’ll use this one first — the lows and the highs of public 

policy debate, on many occasions great progress, and for this I 

will always be grateful. 

 

Before I sit down there’s just a few people I think I should 

thank. Again I thank the people of Saskatoon Nutana for giving 

me this great honour. I thank the people of Saskatoon Nutana 

NDP executive who I believe are the best political organization 

in the province, bar none. Thank you for working so hard to 

elect me over and over and over again because the one thing I 

know is that you can never be elected on your own. Thank you 

for all the fundraisers, membership drives, campaigns, 

donations, pancake breakfasts, taco events, and so on and so 

forth. Some of the people in Saskatoon Nutana have been there 

since the beginning, and I thank them. 

 

Third, I want to thank my friends. I’ve had a group of high 

school friends, we’ve known each other since we were 13. And 

tomorrow night they’re coming from across the country to the 

celebration of my life as a member of the legislature. I can 

report that my high school friends are not NDP. Some of them 

live in Alberta, and they might have worked on Prime Minister 

Harper’s campaign, I don’t know. Some of them are elsewhere, 

but they have not generally been NDP — maybe one. But it’s 

not something we particularly talk about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my high school friends . . . And we like to golf, 

and I don’t really publicly acknowledge that. But we have a 

little trip once in a while up to Waskesiu, which we did in 1999 

after the nurse’s strike. And the press was busy trying to find 

me. They didn’t know where I was. The Premier didn’t know 

where I was. And my friends were busy trying to hide me. So I 

thank them. They’ve been with me through thick and thin. They 

have been with me during some of my worst moments, and I 

thank them. 

 

The other persons I want to thank are the people who have been 

my constituency assistants. I’ve had four constituency assistants 

in 25 years. And Judy Gossen has worked with me for close to 

15 years. And Mark Stobbe, who is the executive director of the 

Craft Council in Saskatoon, he also started out with me in 1986. 

And then there is another young man by the name of Darcy 

Marriott, the jack of all trades, who’s been with me, helping for 

over 17 years. Constituency assistants, I must tell you, get to 

see you unfortunately at your best . . . or no, fortunately at your 

best and unfortunately at your worst. And Judy got to see lots of 

people picket my office, and she was very good. She always 

invited them in to use the washroom or have coffee. I want to 

thank the constituency assistants that have worked on my behalf 

for being there and supporting the people in Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my next-door neighbours, 

Frank and Thelma Cvek. I’ve lived beside them for I think 34 

years. They’ve looked after my sidewalks and my yard for all of 

this time. And they’ve looked after me as a person, fed my cats. 

And I want to thank them because without them being next door 

to me, I think my yard would’ve been an embarrassment and 

my sidewalks wouldn’t have been, some neighbours called it 

NDP clean. 

 

[13:00] 

 

Finally I want to thank my dad and my brothers and sisters, my 

niece and nephew. Thank you for putting up with me and 

forgiving me when I didn’t have time to bake something for a 

family gathering, a dessert or a salad. I have lots of making up 

to do, and I plan on making up. 



7704 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

I also want to thank all of the public servants that I’ve had an 

opportunity to work with, both in government and in 

opposition. Sometimes we think it’s not easy being a politician, 

but I think often it’s not easy being a public servant trying to 

address all of the issues that politicians want addressed. And for 

the public servants that I’ve worked with and people at CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] that I’ve 

worked with over the years, I want to say thank you, thank you, 

thank you. You have taught me a lot. 

 

And finally I want to thank the press and journalists that I’ve 

met over these many years. Thank you for documenting my 

journey and covering my every word, even when I didn’t want 

you to. I think generally speaking you’ve treated me well and 

for this I’m grateful. Journalism is an important part of 

democracy, and we should be thankful that we have a free 

press, free to report on what they wish to on us. We have a free 

press in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally I want to thank colleagues that have worked in caucus 

office, ministerial offices. I want to thank them for all of their 

work that they’ve done on behalf of the New Democratic Party 

government and caucus. 

 

And finally I want to thank my colleagues. Now some people 

have suggested I’m a bit feisty, and I am. Some people have 

suggested I’m a bit emotional, and I am. Some people have 

suggested that I could hone in on something and drive them 

crazy. I know I’ve driven my leaders crazy and my colleagues 

crazy, but I think it’s fair to say that regardless of which side of 

the House you sit on, there’s very few of us that know what it’s 

like to have this life. 

 

And very few of us know what it’s like to be in this kind of 

workplace, I guess. And you’re away so much and sometimes 

you don’t see your parents or you don’t see your husband or 

you don’t see your wife, maybe you don’t see your kids as often 

as you should, and I’m not sure anyone really understands that 

except us. 

 

I think we’ve been through a lot together, good and bad. But I 

think regardless of which side of the House we are on, I’ve 

always appreciated my colleagues, even when I disagreed with 

them. And I have disagreed with colleagues on this side of the 

House and that side of the House, that side of the House and 

this side of the House. But nevertheless I tried to disagree 

respectfully. 

 

So I’m just going to say this final little point. On this fine spring 

day, as we watch the greening of our beautiful province, I’m 

going to bid adieu to this House and to you, my colleagues. I 

hope for new green shoots to spring forth in my life, in this 

Chamber, and in Saskatoon Nutana, though certainly in a 

similar shade of green decorated profusely with delicate orange 

blossoms. That is how we like the landscape decorated in my 

home constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. I want to assure my 

colleagues across the aisle, in Saskatoon Nutana, we’ll continue 

to plant a garden that will burst forth with orange blooms early 

next fall. 

 

I’ve loved and enjoyed this honourable calling. The privilege of 

representing and serving my constituents and all of the people 

of Saskatchewan has been profoundly rewarding and fulfilling. 

I’ve been all atwitter, debating and sparring with colleagues on 

both sides of the aisle, and I’ve formed deep friendships that 

will continue to enrich my life. So until we meet again, thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to request leave of 

the Assembly for just the displaying of a token of a gift for the 

members who have just spoken in the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We were debating whether or not I could 

ask for leave to use a prop, but we decided apparently that was 

not acceptable, and so we make this leave request instead. If I 

may say, Mr. Speaker, just before I quickly present this or 

display it so that it can be properly presented and hopefully 

signed by all members, I would like just to say very briefly on 

behalf of the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, the deputy 

Whip on the government side who was unable to be here, who 

will also not be returning, we know he will miss this place. He 

has certainly told me that, and his colleagues, and we will miss 

him. We will miss his voice in agriculture. We were elected 

together in 1999 and most importantly we’ll miss his friendship. 

And we thank him on this official occasion for his service to the 

province and to his constituents in what is now 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Reg Downs in my office picked up a picture. I 

think it was on the CBC website, had a series of pictures of the 

flood and our very, very wet spring. And he found one in 

particular and he thought it might be a nice token or a gift for 

members who have just made their last speech in the Assembly. 

It’s pretty unique, Mr. Speaker. We know there are a lot of 

pictures of the Legislative Assembly Building, and there should 

be. It is beautiful, as has been eloquently noted by members 

who have spoken. But there aren’t a lot that have this much 

water in them right up to the, almost to the walls of the building 

itself early on in the melt with almost a perfect reflection of the 

Legislative Building in that melted pool. And if there’s any 

picture perhaps that the members who have just spoken so very 

well, who have served this province so very well, if there’s any 

picture of the legislature that will remind them specifically of 

this spring and the decision they made here well in advance of 

this and that they spoke to earlier on, it would be this picture. 

 

And so we have enough of them and maybe during the 

traditional handshakes after the Assembly is adjourned, we can 

have them on the table with some, I think we’ve got some 

Sharpies in the back and we’ll get them onto the table, and I’m 

sure members maybe will want to sign them for each other. 

 

And just on behalf of the government, we just want to thank all 

of those who have served so very well, and for some, for such a 

very, very long time, and who have distinguished themselves 

with that service to the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 19, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7705 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few 

comments that I’ll make as I ask for leave to adjourn this 

Assembly. I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker. This day 

marks the end of the fourth legislative session of the 

Saskatchewan Party government. I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank both you and the Clerks at the Table for 

your wisdom and professionalism while guiding members 

through the procedures of the Legislative Assembly. And I 

would also like to take this opportunity to thank your office 

staffs for their support over the last four years. I know we have 

challenged them and yourselves at times with instant rulings 

and instant paper to come forward in this House as we ask for 

leave for various and sundry Bills and regulations and 

legislation. 

 

I’d also like to extend my thanks to all of my colleagues, the 

elected members, and especially those who are retiring and are 

spending their last day as elected members in this Assembly. I’d 

also like to thank the Chairs and Vice-Chairs of the various 

committees. Over the four years, we have asked you to do a lot 

of work, and you have done that, and we would like to thank 

you. 

 

I would like to also offer thanks to the staff of the respective 

caucus offices, the staff of Executive Council, and the staff of 

ministers’ offices. And I think there’s an office that we often 

forget to say thank you to, and that’s to the people in our 

constituency offices that are there to support us and deal with 

the constituents when we’re not available to be there. 

 

In addition I would like to commend those that help contribute 

to the daily operation of the Legislative Assembly, such as 

library services, broadcast services, Journals, and Hansard, and 

especially Journals and Hansard. They are little seen. There are 

two members in the House during sessions, one in committee. 

They are never heard. We never hear a word from them, but 

they are very well read, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to thank the 

Sergeant-at-Arms and the commissionaires for the duties they 

perform in the House and the building, the building staff, the 

cafeteria staff, the Pages, the interns, and the tour guides, Mr. 

Speaker. You truly help to make our jobs as legislators that 

much easier with your hard work, positive attitudes, and 

friendliness. 

 

I would also like to offer my sincere thanks to the media for 

keeping the public up to date on what’s happening in the 

legislature and the work that actually happens here. 

 

Last but of course not least, I would like to thank our families 

for the continued support they provide to us. It’s truly by their 

sacrifices that we are able to do this work on behalf of the 

people of this great province. It is our spouses, children, and in 

some cases, as we saw earlier today, our grandchildren of our 

members that have to endure the extended absences that often 

occur. And for that I offer my sincere gratitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to wish everyone a safe and 

happy summer as we continue with our duties outside the 

Assembly. And drive safely. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set 

by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government and 

that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 

notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Government House Leader. Will the 

Assembly take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to 

also thank the many, many people who make this Chamber the 

great place it is, where we get to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan on behalf of all of them. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

opportunity that very few people ever get. And it is a challenge 

but it is also a great, great opportunity to feel and represent the 

people of the province and bring forward the things that are 

most important to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we had six wonderful speeches from people 

who have given a good part of their life to serving others. I’d 

just like to say on behalf of all of us and the people of 

Saskatchewan, it is appreciated. We may have our 

disagreements. We may have at times our issues which we are 

polarized on and we can’t agree but, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

the people of the province appreciate the work that’s done. We 

have the province we have and the great country we have 

because we have the democratic process we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to each of those that are leaving, you’ve made a 

contribution to make this province a better place for all of our 

families, and for that you earn everyone’s gratitude. Mr. 

Speaker, to yourself and the staff in your office and the many 

staff in this building who make every day an opportunity to 

make every day a pleasure to work in this building, I think that 

they all deserve a thank you, from the people who clean our 

offices, to the people who provide the food services in the 

cafeteria, staff in the Library, Hansard, Sergeant-at-Arms. I 

could go through the whole list as my colleague opposite did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take all the members’ time this 

afternoon. Many of them have a distance to travel. So I want to 

finish by saying a thank you to each and every member’s 

families who make the sacrifice of allowing their loved one to 

be a part of this great Chamber, this great Assembly. It is 

through their sacrifice that the good work that gets done here is 

able to be accomplished. So on behalf of all of us, I’d like to 

wish everybody a wonderful recess and hope that I see . . . Well 

I hope we’re back in the fall, Mr. Speaker. We could maybe 

trade sides and a few members. 

 

But to each and every one, too many people fail to recognize 

the enormous task that people undertake when they enter public 

life. And I just want to say thank you. And for those who may 



7706 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 2011 

not come back next fall, we don’t know, you won’t be forgotten 

either. Thank you very much. 

 

[13:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Firstly before I place the question, I’d just 

like to make a few comments. And I’m going to begin by 

saying as the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, an honour 

that the members have bestowed upon me, I would like to 

extend to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, the member 

from Regina Northeast, the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, 

the member from Regina Coronation Park, the member from 

Melfort, and the member from Saskatoon Nutana, our thanks, 

appreciation for your devotion, dedication, and commitment to 

your constituents and the people of Saskatchewan as you’ve 

served in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

As a Speaker and having been, I’ve had the privilege of serving 

this Assembly, it’s been an honour to serve with men and 

women on both sides of the Assembly. I think we need to come 

to the recognition that while we may have our differences, each 

and every one of us — one of you, pardon me — represents a 

viewpoint, and we need to respect that. And I want to say 

personally, thank you for the way you have represented your 

constituents. 

 

I would also like to extend my thanks and appreciation to the 

House leaders, the Whips, and the caucus Chairs and the 

members for your co-operation as we have managed to move 

through another session of the Legislative Assembly, the 

twenty-sixth, this twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly. And as 

Speaker, to my staff of Irene, Kathy, and Anna, and especially 

to Anna at this time. In a few short weeks, she’s going to be 

leaving the office, unfortunately, to plan for her marriage and 

moving to a new community. She’s been a real asset to my 

office, and I say thank you. 

 

I say thank you as well to the Clerks for their assistance, and to 

the legislative staff. And I will not go through all the staff, but I 

want to acknowledge the presence of a few members, not 

particularly staff, but especially our Pages: our Pages, Laura, 

Alana, Sydney, Kayla, Quinn, and Tristan. Thank you so much 

for serving us in this session, the fourth session of the 

twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly. Maybe members we could 

give them, show them our appreciation. 

 

And so members, thank you so much. And at this time I place 

the question presented by the member from Cannington. By 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 

day today, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set 

by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the government; and 

that Mr. Speaker shall give each member seven clear days 

notice, if possible, of such date and time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has now 

moved this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:19.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7677, 7679 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7677, 7878 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7677 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7677 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7678 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7678 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7679 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7679 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7679 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7679 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7679 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7679 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7680 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7680 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7681 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7681 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7681 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7681 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7682 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7682 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7683 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7683 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7683 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Contract Negotiation with Teachers 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7683 

 Fundraiser for Tsunami Victims 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 

 Rent Control 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 

 Riding to Break the Cycle 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7684 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7685 

 Laughing Gas 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7685 

 Circus 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7685 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Negotiations with Teachers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7685 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7686 

 Potash Royalties 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7686 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7686 

 Rent Control and Affordable Housing 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7687 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7687 

 Provision of Health Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7688 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7688 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7689 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7689 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on Bill Nos. 907 and 625 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7690 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Housing 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7691 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7693 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7694 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7698 

PERSONAL STATEMENTS 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7698 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7699 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7700 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7700 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7701 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7702 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7704 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7705 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7705 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7706 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


