




















































Hansard: December 15, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 8A THURSDAY, DECEMBER 15, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 235 

 December 15, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to all members of the legislature a group 

of students in the east gallery. These are 15 grade 12 students 

from Sheldon-Williams Collegiate in Regina Lakeview 

accompanied by their teacher, Lindsay Vindevoghel. And this is 

part of their education about what happens in their legislature. 

And I know that they’re very interested to see the end of the 

session and the kinds of things that happen at the end of a 

session, but also to understand how our democracy works. So I 

ask all members to welcome them here to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

group of students in the west gallery, a grade 7-8 group from 

W.F. Ready Elementary School on Arens Road in the heart of 

Regina Dewdney. Their teachers today helping them out are 

Gisele Carlson and Michelle Wallace. 

 

I couldn’t help but notice in the front row there is a student with 

a no. 60 Roughrider jersey. Now I shouldn’t assume that it is a 

Makowsky jersey. It could be a Cherkas or a Clark jersey, but 

that’s . . . Oh okay, if it’s not, someone of that age that’s not my 

kid, that’s certainly a great thing to see. So I look forward to 

meeting them later on after question period. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to join with the member opposite and 

welcome the crew from W.F. Ready and two incredibly fine 

educators, Ms. Gisele Carlson and Ms. Michelle Wallace. 

 

Also of course they teach with my wife over at W.F. Ready as 

well, so there’s some familiar faces there with those students 

there who maybe . . . By a show of hands, how many of you 

have had Ms. Wotherspoon as a teacher there? If you can let 

Ms. Wotherspoon know that we have an event tonight that I 

should pick her up for it about 6 o’clock. Sometimes Ms. 

Wotherspoon gets a little bit grouchy if I forget to tell her about 

the events that we’re going to. So maybe give her that reminder 

and enjoy your day here today and have a wonderful day. All 

the best. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly, an individual seated in the Speaker’s Gallery. 

I’m speaking of Peter Gilmer. Peter Gilmer is a constituent in 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre and does a tremendous amount of 

work with the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry, an outreach of the 

United Church of Saskatchewan. 

 

Peter has worked literally decades now on behalf of the poor 

and the disadvantaged in our Saskatchewan society and in 

pointing that better way forward for those individuals and 

helping us all to think about these things as we set about these 

deliberations in this Chamber. So I’d ask all members to join 

me in welcoming Peter Gilmer to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Best Wishes for the Holidays 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, these days it’s easy to get caught 

up in the hustle and bustle of Christmas. For some I know the 

holidays are a very busy and stressful time, but I hope everyone 

can take some time to enjoy the true meaning of this holiday 

season and the values that Saskatchewan people are known for 

— giving, caring, and sharing. 

 

Saskatchewan has a proud and diverse heritage where we all 

celebrate in our own individual way. My family and I will be 

celebrating Christmas in the same way our parents and 

grandparents did in our Norwegian tradition. I know many 

others will also be embracing their heritage at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know there are a number of new Canadians 

who have made Saskatchewan their home, adding to our 

multicultural tapestry. These cultures enhance the holiday 

season as we join in or share stories of their unique 

celebrations. 

 

As we reflect on our past year, let us give thanks for all that we 

have, but let us also remember those who are having a difficult 

time this year. There are families and individuals who have not 

yet shared in the good fortune Saskatchewan is experiencing. 

Others are grieving of the loss of loved ones or facing 

challenges at work or at home. To those we must offer comfort 

and hope for better times in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my family and the New Democratic 

Party caucus, I’d wish you and everyone in Saskatchewan all 

the best over the holiday season and into the new year. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Information 

Technology Office. 

 

Lloydminster Seniors’ Winter Gala 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to rise today and make the Assembly aware of a 

recent event in my constituency, the first annual Seniors’ 

Winter Gala. This gala was the brainchild of Colleen Groenen, 

the recreation director of Points West Living in Lloydminster. 

 

This event brought together various youth organizations and 10 

seniors’ care facilities. An apt theme for this event was “The 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

Wind Beneath My Wings” in appreciation for what our seniors 

have built and inspired us to do. Colleen believes in the 

philosophy of keeping our seniors involved in their community, 

especially with our youth. 

 

It was my honour to emcee this event along with co-host 

Norbert Cook. Norbert is a retired farmer and rancher, a 

community builder, and now resident at Points West Living. 

 

Many volunteers and sponsors made this inaugural event a 

success. Rick Lucas, an exceptional teacher from Holy Rosary 

School, coordinated his students to cook a five-course banquet. 

The Lloydminster Comprehensive High School provided 

students to work, and Lisa’s Cosmo Club did the nails of 

residents beforehand. The serving was done by a very courteous 

group of Girl Guides and Boy Scouts, and the evening’s 

entertainment was all local musicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very positive event for our community, 

and I look forward to attending next year’s event as well. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Jimmy’s Law  

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to talk about a serious incident that has drawn attention to 

a situation we hope to work with the government on. 

 

This past June, Jimmy Ray Wiebe was working alone overnight 

at a Yorkton gas station when he was shot and killed during a 

robbery. Jimmy’s friends and family along with worker 

advocates have proposed the idea of Jimmy’s law, which would 

protect late night gas and retail employees who work alone by 

ensuring these workers either work in pairs or are protected 

behind a barrier. A petition calling for these changes has 

garnered over 5,700 names. 

 

It is in that spirit that later today it’s my intention to table The 

Jimmy’s Law Act which proposes to amend The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act to institute these protections for overnight 

workers. The proposed legislation is based on existing rules in 

British Columbia. We want to ensure that people who are doing 

late night jobs in this province have as much protection as 

possible. 

 

I’ve spoken about this issue informally with the Minister for 

Labour Relations and Workplace Safety and look forward to 

continuing these productive discussions. In the past, the 

government has worked with us to pass legislation originally 

proposed by the NDP [New Democratic Party], including those 

concerning service animals, the respectful language Act, 

compensation for firefighter injuries, and highway workers. 

 

We believe that this is another important piece of legislation, 

and I look forward to working with the government to reach a 

similar conclusion with Jimmy’s law. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

Blaine Lake Community Cash Lotto 

 

Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take time today to recognize the Blaine Lake Senior 

Citizens Association. This fall, the Blaine Lake seniors along 

with many others from the area worked together to organize a 

very successful second annual Blaine Lake seniors’ community 

cash lotto. Some notable names of involvement are Anne Sitter, 

Annette Pollard, Pam Lavoie, and Karen Fiala. 

 

Tickets were sold throughout the region by volunteers as well 

as having radio exposure the final week. The prizes were drawn 

on October 17th and totalled $125,000, including 10 draws of 

$500, 10 draws of $1,000, one draw of $10,000, as well as the 

grand prize draw of $100,000. This lotto has been a tremendous 

success, selling out all 2,500 tickets last year and coming very 

close again this year, missing another sellout by only 108 

tickets. Proceeds from this lotto are going towards the senior 

citizens’ building addition and towards the Blaine Lake 

Community Association’s skating rink roof project where they 

will be installing new energy-efficient lighting on the ice 

surface. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of this Assembly 

to join me in recognizing firstly the Blaine Lake Seniors 

Association but also all those individuals involved in 

community building efforts across this province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Rotary Carol Festival 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

night I took pleasure in enjoying the 72nd annual Rotary Carol 

Festival in Moose Jaw’s beautiful, historic Zion United Church. 

This festival brings many Moose Javians together to share in 

fellowship and one of the many joys of the Christmas season — 

listening to the joyous voices of the many talented performers. 

 

The festival consisted of everyone from some of our high 

school choirs from Vanier, Central, and Peacock, to some of our 

elementary schools like Sunningdale, Palliser Heights, St. 

Agnes, William Grayson, and Cornerstone Christian. There 

were several instrumental groups that also took part in this 

three-day event, sharing with their audience their love of music 

and the joy of the season. 

 

I am again amazed at the amount of talent the city of Moose 

Jaw puts forth. I want to forward an invitation to the members 

of the Assembly as well as the people of Saskatchewan to visit 

this or one of the many other fine and unique attractions of 

Moose Jaw and area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like this Assembly to join me in 

acknowledging the Moose Jaw Rotary Club for their hard work 

and dedication and congratulate them on 72 years of bringing 

music and enjoyment to the friendly city of Moose Jaw. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 

 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

Musical in Moosomin 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, on the weekend of November 25th 

through 27th, the Moosomin Convention Centre had the 

pleasure of hosting three sold-out performances of Andrew 

Lloyd Webber’s excellent musical Joseph and the Amazing 

Technicolor Dreamcoat. 

 

For more than two hours, a large cast under the direction of 

Sandra Poole, Sherrie Meredith, and Raven Wood sang their 

hearts out with a large group of dancers accompanying them, 

complete with stunning choreography, beautiful costumes, and 

heavenly vocals. A live orchestra made up of local musicians 

provided the musical background without missing a beat. I had 

the privilege of attending the Sunday afternoon performance 

and was blown away by the production. 

 

As one writer said, 

 

They were singing and dancing, and doing it with such 

ease and talent that it looked as if they were all seasoned 

Broadway performers. Every choreographed move was 

right on time, every song sung professionally and 

beautifully, every movement and motion right on cue. 

Broadway had not come to Moosomin, but the Moosomin 

area had succeeded in creating Broadway. 

 

Another person commented, “It was fantastic! I don’t think you 

would see anything more professional and inspiring anywhere.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 

me in thanking all the volunteers who helped make this 

production a reality and congratulate the cast and crew on 

putting on such a memorable show. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

The Meaning of Christmas 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we come to 

the end of this fall session once again and travel to our 

constituencies, our homes, friends, and families, it allows us to 

prepare for the approaching Christmas season, the season of the 

celebration of the birth of the son of God, Jesus Christ, and to 

reflect on the many divine blessings we enjoy in this province. 

Jesus came to Earth in a humble form of a baby with a message 

of peace and hope. He taught us in his time here to be mindful 

of those that are alone or hurting, have less or need help — in 

short, how to love. May we always live and think by his 

example. 

 

During this Christmas season, let us also remember those with 

someone missing from their celebrations, Mr. Speaker, whether 

by distance or because they left this Earth much too soon. And 

let us pray that all who travel would be kept safe not only 

during the season but throughout the year. 

 

The world tends to focus on decorations and presents as we 

celebrate the holiday season in our individual ways and cultural 

traditions. But may we all remember the true meaning of 

Christmas — the divine virgin birth of a child, the Messiah sent 

to Earth for the redemption of all mankind. As John told us of 

the birth of Jesus: 

 

The word became flesh and dwelled among us. We have 

seen the glory of the one and only Son, who came from 

God the Father full of grace and truth. 

 

To everyone, Merry Christmas and have a safe, blessed, and 

prosperous new year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

Pension Plan Funding 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as reported in the 

Provincial Auditor’s report that was released last week, under 

this government, pension debt has skyrocketed. What is this 

minister doing to address this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the pension liabilities in this province are indeed 

rising. There were decisions made by former governments in 

not only not putting aside the required dollars to fund the 

pension plans through the PEPP [public employees pension 

plan] program or also through the Saskatchewan teachers’ 

program, which are all programs, Mr. Speaker, that have ended 

because we now have new plans. 

 

Saskatchewan made the decision — a very good decision, I 

might add — in 1979 to move away from defined benefit plans 

to defined contribution plans. Mr. Speaker, there’s an obligation 

for government to meet the required pension contributions to 

ensure that retirees continue to receive that pension, and we will 

do that, Mr. Speaker. And that is one of the reasons why you’ve 

seen in the estimates over the last number of years that 

contribution continues to rise and it will continue to rise for at 

least the next five to six years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for the minister to cast a 

stone at the opposition and their government record on this 

front is disappointing. And their record is clear. In the auditor’s 

report — and I would ask all to look at page 224 of that report 

— that shows this astronomical growth. And the fact is the 

contributions that that minister references are far exceeded by 

the commitments that are being made by government. 

 

Over the past four years alone, pension debt has grown from 

$4.7 billion to $6.2 billion. Now this is an increase of over 30 

per cent, actually over 33 per cent, and represents more than 

$1.5 billion. It’s a major problem as addressed by the auditor’s 

report. So to the minister: how is letting debt skyrocket in our 

best interest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we have an unfunded 

pension liability in this province. The pension liability 

continues to accumulate while people who have been under the 

plans continue to work towards the end of their careers. The 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

contributions that were not made in the past to those plans have 

now been committed to by former governments, by this 

government. We will continue to meet the obligation, Mr. 

Speaker, the obligation of the province to ensure that those 

pensions are indeed met. 

 

We will do that. We will do that under the program that was in 

place under the NDP, and we will continue to ensure that 

pensions will be paid by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, government has increased 

total debt three years running, three consecutive years. Pension 

debt has skyrocketed in the last four years. We know this 

government fails to report that pension debt properly, arguably 

dismissing its importance. The auditor has reported this as a 

major problem. 

 

This growing debt, Mr. Speaker, we need to understand, 

represents the retirement funds of thousands of Saskatchewan 

people that have worked hard to earn and gain income security. 

They deserve to have confidence that their government will 

fulfill its obligations. And taxpayers deserve to have a plan to 

deal with this massively increasing debt. Action is required. To 

the minister, what’s his strategy? What’s his plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the plan of this 

government has been very clear. In the last four years, our 

government has reduced the debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan by $3 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the auditor points out, as the auditor points out, 

because of the improving financial position of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the government now will be able to meet the 

obligations of the pension plan much better than the outlook 

was a few years ago. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker: the member opposite was part of 

an election platform that projected $5 billion worth of spend. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering where he would like to, what 

programs would we have to cut to ensure that the $6 billion that 

he talks about today would be funded in one year, Mr. Speaker. 

What will he cut? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Plans for the Future 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a rather thin Throne 

Speech that doesn’t have a long-term vision for the province. 

We’ve understood here that we have some short-sighted 

management of our finances that the auditor has pointed out. 

We know that the Premier has magnanimously said, we’ll listen 

to ideas from other places, including the opposition. 

 

We also know that in a country, Norway, which didn’t have any 

oil until 1970 or ’71, they set up a fund called the Oljefondet, 

the Oil Fund, which is now called the Statens pensjonsfond — 

utland, basically the Government Pension Fund — Global. This 

idea of taking some portion of the share of the natural resources 

that we have in this province is a good idea that should be used 

by this government. 

 

Will the Premier look at a long-term savings plan that will 

cover and deal with some of these long-term management 

problems? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, as 

we’ve said very publicly, Mr. Speaker, there is legitimacy in 

what the opposition has proposed with respect to some sort of a 

futures fund, Mr. Speaker, some sort of a contribution from 

royalty revenue to the future of the province, to future 

generations, to the next economy. That might take the form of a 

fund when the debt’s paid off or, Mr. Speaker, it might take the 

form of maybe an investment into something transformational 

like a global food security institute that can help build our next 

economy and help deal with hunger issues around the world. 

There are a number of ideas that are out there. Our 

government’s going to be listening to all of those ideas. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to do is 

finish paying off the debt. That’s what we campaigned on in the 

election. The idea was proposed by the opposition, as was about 

$5 billion worth of other promises that they made. They wanted 

to use some of the resource revenue for this fund, some of the 

resource revenues to be shared by one particular group. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of the province voted to stay the course. 

And the course is less debt, Mr. Speaker, a competitive tax 

structure, and a leading economy in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Support for Seniors 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last week’s Throne Speech said 

that the government wants to ensure that seniors are treated 

with dignity and respect. We share that desire, Mr. Speaker, but 

we know there is a lot of work to do. 

 

There are many seniors in the province, Mr. Speaker, who are 

not yet ready for long-term care. They want to stay in their 

homes but they’re unable to find the bit of support they need to 

stay in their homes. My question to the minister: what does he 

have to say to these seniors who want to stay in their homes but 

are unable to find the help that they need to do so? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what we are doing for our 

seniors is an important part of our agenda: making sure that the 

seniors have money in their pockets, making sure that the 

number of seniors on the seniors’ income plan has doubled, 

making sure that the money available to seniors will have 

tripled by the time this budget is finished. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there are people that have needs 

across this province and our province has been built on the hard 

work of our seniors. I assure you they will not be neglected like 

they were under the previous government who did not look at 

things like the seniors’ income plan for 13 years. 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, over 18,000 people in 

Saskatchewan currently have Alzheimer’s disease or a related 

dementia. One of the top priorities for this government should 

be providing support to the caregivers of these individuals, Mr. 

Speaker. We know this is an important thing because it keeps 

families, it keeps couples together. And it also reduces strain on 

the health care system, especially when we look at long-term 

care facilities. For this to happen, the Alzheimer Society has 

asked for increased funding for its First Link program. 

 

My question to the minister: will the Sask Party government 

increase funding for the First Link program offered by the 

Alzheimer Society, recognizing that the return on this 

investment is very significant? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

seniors built this province and, Mr. Speaker, this government 

holds them in very high esteem. The member opposite 

mentioned long-term care facilities. Mr. Speaker, in a minute 

I’ll elaborate on what we’ve been doing on that end. 

 

But to his issue: before seniors are ready for long-term care, this 

government has increased home care budgets by 34 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, for home care. Mr. Speaker, seniors are very 

important to us. As far as when seniors are ready for long-term 

care, 13 new long-term care facilities are ready to go and being 

built around the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on top of that, we listen to communities. We 

recognized when they said to us that the old funding formula, 

which was initiated and carried forward by the members of the 

opposition when they were in government, 65/35 was too 

onerous for communities, Mr. Speaker. We listened. We 

changed it to 80/20, Mr. Speaker. We’re moving forward for 

seniors in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister pulled out the wrong 

briefing note on the topic. The question was not about 

long-term care facilities. It was about reducing the demand for 

long-term care facilities by providing supports to couples, to 

families, who are living in their home. 

 

My question to the minister. While supports through the 

Alzheimer Society are important, they are also calling, seniors 

in Saskatchewan are also calling for respite care and home care. 

We know this is important because it allows people to stay in 

their homes longer. My question to the minister: if it is such a 

priority, why was there no mention of respite care or home care 

in the Throne Speech? Does the government not realize that this 

is a major priority for Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again home care is a priority for this government. Seniors are a 

priority for this government. I will say that under the guidance 

of the Premier, the Minister of Health has done very good work 

in this and in many other areas of health care, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve been leading-edge. 

 

Under the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, we had the worst 

waiting lists in the country for surgery, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

improved dramatically. Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Health has 

done an amazing job in my mind in providing health care not 

only for seniors but for all citizens of this province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question wasn’t how much 

that minister likes the Health minister. The question was about 

providing care to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a major issue, a major issue, Mr. Speaker, that 

seniors also care about here in the province is high-quality 

end-of-life care. I know one professional who works in this 

area, Mr. Speaker, and what this person told me, they said, 

“There’s a lot of talk about Saskatchewan being the best place 

to live, but we desperately need to make Saskatchewan a better 

place to die.” 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, for many of us in this Chamber, 

many in the province who have journeyed with family members 

through that process, it’s a very important issue, Mr. Speaker. 

We have much to do to enhance supports for Saskatchewan 

people, for seniors in this area. In Saskatoon specifically there 

are a group of individuals who are working for the development 

of a hospice in Saskatoon. 

 

My question to the minister: does the Sask Party government 

support the establishment of a hospice? And what other plans 

are in place in order to improve end-of-life care for 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware of discussions 

that may have happened or may happen down the road between 

the Minister of Health and the people in Saskatoon that the 

member opposite’s speaking to. But I will say this, Mr. 

Speaker, on seniors, now he is talking about long-term care, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Our long-term care record frankly, Mr. Speaker, is amazing 

compared to the members opposite. They closed long-term care 

beds, Mr. Speaker. Our government is opening long-term care 

beds. Mr. Speaker, in my own community of Rosetown, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a long-term care facility going on as there is in 

12 other communities around the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve listened to communities. They’ve told us of 

the need for long-term care beds. We’re moving forward on 

that, Mr. Speaker. On the funding, as I mentioned earlier, 80 per 

cent funded by this government, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

members opposite who stuck to an old formula of 65/35 which, 

Mr. Speaker, was almost irrelevant because they didn’t build 

any long-term care facilities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Shelter Accommodation 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the 

House the Minister of Social Services said: 

 

We know there’s more work to do to ensure that people 

have a safe place to go in the evenings and at night. But 

we also know that every individual, their cases are looked 

at to find out why they are still in a hotel, and there’s 

always answers and reasons behind that. 

 

To the minister: how many of the people currently staying in 

hotels paid for by the government are in emergency situations? 

And how many are there because there’s simply nowhere else 

to go at the shelter rate the government is currently paying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know in this 

discussion yesterday we had an opportunity to say that the 

number of people who were staying in hotel rooms had 

decreased considerably March over March, and we know that 

it’s now down to about four nights. And I know that this is not a 

good number but at the same time we’ve built 131 more shelter 

spaces in places like Saskatoon with the Salvation Army’s 

Mumford House. In Regina we have My Aunt’s Place. We have 

a new shelter in planning in Prince Albert right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that this number is down from when the 

members opposite were in government. And we also know that 

the important part is working with CBOs [community-based 

organization], to work with them to not just supply a shelter for 

the night, but to make sure that they have the support to live in 

their own home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Social Services claims to have answers for what she calls 

anomalies. Yesterday we spoke with an advocate about a 

woman who has no other option but to live in her truck in the 

middle of the winter, so she is not benefiting from all those 

shelters the minister’s talked about. 

 

This senior’s fleeing a domestic violence situation. Social 

Services initially gave her permission to stay in a hotel starting 

Monday. She got moved in but was then told that they wouldn’t 

pay for the hotel room for that night. So now she’s calling her 

truck home once again. Apparently making $500 per month 

from CPP [Canada Pension Plan] means the minister thinks this 

woman should be able to afford to find a place in the private 

market. 

 

To the minister: how is this that a senior fleeing domestic 

violence, earning just $500 per month, does not qualify for help 

from this government when others are being housed in hotels 

for up to seven months? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am sure the 

member opposite is aware that I don’t know the individual case 

that they’re talking about. 

 

And our goal is to make sure that people do have a safe place to 

stay in the evenings. And that’s why we’ve been working on a 

number of fronts right across government to make sure that the 

funds that we bring in from government go right across the 

priorities of government. We don’t bring money in through 

revenues just to put it in individual government spending. We 

make sure that monies from every ministry goes towards the 

needs of the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have removed 114,000 people off 

the tax roll. That’s why we paid down the debt, to make sure 

that the interest rate is lower so that we have more money to 

spend on people with needs. That’s why we’ve increased 

funding to CBOs by over 14 per cent. 

 

The individual that the member’s talking about, I would 

appreciate seeing the case that she’s talking about. But you 

know what? Individual cases have to be looked at through 

individual eyes, and specifically, and I’ll be glad to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Sask 

Party is refusing to help a senior impacted by domestic violence 

who is forced to live in her truck — she spent the night in her 

truck last night outside of the YW [YWCA — Young Women’s 

Christian Association] in Saskatoon in the winter — I think the 

minister is definitely right that there’s a lot more work to do. 

We hear that quite frequently from the minister. She was very 

pleased with her reduced statistics yesterday and today again, 

but when we hear stories like this, it begs the question: is the 

Sask Party intentionally making it a lot more difficult to get 

assistance in order to drive down those numbers, including the 

number of hotel stays? 

 

To the minister: how many other people like this woman are 

being told that there’s no room in the inn because the Sask 

Party government wants to manipulate the statistics in their 

favour? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the member 

opposite is getting some kind of pleasure at making those kind 

of comments when they . . . I’m sure the member opposite 

knows that our goal as government is to make sure that 

everybody who lives in Saskatchewan calls this place the best 

place in the world to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have income supports. We have emergency 

supports. We have access to shelters. And if there is no spaces 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

in those shelters, then we also put people up in hotel rooms. 

When there’s individual cases, Mr. Speaker, we have people 

that are hired, not just through government, but through CBOs, 

to make sure that they can be looked at. Part of the policy we 

have of Social Services is to make sure that people who do not 

have a shelter, we will pay for a hotel room. I don’t know what 

the case is; I’ll be glad to look into it. But I assure you that our 

government cares about every one of the people in the province 

and we’re working hard to ensure they’re part of our great 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Timing of Assistance Payments 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am glad 

that the minister is saying that this government cares about poor 

people, and I’m sure that would extend to people on social 

assistance. And if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the 

minister could update the House. What is the change in practice 

that has gone on in Social Services where before it used to be 

the case where social assistance payments would get in the 

hands of families before Christmas whereas now that is not the 

case? Could the minister explain that to the House? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is a change but it didn’t 

happen this month. It happened a while ago to make sure that 

the money came in at a time when people could . . . after 

Christmas they had money to pay their bills; they had money 

for food and for their shelter. This isn’t something that just 

came up overnight. It was something that was brought forward 

a number of months ago, and I assure you that our goal is to 

make sure that people can budget their money right across the 

month and that they will have the money they can do, they can 

have to have a great Christmas in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the past practice had been to 

ensure that social assistance payments had been in the hands of 

families, on their way at least five working days before 

Christmas, before the last working day before Christmas. That 

had been the past practice. That had worked relatively well in 

making a reasonably minor accommodation for the 25,000-plus 

families that count on social assistance funds to make sure that 

they’re paying the bills and keeping the body and soul together. 

As we know, Mr. Speaker, those kind of concerns are all the 

more pressing when it comes to the Christmas season. This is 

something that had worked in the past for families that were 

receiving social assistance. It works still to this day in terms of 

the way that the federal government flows out certain of its 

funds to people receiving different federal benefits. 

 

Will the minister change this decision? Will the minister listen 

to their own rhetoric when it comes to what they espouse 

around caring for people at Christmas? Will they ensure that 

these dollars get in the hands of those families before 

Christmas? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there are lots of things that 

happened in the past that have changed, and I think the people 

of the province are glad about that in the majority. And when 

you look at the changes that are made with the way that people 

are sitting in the House today, you’ll know that the people of 

the province decided that our plan as a government is what they 

needed to have happen. They also knew that what we are doing 

is based on affordability and sustainability and making sure that 

we care about the people — everybody in this province. 

 

That’s why, for example, Mr. Speaker, the biggest expenditure 

in our platform was for people with disabilities. That’s why we 

are . . . Another big expenditure was for seniors, for tripling the 

amount of money they had. Mr. Speaker, the people on social 

services are very important to us, and that’s why we’re also 

working with Advanced Education to make sure that we can 

move them into employment. Mr. Speaker, the changing of . . . 

The money that’s going to people on social services isn’t 

changing, but what is happening is the face of the people of the 

province where we’re going to work whenever possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in my constituency office we’ve 

had a lot of calls and we’ve had a lot of contact from people 

that, you know, they have a hard enough time making a go of it 

on social assistance. This change makes it all that much more 

harder to make a go of it at the Christmas season. 

 

Would the minister reconsider this decision? Would the 

minister make the right choice in terms of . . . It’s not a huge 

thing. This is something that the federal government does with 

various payments that it makes. But it makes a huge difference 

to these families that are already budgeted pretty much to the 

penny, Mr. Speaker. It’s the Christmas season. Would the 

minister change the decision this government has made in terms 

of making sure that these funds are in the hands of families 

before Christmas so that they can have one less stress to worry 

about at this Christmas season? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — The member opposite has asked a very 

important question because the people that are on social 

assistance do, are looking forward to Christmas as well. They’re 

also looking forward to tomorrow in Saskatchewan; that’s the 

day after Christmas and the day after that as well. They want to 

make sure that they have a government that’s looking, and a 

province that’s looking forward tomorrow, not just looking 

backwards, looking at what we can do to ensure that there is 

money in their pockets at all times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have done things like increase the 

shelter rates. That’s why we’ve done things like making sure 

that there’s an extra $1,200 in the pockets of seniors at the end 

of the year through some of our programs. That’s why we have 

$2,000 more in the pockets of couples because of our programs. 

Mr. Speaker, you know what? Things like the low-income 

seniors’ plan and the children’s prescription drug plans, that 

makes a difference to them as well. 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, we put money into CBOs. We put money into the 

food banks. We put money into programs that will help our 

seniors and our families right across the province. Indexing the 

housing has made a difference to them as well. 

 

There’s work to do, Mr. Speaker, and as a government I am 

proud to say that we’re moving forward, not just with the 

people in this room, but for everybody in this province who are 

proud to call Saskatchewan home. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, during the question 

period the member for Saskatoon Massey Place referenced a 

number of quotes during his questions. I would ask him to table 

the documents from which he was quoting. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been the tradition of this House that the 

opposition does not have to table quotes or documents, so your 

point of order is not well taken. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Amendment Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi 

de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of a Bill No. 35, The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say, next 

sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, 

The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved first reading of a Bill No. 36, The Constituency 

Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 601, The 

Jimmy’s Law Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 

first reading of a Bill No. 601, The Jimmy’s Law Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

Bill No. 602 — The School Bus Drivers (Saskatchewan) 

Appreciation Day Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 602, the school bus drivers appreciation day Act be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved first 

reading of a Bill No. 602, The School Bus Drivers 

(Saskatchewan) Appreciation Day Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 118 through 131. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions 118 to 131. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 132 through 143. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 

132 to 143. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 144 through 184. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 

questions to 144 to 184. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Reporting of Government Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on a debate today of a matter of great 

importance to Saskatchewan people, the province as a whole 

certainly now and well into our future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the end of this, my speaking here today, I’m going to be 

moving a motion. I’ll read it into the record here at this point in 

time now, and that’s: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to change how it 

reports to the public on its finances by focusing on 

summary financial statements that are prepared in 

accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 

in keeping with the recommendation of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

So I’ll be moving that at the end of my words here today. 

 

This is a matter of great importance to Saskatchewan people, 

and it’s about the accountability and transparency of the 

government and how it reports to Saskatchewan people. It’s a 

matter of fairness. And it certainly would be a shift that’s 

important to Saskatchewan people, to provide the openness and 

even the fostering of understanding of our public finances, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s certainly in the best interests of a government, 

of any government, and certainly should be the aim of this 

government to provide to Saskatchewan people. 

Of course the current scenario right now is well known. It’s 

been certainly discussed by financial experts for some time. 

And many individuals in the past few years have weighed in on 

this discussion as Saskatchewan has remained a holdout on this 

front and really dug its heels in from providing the kind of 

transparency that the people of our province deserve. 

 

Right now as it stands, it’s entirely inappropriate by the way, 

how this government accounts for our finances. And quite 

simply, the government does not comply with public sector 

accounting standards, public sector GAAP, generally accepted 

accounting principles. And we’re the last holdout in Canada. 

We’re out of line with the rest of this country, the federal 

government, and all other provinces in providing that sort of 

transparency to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s of great importance to 

provide the true and full state of our finances to Saskatchewan 

people. And that’s what the NDP have been calling for, that’s 

what we continue to call for, and that’s why we raise this issue 

here today in this important debate and we’re looking for action 

from this government. 

 

The current scenario that’s put forward allows the government 

to manipulate the outcomes on an annual basis and to report that 

in an incorrect fashion back to the public. Of course this doesn’t 

foster anything other than misunderstanding and is a major 

barrier for Saskatchewan people when they’re trying to analyze 

their finances. And I know Saskatchewan people to be a fiscally 

prudent, fiscally responsible lot of people, and they care for the 

good management and good stewardship of our finances in our 

province. And it’s only fair that they have the information 

provided to them in a fashion that’s fair and consistent with the 

rest of Canada so that they can do that analysis and engage in 

that discussion. 

 

What’s going on right now with this government is nothing 

short of manipulation, Mr. Speaker, and certainly has proved 

itself to be an exploitation of the fiscal tools availed to this 

government. And it’s hugely unfortunate when we look at the 

actual consequences of this. 

 

Some of the consequences of course are just that the public isn’t 

provided the transparency and the information that it should 

receive in a fashion that makes it understandable and 

explainable. But further to that, what these tools that are availed 

to this government have allowed this government to do, at a 

time where they continue to tout record growth and prosperity, 

is in fact to not be moving our province forward in a fiscally 

responsible fashion and not to be improving our fiscal position. 

And quite simply, they focus on one set of books that are an 

inaccurate view of the whole functions of government and that 

certainly hide the exploitation and the draining of funds and 

equity that this government possesses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we compare this to a household scenario that individuals 

across this province would be familiar with, this is nothing 

different than a household or an individual pretending to be 

balancing their budget by suggesting that their chequing 

account was balanced but while, at the same time, increasing 

their credit card debt and increasing their credit lines or their 

mortgages to transfer dollars over to cover off their unbalanced 

budget or their lack of balance in their budget, or just the same, 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

draining the children’s university fund to fund operations of the 

day. Of course that’s irresponsible management for a 

household, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People across this province can’t manage their finances in that 

fashion and we should expect better, and we do expect better 

from our government. And that’s where we’re calling for an 

improvement both by way of their stewardship and record, but 

also by way of how they report to the public so that the 

Saskatchewan people can be well aware of the state of our 

finances. 

 

So when we’re looking . . . I guess people might ask well, 

what’s the difference out of these pieces? When I highlight the 

difference about draining the funds, whether that be a university 

fund or a savings fund or pensions, this is what this 

government’s really doing in a very short-sighted fashion when 

they’re draining huge equity out of our Crown corporations. 

Over the last four years of record, a shameful record of taking 

more than $2 billion from our Crown sector at a time where 

these utilities can certainly, require those dollars to make those 

investments and enhancements needed to provide services at a 

low cost to all Saskatchewan people and to make sure that those 

Crown corporations are in a strong position. Something that has 

really deteriorated in the four years under this sort of 

management. 

 

So we’ve seen that $2 billion from our Crown corporations, and 

we’ve seen a significant raid on our rainy day fund at a time 

where, Mr. Speaker, we continue to hear that things couldn’t be 

better. So we see this inappropriate utilization of dollars that 

should be bettering our fiscal position moving forward, and 

we’ve seen over $2 billion taken from our rainy day fund over 

this government’s short record in office. And that’s a 

disappointing record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re calling for transparency. We’re calling for 

accountability. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re joined by financial 

experts across Canada and we’re joined by the Provincial 

Auditor of Saskatchewan, an independent officer of this 

Assembly, in making that call. 

 

We’re the last holdout in Canada. That puts us in a very weak 

position to defend, as the government continues to try to do so 

on a day-to-day basis. And members can heckle from their feet 

all they want on this, Mr. Speaker, but what I’d urge them to do, 

is instead of sitting in the backbenches and heckling from their 

feet, I would urge them, Mr. Speaker, to bring forward the kind 

of action and to bring forward the kind of changes and to 

provide the kind of fairness to Saskatchewan people that they 

deserve. 

 

Second to that, I would urge this government to provide the 

kind of financial stewardship that puts Saskatchewan in a better 

position, not only today, but tomorrow and generations forward, 

Mr. Speaker, something that this government’s failing 

miserably on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Whether we’re looking at debt, the fact that now we’re in the 

third consecutive year of debt being increased, Mr. Speaker, or 

the fact by way of the Provincial Auditor’s report — it’s not my 

word, Mr. Speaker, but that of the Provincial Auditor — the 

third consecutive year that we’re running a deficit in 

Saskatchewan. That the Sask Party government is running a 

deficit, Mr. Speaker, is certainly a concern to Saskatchewan 

people who expect better. And quite simply, at a time of 

prosperity, at a time of touted record revenues and growth, they 

expect their government to improve their financial position as a 

province and then of course how that impacts Saskatchewan 

people and services now and well into the future. 

 

I would like to highlight just some of the comments from the 

Provincial Auditor’s recent reports. There is significant focus in 

the Provincial Auditor’s most recent report that came out just 

last week. Mr. Speaker, that makes this a very important topic 

here right now as well and adds that third party validation that’s 

so significant to hopefully urging this government that’s really 

dug their heels in and failing to provide that sort of 

transparency, urging this government to do better and to make 

those changes. 

 

And we hear a lot about this brave new day in Saskatchewan 

and these record revenues. I think what Saskatchewan people 

deserve is a government that’s going to be fair, straightforward, 

transparent in explaining that financial position to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I know the auditor has said in her statement of last week, that I 

quote, “Simply put, the way Saskatchewan publicly reports its 

annual surpluses and deficits to the citizens of Saskatchewan is 

out of sync with the rest of Canada,” all other provinces and the 

federal government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that if I go further on here to the quotes, to quote the 

Provincial Auditor’s statement of last week: 

 

The press release highlights the anticipated $25 million 

pre-transfer surplus in the General Revenue Fund, but 

makes no mention of the fact that the Government is now 

forecasting a $304 million deficit on a summary basis. 

This $304 million deficit is the more comparable figure to 

the financial results being reported in other provinces in 

Canada. 

 

So it’s pretty rich and pretty insincere, Mr. Speaker, for that 

Premier and that government to run advertisements and to make 

statements and provide speeches to the Saskatchewan public 

about balancing the books when it’s not the fact, Mr. Speaker, 

and the fact is validated and verified by the Provincial Auditor 

of Saskatchewan. And as we hear this message that somehow 

we’re the only province that’s running a balanced budget, Mr. 

Speaker, the auditor lays it out right here in her report that that’s 

simply not true. And comparing apples to apples and utilizing 

public sector accounting standards, this province, this 

government, is running a deficit in this fiscal year of $304 

million, Mr. Speaker, and it’s about being straightforward and 

honest with Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we look at some of the other aspects of what’s not being 

reported, Mr. Speaker, and it was highlighted today in question 

period because it’s of utmost importance, is the pension debt in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, the unfunded liability that exists and 

is owed to Saskatchewan people by way of commitments, and is 

reflected, Mr. Speaker, in the confidence that they should have 

in a government to fulfill its obligations. And these are 

Saskatchewan people, thousands of Saskatchewan people that 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

have worked their lives to build the certainty of retirement 

income and of income security. And this is something that’s 

been compromised by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think it’s a fair question, Mr. Speaker, with a government 

that dismisses that reporting to the public and that pension debt, 

Mr. Speaker, how significant are those commitments that need 

to be rock solid to Saskatchewan people? But further than that, 

Mr. Speaker, taxpayers deserve to know the true state of their 

finances. And to have dismissed this massive growth in pension 

debt, Mr. Speaker, and to have no regard to putting forward a 

plan or actions or strategy to address it, Mr. Speaker, is simply 

not sustainable and it’s certainly not responsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I look at some of the pension information here, over the 

past four years, Mr. Speaker, this government has actually 

increased pension debt by over 33 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve taken it from what was $4.7 billion in 2007, not an 

insignificant amount of money, Mr. Speaker, and have 

increased it to $6.2 billion. That’s an increase of $1.5 billion, 

and again representing dollars that are owed to Saskatchewan 

people and representing their livelihoods, their peace of mind, 

their quality of life by way of their retirement incomes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To not be reporting this in a fashion that’s consistent with 

accounting standards and public sector accounting standards is 

less than fair. And to not have a plan and a strategy to address 

these obligations . . . And to make sure that at a time of growth 

and prosperity that we’re in fact advancing these circumstances 

in making the contributions — that quite simply they need to 

surpass what the obligations are to Saskatchewan people — 

that’s not occurring, Mr. Speaker. And it represents weak 

financial stewardship, Mr. Speaker, and it’s short-sighted and 

certainly doesn’t have the long view for Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to just wrap up 

some of my comments here. But the fact is we’re not complying 

with public sector accounting standards. We’re out of line with 

the rest of Canada in our reporting. It’s a matter of 

accountability. It’s a matter of transparency. It’s a matter of 

being fair. And from a perspective of management in 

government, it’s a matter of not being short-sighted, which we 

currently see, Mr. Speaker, and taking care of needs of today 

but also ensuring that we’re in a better position tomorrow, Mr. 

Speaker. The current management is unacceptable. The current 

reporting is unacceptable, and we need changes on both, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

I know that this is an issue for Saskatchewan people and for the 

province as a whole, certainly now and certainly it is for 

generations forward, Mr. Speaker. And it’s time for 

Saskatchewan to get in line with the rest of Canada, to heed the 

concerns of the auditor to comply with the recommendations 

and with public sector accounting standards. And at this point in 

time, Mr. Speaker, I will highlight my motion that I’ll be 

reading into record once again, and I’ll move the following: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to change how it 

reports to the public on its finances by focusing on 

summary financial statements that are prepared in 

accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 

in keeping with the recommendation of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite simply it’s a time for Saskatchewan to move 

forward on this front. It’s time for Saskatchewan people to have 

the kind of transparency that’s provided in the rest of Canada, 

to understand the whole of the operations, to not be robbed of 

the information that highlights the management of government. 

And it’s time for this government to provide that. And as I’ve 

said, over that past four years this record has not been a strong 

one. At a time where we’ve seen our Crowns weakened by 

trying to cover off inadequate budgeting, in a time where we’ve 

seen our rainy day funds being drained, Mr. Speaker, we should 

expect better by way of management, and certainly we need to 

expect better by way of accounting to the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you very much for having this debate, and I’ll move the 

motion at this point in time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — You have to move it. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I did read it in just a moment ago. I’ll 

read it in again. 

 

The Speaker: — Do it again. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I move at this point in time: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to change how it 

reports to the public on its finances by focusing on 

summary financial statements that are prepared in 

accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 

in keeping with the recommendation of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to change how it 

reports to the public on its finances by focusing on 

summary financial statements that are prepared in 

accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 

in keeping with the recommendations of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 

opportunity to join in this debate. You know, if I’m not 

mistaken, I think that’s the second gimme that the House 

Leader’s given the opposition in the last two weeks. So you 

know, a lot of credit to the House Leader for being so fair. 

 

First off I’d really truly like to thank the Provincial Auditor for 

her hard work, her commitment, her expertise. She’s a very 

capable woman, and this government has the utmost respect for 

her and gratitude for her and her work. I found something a bit 

odd. The member across stated just a few moments ago that the 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

current practices aren’t understandable, they’re hard to explain, 

which I find odd in the fact that it’s the same practices used by 

his party when they were in government only a few short years 

ago. In fact he used both the summary statement and the general 

statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to move just to a summary statement would really 

not be fair in comparisons with past years. If we moved to 

strictly a summary statement, it would be just not really 

comparing apples to apples. This method of using both the 

general statement and the summary statement in fact gives the 

public and the government to truly compare what has been and 

what currently is happening to make plans as we move ahead 

into the future. 

 

Just to begin with, we’ll go through a little bit of background on 

the current practices. In Saskatchewan truly we are focused on 

an annual budget that is based on the GRF [General Revenue 

Fund]. And this has been the practice — that plus the adding in 

of the summary financial statement as I mentioned — since 

2004, 2005, which does in fact . . . The summary financial 

statements add in the Crown Investments Corporation’s results, 

Crown investment . . . Crown corporations, Treasury Board 

Crowns, not-for-profit organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the member across seems to allude to they are somehow 

hidden, hidden somewhere, well, Mr. Speaker, they are hidden 

in clear sight and are a matter of public record, accessible to 

anyone should they wish to look at those documents. We are a 

government that is fully committed to transparent and 

transparency with the public and with the opposition and all 

those concerned, Mr. Speaker. And again the financial reporting 

of this nature to the public is in accordance what has happened 

. . . which is what has happened in the past, and again both 

methods are available to the public. 

 

The General Revenue Fund is where all public monies are 

collected and disbursed and allows people to see how their 

money is allocated. So, Mr. Speaker, in this regard it doesn’t 

add in the — as the member spoke about and the Finance 

minister spoke about earlier today — the unfunded liabilities. 

And I’ll touch on some of those in a bit longer on in my 

remarks. But this is a true reflection of what the actual 

government operations are entailing, not going as far as with the 

Crown corporations, Crown Investments Corporation, but again 

that information is all readily available. 

 

The GRF statements provide a report on the annual budget 

assemblies prepared by the Legislative Assembly, and they are 

also a significant public accountability document. And they do 

provide a report against the annual budget estimates approved 

by the Legislative Assembly. So in accordance with the budgets 

that do get passed in this building, they do in fact line up with 

what would be expected in reporting those. 

 

The summary financial statement does provide information on 

the results and financial position of the government as a whole, 

and this is true, and that’s why they are available. We can 

compare what the government is doing, and when rolled into 

the facts of Crown investments and the Crown corporations, 

not-for-profit organizations that do get funding from the 

government, it does give the whole picture. And again that’s 

totally accessible to the public. 

We do, we continue to, and we will continue to do two sets of 

financial statements: produce a General Revenue Fund 

statement that does provide a clear picture of government 

expenditures and revenues as well as a summary statement 

which does come out twice a year, which does include Crown 

corporations and other government bodies, which is in line with 

other provinces. And this is consistent with previous practices 

of previous governments — I believe the Conservatives in the 

’80s, the New Democrats through the ’90s. And now we are 

carrying on with that same practice now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again we do appreciate the auditor’s views. In this case, 

however, we do take the position that it’s important for the 

government to budget and to report according to the way it’s 

organized and operates, as I’ve stated, what happens in the 

Legislative Assembly and through committee work, and in fact 

the way it does get reported. 

 

The summary financial statement does provide a look at all the 

government operations. It does provide two sets of books, 

provides people with a better look at the state of the province’s 

finances, and again totally accessible to the public. Showing 

only the summary statements, we think that would have . . . is 

not necessarily in the best interest of the people of the province 

to not truly show an example of what is now and what the 

practices were in the past and do a direct comparison and a fair 

comparison. We are actually doing what many other, if not all 

other, provinces do, producing the financial statements in the 

same way as most other provinces. 

 

The difference is that we also produce the General Revenue 

Fund statements, Mr. Speaker, which other provinces as a 

whole don’t. So by providing both, we do carry on with 

practices of the past but do in fact provide the documents that 

any other province does. 

 

I know the auditor would prefer that we focus only on the 

summary financial statements, but we do think that General 

Revenue Fund statements help people understand where their 

actual tax dollars are going. And again that’s been the focus for 

many decades of this Assembly and governments in the past. 

 

When you look at all the money we raise from taxes and 

resources and then subtract all of our spending from programs 

like emergency flood relief, we still do expect to balance the 

budget — and some of those comments shortly. And when you 

include all the government in summary statements, you will see 

the effects of the global volatility on investment returns of the 

Auto Fund, Workers’ Compensation Board, and higher crop 

insurance payouts. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one thing I’d like to touch on in my final 

minutes of this debate, the members across, and it’s been 

brought up in debate today, is the platforms that were presented 

by the now governing Sask Party and the New Democrats in 

opposition and the exorbitant spending that they were planning 

on carrying through with. And it begs the question, how would 

you get that money? We know there’s not a money tree. We 

know there isn’t that much accessibility even increasing the 

royalty rates as they were speaking of through the election. 

There just isn’t enough there. So it begs the question, where 

would that money come from? And I would argue, as in their 

past practices, raising taxes which is not acceptable to this 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

government or this party. That lends to a bit of hypocrisy, from 

my view. 

 

I would have to ask the question as, I think, brought up by the 

Premier earlier today: where would they cut? Would they cut 

funding to a children’s hospital? Would they cut funding to 

some of the housing programs that we’ve laid out that are 

starting to show dividends? Would they make cuts to disaster 

relief? I know Yorkton and surrounding area, the South, the 

Southwest, the North experienced all these flooding disasters. 

Would they cut funding to PDAP [provincial disaster assistance 

program]? 

 

Would they cut funding to the crop support and our agricultural 

support for our farmers? Would they cut some of the increases 

of support we’ve done for the seniors’ income plan? Would 

they cut maybe some of the disability support that have been 

brought out by our government and expanded on in the Throne 

Speech and going to be increased over the number of years to 

come? Would they in fact cut the tax relief that we’ve given to 

the people of the province in our four years in government, Mr. 

Speaker? As it was touched on by the Minister of Social 

Services earlier, 114,000 of the lowest income earners in the 

province no longer pay any provincial income tax. Would they 

cut, as was mentioned by the Minister of Highways earlier, 

would they cut and roll back to that 35/65 split for health care 

facilities when we move forward with the 20/80 split, Mr. 

Speaker?  

 

Would they cut the record investment of their Crowns? The 

member from Rosemont touched on the Crown investment and 

Crown debt expanding. And all the years I had in business, Mr. 

Speaker, I knew I had to invest from time to time in equipment 

that wouldn’t pay dividends in that year or the year after, but 

that equipment, that infrastructure was very important in having 

a successful business for many years to come, providing service 

to the people of Yorkton and making sure I had a viable 

business that also provided employment and helped to fuel the 

economy in my home riding of Yorkton. 

 

So I would argue . . . I know the member from Riversdale 

mentioned something about power issues in the west part of 

Saskatoon. Would they in fact want to cut SaskPower 

investments so those problems couldn’t be addressed? Mr. 

Speaker, I really have a lot of questions about that. 

 

The member across also spoke of financial experts across 

Canada. Well, Mr. Speaker, financial experts such as Standard 

& Poor’s recently gave Saskatchewan the highest credit rating it 

has ever seen — a AAA. So I think those financial experts have 

spoken. Again I would question, would they raise taxes to pay 

for some of these promises? 

 

I would also like to point out that this budget also, past budget 

also includes a $700 million balance of the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is rolling to a close, so just to 

say that obviously we aren’t in line with the motion of this 

opposition. And I am believing that most of my colleagues on 

this side of the House will not be speaking in favour of this 

motion brought forward by the member from Regina Rosemont 

but will be in fact speaking against it, and I will be doing so as 

well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just witnessed an 

incredibly baffling speech by the member from Yorkton, talking 

about what the, what the . . . What was he talking about? We’re 

currently talking about reporting on summary, we’re currently 

talking about reporting on a summary financial basis, Mr. 

Speaker, and not about . . . That member from Yorkton was 

asking what, what the opposition would cut. That has absolutely 

nothing to do with . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . We do not 

support cutting a single thing, Mr. Speaker. But what we do 

support is moving to reporting on summary financial reporting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter the debate urging the 

government to change how it reports its finances to the public. 

It’s not the first time the NDP has been talking about this. In 

fact our current Finance critic, the member from Regina 

Rosemont, introduced last spring a private member’s Bill 

requiring government to use generally accepted accounting 

principles for the public sector and report on a summary focus, 

bringing Saskatchewan in line with the rest of Canada. So this 

is most certainly not the first time we’ve been speaking about 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’re very pleased that the auditor continues to press the 

things that we’re talking about as well. I don’t believe either, 

Mr. Speaker, that in my first two years in the legislature that the 

member from Regina Rosemont missed a day presenting 

petitions pointing out that this government was in fact running a 

deficit and increasing — not decreasing — our debt load, 

contrary to Sask Party literature stating otherwise. 

 

But the reality is we’re not here today to debate, to discuss 

specifically this government’s consecutive deficits and rising 

debt in this province. That said, I do think it’s worth noting that 

even though we have record revenues in this province, thanks to 

our abundance of natural resources, the government is still 

managing to run deficits and rack up debt and hasn’t been clear 

with the people of Saskatchewan about this. 

 

But we are talking today, Mr. Speaker, about the Provincial 

Auditor’s report last week and our motion for the government 

to become more transparent in the way it reports its finances. 

The auditor, Bonnie Lysyk, too called on the government to 

adopt summary financial statements or an entire government 

perspective, not just the GRF or General Revenue Fund, as its 

basis for reporting its finances to the public. 

 

So the one thing the auditor points out is that we are out of step 

with most provinces and the federal government in how we 

report our finances to the public. So just to quote the auditor, 

she says, “Simply put, the way that Saskatchewan publicly 

reports its annual surpluses and deficits to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan is out of sync with the rest of Canada.” So we’re 

not. We are doing our own thing, Mr. Speaker, here, and it 

doesn’t benefit the people of Saskatchewan. So yes, perhaps 

they think that the auditor is wrong. 

 

[11:15] 

 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

So . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I hear the member 

opposite from Martensville heckling about what the 

governments did in the past or what previous administrations 

did. It’s 2011, Mr. Speaker, and I am . . . quite frankly, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, it’s time. Standards and principles 

change. And you know what? Standards and principles change, 

and it’s the responsibility of the government to evolve and 

change with the times, Mr. Speaker. It’s no excuse, it is a poor 

excuse, Mr. Speaker, to say, it is a poor excuse, Mr. Speaker, to 

say that just because a previous government didn’t do 

something that it’s acceptable not to evolve and change with the 

times. 

 

While that’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . oh I hear over there 

some heckles about the government has a big mandate so they 

can do whatever the heck they want and report how they want. 

That’s not, that is not good practice, Mr. Speaker. So when the 

Sask Party government boasted in the past about being the only 

province not running a deficit, this just isn’t the case. It’s about 

being able to compare apples to apples, or in this case summary 

financial statements to summary financial statements, which the 

government is not using to report numbers clearly to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard from the member from Yorkton saying 

that, oh the summary financial statements are hidden in clear 

sight. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly was not well reported on 

any of the Sask Party literature that we’ve seen from this 

government in the time that I’ve been around, Mr. Speaker. And 

the member from Yorkton says that summary financial 

statements are hidden in clear sight. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not an accountant, but I also know that 

most citizens of Saskatchewan are not accountants either. And 

in terms of transparency and accountability and pure citizen 

engagement, Mr. Speaker, citizens need to be able to easily 

access and understand the books of the government. This is 

about being able to help people understand what is going on in 

their government. We need to know so we can, as citizens, we 

can make our case for certain policies as well. 

 

So this is about engagement of citizens. Citizens need to know 

what is going on in their government. And quite frankly, it’s 

brutally unfair to citizens when they hear the opposition or the 

auditor talking about one thing and the government saying, oh 

no, this is the case; this is the case. And it’s very confusing for 

people. 

 

We see low voter turnouts, and we see people disengaging from 

the political process, Mr. Speaker. We see people disengaging 

from the political process. And part of it is because people don’t 

know what to think when they hear from government members 

and they get conflicting information. So people start to tune out. 

That’s the last thing we want, Mr. Speaker. We want citizens to 

be engaged and to be involved and to know what’s going on in 

their governments. 

 

So again . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, you know what? 

So I would challenge, I would challenge the member. I would 

challenge the member from Martensville to talk to her 

constituents about this and find out if in fact they’re going to 

the website. Most people are getting their information, Mr. 

Speaker, from news releases and from reporting in the media. 

The average citizen is not going to know or take the time to go 

to a government website saying, I think that I want to know if 

the government is reporting on a summary financial basis. They 

hear that surplus deficit, this is what they hear, Mr. Speaker, 

and they accept that as gospel. That is not fair or not right, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If I as a citizen, Mr. Speaker, if I go to my bank or to my credit 

union, the Affinity Credit Union’s in Saskatoon, and I say to my 

lender, I say, you know what? I’m doing pretty good here. 

Look. Just take a look at my chequebook. I’m doing well. And 

they say, well Danielle, you know what? You’re drawing down 

on Hennessey and Ophelia’s education account, or you’ve 

racked up a couple thousand dollars on your credit card. You 

really aren’t balancing the books. And this is the fact of the 

matter, is this government is not balancing its books and not 

being transparent and clear. And this will have long-term 

impact, Mr. Speaker, on government’s ability to serve and 

support citizens going down the roads. 

 

And I still, Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit dumbfounded that we talk 

about the summary financial statements being hidden in clear 

sight. Again, the average citizen, Mr. Speaker, is not going to a 

website to find out what government finances are like. They are 

getting information from news releases. Complex information is 

being oversimplified and not being made clear for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And at the bare minimum, Mr. Speaker, we deserve to know 

what’s going on with our public finances, just like other 

provinces, Mr. Speaker. We’re not asking to do anything new 

and radical here. We’re simply asking that Saskatchewan get in 

line, get in step with what other provinces are doing and what 

the auditor is calling for, Mr. Speaker. As I said, the NDP has 

been talking about this for quite some time and believe it’s time 

to move on, Mr. Speaker, time to start reporting on a summary 

financial basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So just when we talk about the government debt, as this 

government has bragged about running surpluses or not racking 

up debt, the auditor points out that the government has recently 

been talking about a $25 million surplus when it should be 

focusing on a $304 million deficit which corresponds to the 

summary accounts — $304 million deficit, Mr. Speaker, not a 

$25 million surplus. But the average citizen doesn’t know that 

and doesn’t know where to look for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the auditor also points out, she points out many things 

actually, Mr. Speaker, that this is about drawing down . . . She 

points out very well that it’s very easy, that the General 

Revenue Fund finances look way prettier, much prettier, when 

money comes in from the province’s rainy day fund, although 

it’s essentially a case of the government taking money from one 

pocket and putting it into the other, Mr. Speaker. One pocket, 

the other pocket, doesn’t mean I have more money or less 

money, it just means I’ve shifted it around, Mr. Speaker. This is 

a complete shell game. 

 

So, all the opposition is doing, Mr. Speaker, is calling for the 

government to get in line with the rest of Canada. We’re not 

asking for something new and outrageous. This is what other 

provinces are doing everywhere, Mr. Speaker. 2011, it’s not . . . 

It is time, Mr. Speaker, for this government to start reporting on 

a summary financial basis to the general public so people have 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

an opportunity to understand and engage with the process. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

privilege to rise today to discuss the value of the Office of the 

Provincial Auditor. The history of the Office of the Provincial 

Auditor in providing accountability and direction for 

government dates back to 1878. The office was established 

under section 65 of The Treasury Department Act in the 1878 

Acts and Ordinances of the North-West Territories. These are 

the same North-West Territories that I spoke of my inaugural 

speech, a North-West Territories that stretched from Alberta all 

the way across to what is now part of Quebec and included 34 

per cent of Canada’s land mass at that time. What tremendous 

energy and foresight our forefathers had in developing this 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this office then became known as the territorial 

auditor and was not independent of the government of the day. 

It wasn’t until 1965 when a special committee on public 

accounts appointed by the Legislative Assembly recommended 

changes to the legislation governing the provincial auditor. Mr. 

Speaker, these changes created an independent legislated 

auditor who audited the accounts of the government on behalf 

of the Legislative Assembly after the expenditures were made. 

The provincial auditor then reported findings and conclusions to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1983 separate legislation was enacted for the 

Provincial Auditor known as The Provincial Auditor Act. This 

Act once again improved the independence of the office 

through two significant changes. Firstly, the Provincial Auditor 

began submitting reports directly to the Speaker of the 

Legislative Assembly for tabling. Formerly this had been done 

by the minister of Finance who tabled the annual report. 

Secondly, employees of the Provincial Auditor’s office became 

employees of the Legislative Assembly. These changes better 

enabled the Provincial Auditor to manage the office. Further 

changes have been made to improve the auditing capabilities of 

this office and ensure the efficient and effective delivery of 

auditing reports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Provincial Auditor performs an 

important public service for the people of Saskatchewan. We 

need only examine the mission statement of the Provincial 

Auditor’s office to understand the importance of this office. 

And I quote, “We serve the people of Saskatchewan through the 

Legislative Assembly by fostering excellence in public sector 

management and accountability.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is of the utmost importance that this House 

recognizes the function of the Provincial Auditor. Thankfully 

this debate affords us the opportunity to acknowledge their 

efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as employees of the Legislative Assembly, the 

Office of the Provincial Auditor employs nearly 60 people, 

most of which are professional accountants or training to 

become professional accountants. The Office of the Provincial 

Auditor supports all three recognized accounting designations 

— certified general accountants, certified management 

accountants, and chartered accountants. 

 

As the parent of a chartered accountant, I can attest to the 

training and knowledge and attention to detail that members of 

this profession bring to their work each and every day. And 

they ensure that all reports are accurate, and hopefully can assist 

non-accountants such as myself to better understand these 

important documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Provincial Auditor also employs 

other professionals such as a health professional, a lawyer, 

certified information systems auditors, whose skills, experience, 

and perspectives continue to be particularly valuable as they 

continue to examine broader and more in-depth issues. 

 

The Office of the Provincial Auditor is organized into five main 

divisions — gaming and insurance, education, health, finance 

and Crown corporations, and their support services. 

 

Firstly, the gaming and insurance division’s responsibilities 

include examining the government’s gaming, insurance, 

pension, and resource management programs. These are 

complex areas of expertise and the Office of the Provincial 

Auditor possesses the skills to ensure accountability and 

transparency in each area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pension and insurance liabilities require the 

office’s staff to acquire knowledge to understand the methods 

used by actuaries and the accounting practices in these 

industries so that they can examine these methods and make 

concise reports to the people of Saskatchewan. Gaming 

operations such as casinos and resource management also 

require their staff to understand the unique risk relating to each 

of these industries. 

 

Number two, the education division’s responsibilities include 

examining our government’s education, training, labour, 

telecommunications, and the infrastructure programs. 

 

Thirdly, the Provincial Auditor’s health division’s 

responsibilities include examining the government’s programs 

relating to health, which include regional health authorities, 

justice, welfare — including child and family services — and 

distribution of natural gas for home heating. 

 

Fourthly the finance and Crown corporations division’s 

responsibilities include examining the government’s provincial 

taxation, cash flow, and debt management, transportation, 

agricultural, and power production and transmission programs. 

This division also leads the audits of our government’s 

summary financial statements and Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the support 

services of this Office of the Provincial Auditor have important 

consequences for the public. Mr. Speaker, throughout their 

service to this province, they maintain a high standard of 

objectivity which is essential for an independent office. 

 

They also possess thorough knowledge of the following: (a) the 

complex structure and systems that government uses to manage 

public resources, (b) the knowledge of the structure of the 

legislative authorities governing activities of the government 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

agencies related to financial reporting, safeguarding assets, 

revenue raising, spending, borrowing, and investing, and (c) 

knowledge of the audit of information systems, and (d) 

accounting and assurance standards recommended by the 

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. Mr. Speaker, their 

working knowledge of a variety of issues facing government 

agencies are absolutely critical to providing Saskatchewan 

taxpayers with transparency and accountability that they 

deserve. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, to fulfill this mission, the Office of the Provincial 

Auditor provides independent assurance — that’s audit reports 

— and advice on our government’s management of and 

accountability practices for the public resources entrusted to it. 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this office informs the Legislative 

Assembly about number one, the reliability of the government’s 

financial and operational information; number two, the 

government’s compliance with legislative authorities; three, the 

adequacy of the government’s management of public resource. 

Furthermore the Office of the Provincial Auditor encourages 

discussion and debate about public sector management and 

accountability issues. They are also valuable in their assistance 

to the standing committees on Public Accounts and Crown and 

Central Agencies in their duties. 

 

The important role and mandate of the Office of the Provincial 

Auditor begs the question: who watches the watchman? Mr. 

Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor in Council appoints an 

auditor to audit the Office of the Provincial Auditor. This 

auditor must be an accountant who is a member in good 

standing of a recognized accounting profession that is regulated 

by an Act. Furthermore the auditor cannot be employed by a 

government department, a Crown agency, a Crown-controlled 

corporation, or by the Office of the Provincial Auditor.  

 

Each year this independent audit of the Provincial Auditor 

reports the following to the Legislative Assembly: that their 

financial statements are reliable; that they have adequate 

management systems and practices; that they have complied 

with the laws that govern their office; that the reported costs of 

auditing government organizations are reliable; that the reported 

actual time spent by employees on tasks are reliable; that the 

assumptions underlying the requests for . . . [inaudible] . . . are 

suitably supported and consistent with their goals, objectives, 

strategies, and action plans. 

 

The role of the Office of the Provincial Auditor is absolutely 

crucial to the successful functioning of our democracy. We 

thank the office for their annual reports and will continue to 

work with them on ensuring best practices and protocols 

throughout all aspects. 

 

In closing I would like to quote the last page of the auditor’s 

report, and I quote: 

 

The Auditor notes that her office did not find significant 

issues for most of the 145 government agencies it 

examined. The auditor also found that many agencies had 

made progress in implementing past audit 

recommendations. 

 

For that reason I cannot support this motion. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 

into this debate. I think we need to get down to some simple 

points here. What we know if one is a lawyer or an accountant 

or somebody’s who’s involved in looking at buying stocks on 

the stock exchange, and you look at the books of a company or 

an organization, the more complex the accounting is, the more 

challenging the operation of that particular business is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what our auditor is saying to us on this 

particular issue is that let’s move on. The old ways of reporting 

how the operation of the provincial government works are no 

longer the national standard, and it’s time for Saskatchewan to 

get on board with what’s happening in virtually every other 

province and territory in the country, which is to report the full 

amount of the books. 

 

And what’s happening now, the auditor says quite clearly in her 

news release, is that it’s allowing the provincial government to 

move money in and out of funds to create a desired result in the 

main budget that they report on which is the General Revenue 

Fund. And, Mr. Speaker, that may have been something that 

was developed in all provincial governments over many years. 

But in this decade and as we move forward, the standard has 

changed, and it’s time for Saskatchewan to catch up and report 

things in a more accurate fashion. 

 

Now one of the things that concerns all Saskatchewan residents 

is what was identified by a group of very able financial people 

back in 1992. It’s called the Gass report. And one of the things 

that they identified as causing all kinds of difficulties for the 

province, for its credit rating, for the people of the province 

who ended up having to pay extra tax to try to get us out of the 

jam that we were in was some of this same kind of issue that 

we’re talking about now, which is that the accounting was so 

complex people couldn’t understand. And even the accountants 

couldn’t understand what was going on. But the net effect was 

that way more money had been borrowed but, more 

importantly, way more loans to various organizations or 

businesses that were established were guaranteed by the 

government without knowing the full consequences of what 

those guarantees are. 

 

Now as opposition, over the last four years, we have raised 

questions in a few areas where these concerns are there. One of 

them clearly continues to be in SaskPower, the Northland’s 

power project. The public does not know what the long-term 

cost of that property is and what’s going to happen there. We 

know that there’s a commitment to pay substantial amounts of 

money to a company from Ontario to operate a chunk of what’s 

happening in the SaskPower supply in northwest Saskatchewan. 

But we don’t know what the long-term costs are for the 

province.  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the kind of thing that . . . It 

was identified 20 years ago when the province was in such 

financial difficulty. What the auditor is saying here is the 

standards have changed about how we need to report what’s 

happening in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

to ask many, many questions in this area because we know that 

there is a propensity of members who were involved in the 

government 25 years ago, and the new people who are here, to 

make a lot of big promises and make a lot of commitments 

where they haven’t looked at how they’re going to make sure 

that the things are done. And, Mr. Speaker, what happens is that 

you end up in a situation where you’ve made commitments in 

various places that are not fully accounted for. Northland Power 

is one that we know has already been entered into. 

 

What we don’t know about are the other projects, the other 

guarantees that have been discussed and are being dealt with 

right now. But we will continue to watch very carefully what is 

happening in that area. We know in the legislative agenda that’s 

been set forth in this particular session already, and I think it’s 

numbering up around 33 Bills, that there are a number of places 

where the change in the structure of some of the organizations 

we have will allow for once again shifting of the full 

accountability of expenditures into some other place. And so 

we’re looking forward to the spring as we get more information, 

as we have others from outside of this legislature look at the 

financial planning that is or may be lacking for this government. 

 

Now I thought it quite telling that our new Provincial Auditor 

on the day that she released her report set out simply the fact 

that the government was only reporting one debt and not both 

debts, and her simple example of somebody in a household who 

had gone to the bank to borrow money. And they said, well I 

owe $10,000 so therefore I have sufficient income to pay down 

that debt, but you know, you don’t worry about this other debt I 

have over here because it’s not going to affect my ability to pay 

the money back. Any banker worth his salt is going to say, well 

you have to tell me the whole story before I lend you any 

money. 

 

Simply that’s the point here in this report that we’re talking 

about. And that’s why the government needs to come up to the 

present standards and make sure that the reporting is there. If 

that reporting is done in a way that is acknowledged, we’ll see a 

situation where some of the newly elected people who come 

from the business world, who are on your side of the House, 

will say, you can’t run a business like this. You can’t run a 

business where you’re borrowing more money than is coming 

in to your operation. You can’t, you can’t not tell all of your 

investors, you can’t tell your partners, if you in a business as a 

partnership, you can’t tell your partners, well don’t worry about 

that debt we’re committed to over there because is doesn’t 

really count. That’s not acceptable at all. 

 

So when the government sets up their books, when they set up 

their report, when they bring forward the budget in the spring, 

we hope that they will have made a decision to get into this 

decade, get into this century around how you report the finances 

so that our books are comparable to Alberta and Manitoba and 

Ontario and British Columbia, and that we can say with security 

and safety that we understand what the government is doing. 

And we know that the capacity is there because we end up 

having that information in our system. But let’s be 

straightforward about how we do this so that the public actually 

knows what’s going on. So it’s a question of transparency. It’s a 

question of not hiding behind complicated accounting to 

basically obscure what the public sees on public finances. 

 

Now as I’ve said a number of times in this House, that the role 

of the opposition is to ask those kinds of questions. It’s not 

dissimilar to the role of the journalist to look at, well, where are 

the things that don’t make quite sense, that don’t fit together. 

The role is to ask questions in those areas to make sure that we 

get clarity. All I ask the opposition, I ask the Premier, the 

legacy of a good government should be one that’s open, that 

should be one that follows the generally accepted rules of how 

you account to the public, and it should be one where people 

can say, well, there’s exactly what’s happening on. 

 

The really sad part, Mr. Speaker, is that we in Saskatchewan are 

living in times where we’ve had more revenues and more 

resources than we’ve ever had in the province. And the 

Provincial Auditor has to report that we’re in a deficit situation 

but that we’re hiding that by old accounting rules, old 

complexities which are of no longer any use to the people of 

Saskatchewan. So I say to the Premier, I say to the Minister of 

Finance, get the work done now, between now and March, and 

let’s make sure we’re on the page with all the other provinces 

and territories by the year 2012. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s an honour to 

stand in the Assembly today and participate in this debate 

regarding our government’s accounting practices. And after 

listening to the member from Regina Rosemont and Regina 

Lakeview, I beg to differ. Our government is committed to full 

and transparent financial reporting to the public. GRF and 

summary-based information each have a role to play in 

providing important accountability. 

 

Now the General Revenue Fund, the GRF, is where all public 

monies are collected and disbursed and allows people to see 

how their money is allocated. The GRF statement provides a 

report on the annual budget estimates prepared by the 

Legislative Assembly. And these statements are a very 

significant public accountability document as they provide a 

report against the annual budget estimates approved by the 

Legislative Assembly. The SFS [summary financial statement] 

provides information on the results and financial position of the 

government as a whole. 

 

We continue to put out two sets of financial statements. We 

produce a General Revenue Fund statement that provides a 

clear picture of government expenditures and revenues. Mr. 

Speaker, we also produce summary statements twice a year 

which include the activities of Crown corporations and other 

government bodies, that are in line with those of other 

provinces. This is consistent with the practice of previous 

governments, and we think it works. We appreciate the 

auditor’s views, but in this case we still take the position that 

it’s important for government to budget and report according to 

the way it’s organized and operates. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The summary financial statement provides a look at all of 

government’s operations, providing both sets of . . . [inaudible] 

. . . people with a better look at the state of the province’s 

finances than showing only the summary statements. We think 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

that what we have is the best of both worlds. We actually are 

doing what every other province does. We produce summary 

financial statements in the same way as every other province. 

Contrary to what the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 

commented on, apples to apples . . . [inaudible] . . . the 

difference is that we also produce General Revenue Fund 

statements. The auditor would prefer that we focus only on the 

SFS statements, but we think that GRF statements help people 

understand where their tax dollars are going. Mr. Speaker, that 

has been the focus here for decades. 

 

When you look at all the money we raise from taxes and 

resources and then subtract all of our spending for programs 

and emergencies like flood relief, we still expect to balance the 

budget. You can see the budgets for the various Crowns and see 

their activities reflected there. Mr. Speaker, it’s actually a good 

budget tool which allows people to access our activity in the 

way that government is organized. 

 

That said, we’re interested in how we can improve our 

accountability to the public, and we appreciate the auditor’s 

recommendations. We’ll be looking at all of her suggestions. 

 

The Provincial Auditor said: 

 

My responsibility is to express an opinion on these 

financial statements based on my audit. I conducted my 

audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted 

auditing standards. Those standards require that I comply 

with ethical requirements and plan and . . . [reform] the 

audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the 

financial statements are free from material misstatement. 

 

In my opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in 

all material respects, the financial position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as at March 31st, 2011 and 

the results of its operations, the changes in its net debt and 

its cash flows from the year then ended in accordance with 

Canadian public sector accounting standards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this form of accounting has been in practise even 

when the members opposite were in government. 

 

The following is an excerpt from the 1996 Public Accounts: 

 

The government’s summary financial statements are first 

class. The information they include is very useful for 

identifying, analyzing, and monitoring trends in the state 

of the government’s finances. For this purpose, we show 

the total revenue and expense of the government’s general 

programs together with the totals for the government’s 

enterprises. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, providing both sets of books provides people 

with a better look at the state of the province’s finances than 

showing only the summary statements. Our government has 

delivered four consecutive balanced budgets, but you don’t 

have to take our word for it, for here are a few budget 2010 

third party quotes. 

 

From the post-budget editorial in The Globe and Mail dated 

March 25, 2010: 

 

. . . Saskatchewan stands a beacon of light, tabling another 

balanced budget yesterday . . . what is encouraging about 

this budget is that the government has taken a . . . stab at 

spending cuts, although times there are relatively good. 

Other jurisdictions could stand to learn from . . . 

[Saskatchewan’s] example. 

 

. . . poised to be among Canada’s leaders in economic 

growth . . . It is to Saskatchewan’s credit that it is using 

these circumstances to make some tough choices. 

 

From the Times Colonist, British Columbia, April 4th, 2010: 

 

Anyone interested in the difference between good 

management and bad should take a look at Saskatchewan. 

There, the provincial government just brought down a 

balanced budget. It’s the only one in Canada. 

 

And why is Saskatchewan not broke? The answer is simple. BC 

[British Columbia] and Ontario spent freely while 

Saskatchewan put money aside for a rainy day. When you 

include all of government in the summary statements, you see 

the effects of global . . . on the investment returns of the Auto 

Fund and the Workers’ Compensation Board and higher crop 

insurance payouts. None of these have any effect on our 

day-to-day operations, but it’s all there for people to see. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is true that in opposition our party has 

called for a move to summary financial reporting. But it’s also 

true that the NDP government of the day made the same 

arguments in favour of maintaining the GRF that we are making 

now. Mr. Speaker, this is just a different perspective between 

being in opposition and being in government. Mr. Speaker, we 

think that the summary budget we prepare is a good one. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I listened to all the comments today from 

Regina Rosemont, Saskatoon Riversdale, Regina Lakeview, and 

I am very proud of our fiscal record in government. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very proud to stand behind our accounting 

practices that are in accordance with Canadian auditing 

practices. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the motion. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Is this continuing in the debate? The time for 

debate is expiring. We will move on to oral questions. I 

recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know that the 

member will not answer this question directly, but I’ve heard 

this on the doorstep a lot during the campaign for the good 

people of Regina Walsh Acres, so I’ll put it to the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

I assume, since he is the NDP Finance critic, the member from 

Rosemont was one of the chief architects of the NDP’s most 

recent budget for their election platform. So how can the good 

people of Saskatchewan take him seriously about any financial 

issues when his first major budget, with his stamp of approval, 

would’ve plunged our province into $5.5 billion of debt? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

motion is about the need to report to the public in a more 

transparent and accountable way. The government needs to do 

the right thing and join the rest of Canada — and 2011 — in 

reporting to the public on a summary financial basis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Following in with the member from 

Riversdale here, this government is out of line with the rest of 

Canada. It’s non-compliant with public sector accounting 

standards and it’s hiding the true state of our finances from 

Saskatchewan people. I ask the member from Yorkton: how 

does he explain this, and how does he believe this to be fair, to 

hide the true state of our finances from his constituents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, before 

I answer that question, before I answer that question, I’ve got 

just a small piece of advice, and I mean this in all sincerity to 

the member from Rosemont. I noticed in introductions today he 

actually referred to his wife I think as grumpy. So I would 

suggest you buy flowers on your way home when you pick her 

up for your event tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact you know, we’ve been found out. This 

information is hidden in plain sight in the summary financial 

statement as is acceptable in many other provinces. In fact, we 

do have the same practices as many other provinces with the 

summary statement. The thing is we go above and beyond by 

providing the general revenue as well. 

 

I will point out as well, you know, Mr. Speaker, in 2003 I 

believe it was, the NDP using the same examples that we do, 

the GRF and the summary statements. But they did omit one 

thing. They didn’t include in that response or that information 

the unfunded liabilities. So I think we have gone above and 

beyond the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Lots of 

interest in this debate on this side of the House, of course; I’m 

sure over there as well. I noted with interest at the start, the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers that she talked with some 

pride about how it is that this government keeps two sets of 

financial statements. In other spheres, Mr. Speaker, that would 

be regarded as keeping two sets of books. I ask the member 

from Saskatchewan Rivers: what do they call it when you keep 

two sets of books in anything else? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

form of accounting has been in practise even when the members 

opposite were in government. This is consistent with the 

practice of previous governments and we think it works. 

 

We also produce summary statements twice a year, which 

includes the activities of Crown corporations and other 

government bodies, that are in line with those of other 

provinces. The summary financial statements provide a look at 

all of the government’s operations. And providing both sets of 

books provides people with a better look at the state of the 

province’s finances. So, Mr. Speaker, I believe our government 

is doing an excellent job and I’m proud of moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, our government has been 

following the conventional accounting principles of previous 

NDP governments. In fact, the accounting practices used by our 

government are in fact the same principles used by the NDP for 

16 years. To the member from Regina Lakeview: the former 

NDP government never adopted generally accepted accounting 

principles while in government. Why does your party champion 

these principles while in opposition? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly the 

point, is that as the accounting practices changed, the books 

were improved in every province and territory across the 

country. Unfortunately it stopped four years ago and they’re not 

up to where we’re going and where the people of the province 

need the information. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

I’m now going to ask you questions . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to welcome the 

member from The Battlefords to the Chamber. And we 

understand that he’s a businessman from that community, and I 

want to ask him if he’s feeling uneasy about a government that 

still continues with old accounting methods, complex methods, 

with two sets of the books, which would be contrary to any 

business operating in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to that, I’m 

not uncomfortable at all to our methods, what we’re using. 

We’re actually doing what every other province does. We do 

produce summary financial statements, which we’ve started 

doing in 1992. They have been available since then. The 

difference, that we also produce a General Revenue Fund 

statement. The auditor would prefer that we focus on the 

summary financial statements, but we think the general revenue 

statements help people understand where their tax dollars are 

going. 

 

I have been asked . . . I can reference here today a publication 

from November 28th, 2011. I have been approached by 

numerous constituents from my constituency asking how these 

financial statements are reported. When you take the time . . . 

We’ve heard words here today, Mr. Speaker, like: can’t 

understand, hidden, no transparency. It takes about 30 seconds 

to compare the GF statements down to the summary statements. 

My constituents have been happy with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, our government produces 

summary financial statements, just like every other government 

in Canada. We also produce General Revenue Fund statements. 

Both provide sets of books providing comprehensive overview 

of the provincial finances. 

 

To the member from Riversdale, the Provincial Auditor has 

said, “The financial statements presented present fairly, in all 

material respects, the financial position of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.” To the member from Riversdale: why do you 

want to change this system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the member 

opposite should listen fully to what the auditor is saying. I’d 

like to quote: 

 

It’s time for public reporting to focus on the Summary 

Financial Statements. Focusing public reporting on the 

Summary Financial Statements will provide citizens with 

the deficit or surplus result that fairly reflects 

Government’s management of all public monies and 

resources under its control. 

 

So I think we need to be looking at the whole picture, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

failing to hear the answers to the questions that have been posed 

by this side, and I’d like to put this question to the member 

from Battleford. Once again, you went at great lengths to 

explain to us how accounting works. Thank you for the 

explanation. The question is, the auditor has said, “This is an 

issue where Saskatchewan is not keeping up with other 

provinces.” Do you agree with that quote from the auditor? And 

if not, why not? 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have great respect 

for the auditor and the auditor’s reports, Mr. Speaker. But in 

fact we are actually doing what every other province is doing. 

We produce summary financial statements in the same way as 

other provinces. The difference is that we also produce General 

Revenue Fund statements. The auditor would prefer that we 

focus only on the summary financial statements. But we think 

the General Revenue Fund statements help people understand 

where their tax dollars are going, and that has been the focus 

here for decades, as I mentioned before. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this year’s Public 

Accounts, the Provincial Auditor clearly wrote, and I quote: 

 

In my opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in 

all material respects, the financial position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as at March 31, 2011, and 

the results of its operations, the changes in its net debt, and 

its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with 

Canadian public sector accounting standards. 

 

To the member from Nutana: why is it that your party believes 

itself to know more about Canadian standards than the 

Provincial Auditor? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh she didn’t? Not in the debate. 

I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

would love to take this question. She would probably highlight 

that we’ve . . . As the auditor . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Support for the Keystone XL Pipeline 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege and 

honour to rise today in support of this motion calling upon all 

parties to support the Keystone XL pipeline without any further 

delay. 

 

The US [United States] government’s decision to sideline this 

project until at least 2013 is jeopardizing a $7 billion project 

that will create thousands of jobs on both sides of the border 

and billions more in additional spinoffs. The problem, Mr. 

Speaker, is that not all Canadian federal parties are united in 

support of this project, particularly the federal NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. If their opposition is rooted in ignorance of the facts, I 

would like to use this opportunity to inform them of the state of 

energy in Canada and Saskatchewan and how much it means, 

not only to Western Canada, but to the country as a whole. 

 

Saskatchewan is Canada’s second-largest producer of oil, home 

to a large part of the Bakken play, a formation the US 

Geological Survey says is the largest conventional play in North 

America, and one we share with both Montana and North 

Dakota. Our province is the third-largest producer of natural 

gas. We produce 20 per cent of the world’s uranium; 5 per cent 

of the lights in the US are lit by Saskatchewan’s uranium every 

single night, Mr. Speaker. We have 45.6 billion barrels of oil in 

place, and more than 38 billion barrels of that cannot be 

recovered using existing technology. 

 

If we could increase our recovery rates even marginally by 5 

per cent, it would triple our recoverable reserves of oil. 

Increasing our recovery rate by 10 per cent would obviously 

increase our recoverable reserves sixfold. 

 

Today’s motion is about energy security in North America in 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

general, but it is also specifically about the Keystone XL 

pipeline. Here are the facts around the Keystone XL pipeline. 

There will be 20,000 new North American jobs in construction 

and related manufacturing created by this project. There will be 

more than 118,000 spinoff jobs generated during the two years 

of construction. Without Canada’s oil, America’s dependence 

on oil from Venezuela and the Middle East will continue to 

increase. 

 

A life cycle comparison of North American and imported crude 

prepared by Jacobs consulting shows that oil from Venezuela 

and Iraq has about the same carbon dioxide footprint as 

Canadian oil sands oil and less than California heavy oil and 

Nigerian crude. These findings were confirmed by the United 

States Department of Energy. Also, Mr. Speaker, it’s worthy of 

note that the XL pipeline will take up to 100,000 barrels a day 

of light, sweet crude out of the Bakken plate, partly situated in 

southeastern Saskatchewan, some of which crude is currently 

trucked, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Keystone pipeline will enter Saskatchewan near McNeill, 

Alberta and continue southeast to Monchy, Saskatchewan. The 

total length of the pipe in Saskatchewan, approximately 259 

kilometres, Mr. Speaker. The Keystone XL pipeline is a 

National Energy Board regulated pipeline with all of the 

regulatory scrutiny that that implies, Mr. Speaker. The majority 

of the route follows the existing foothills pipeline constructed in 

1981, and within the Great Sand Hills region, the same route 

will be followed. 

 

Routing through the sand hills includes crossing through 

approximately only 3.1 kilometres on the extreme southwest 

edge of the Great Sand Hills. Environmentally sensitive areas 

within the sand hills are zoned as either environmentally 

sensitive 1, which allows no development; or environmentally 

sensitive 2, which allows development following submission of 

an environmental protection plan and adherence to strict 

development conditions. The portion of the pipeline that crosses 

the Great Sand Hills fall entirely within the ES2 

[environmentally sensitive 2] area. The crossing of the pipeline 

is not within the proposed biodiversity conservation area 

identified within the Great Sand Hills environmental study. 

 

The sand hills advisory committee and rural municipalities 

affected have been consulted over a considerable period of time 

and no concerns have been raised to date, Mr. Speaker. Some of 

the special development conditions include all main water 

courses must be directionally bored, mainline valves must be 

installed on both sides of major water courses, specific 

mitigation for identified species of concern and minimization of 

impacts on native prairie. In addition, a specific reclamation 

planned for the Great Sand Hills area has been developed and 

submitted as requested by the National Energy Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now know that the state of Nebraska voiced 

concerns in the past about this pipeline being routed through 

environmentally sensitive areas and TransCanada has agreed to 

direct the pipe around those areas and away from the sensitive 

Nebraska sand hills region and more importantly, the Ogallala 

Aquifer that lies beneath it. 

 

I think in the constraints of time, I’m going to shorten this, Mr. 

Speaker. The American Federation of Labour and Congress of 

Industrial Organizations, the AFL-CIO [American Federation of 

Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] has voiced 

their support for the Keystone XL pipeline in very emphatic 

terms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On November 17th, the building construction and trades 

department of the AFL-CIO announced that it “unreservedly 

supports the Keystone XL pipeline.” They also said, and I 

quote: 

 

Keystone XL will create longer term employment in both 

Canada and the United States in refinery conversion 

projects, operation, and maintenance. Moreover these jobs 

will keep an enormous amount of money circulating 

within North America. Energy security for North America 

comes from developing the oil sands and other Canadian 

energy projects. 

 

That same news release went on to quote Joseph Maloney, 

chairman of the CBDT, Canadian Executive Board and 

international vice-president for the International Brotherhood of 

Boilermakers stated that: 

 

Jobs in Canada’s oil sands are vital to North America. 

They support our standard of living and to be blunt, what 

is better for the North American economy, to support the 

United States and Canada or to support unfriendly foreign 

regimes? 

 

The NDP has apparently turned its back on this country’s 

labour movement by effectively ignoring the concerns of an 

organization that represents over a dozen labour organizations 

including the United Association of Journeymen and 

Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting industry of the 

United States and Canada; International Union of Operating 

Engineers; Sheet Metal Workers’ International Association; the 

International Association of Heat and Frost Allied Workers, 

International Union of Elevator Constructors; Operative 

Plasterers and Cement Masons’ International Association; 

Teamsters Canada; International Brotherhood of Electrical 

Workers; International Union of Painters and Allied Trades; 

Laborers’ International Union of North America; International 

Association of Bridge, Structural and Ornamental Iron 

Workers; United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of 

America; and the International Union of Bricklayers and Allied 

Craftworkers. 

 

Pipelines, Mr. Speaker, are essential to ensuring the safe and 

efficient transportation of oil in various states of production. If 

Canada only produced as much oil as it consumed, the national 

economy would be decimated. Exporting oil from 

Saskatchewan and Canada is vital to national interest of this 

country. The Canadian dollar is seen in money markets of the 

world as a petro currency which simply means, Mr. Speaker, 

that more than any other single factor, the interests of oil and 

gas production and sales around the world affect the dollar 

more than any other factor, Mr. Speaker. For the US, importing 

oil from Canada is better than the alternative of importing oil 

from countries that do not aspire to the democratic values of 

Canadians. 

 

So in a sense, Mr. Speaker, this is not just about energy and 

food security, nor is it simply about creating new jobs for 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

Canadians and Americans, although these are worthy goals in 

and of themselves. Mr. Speaker, this is about providing our 

neighbours to the south with a product that is recovered and 

transported from a country that is ethical. And oil sands are 

without a doubt ethical when you compare our nation’s policies 

to that of other major oil-producing nations. 

 

On all fronts, this Keystone XL project has been shown to 

benefit all stakeholders, notwithstanding the whining and 

bleeding of a few ill-informed NDP MPs [Member of 

Parliament] and celebrities. It will be interesting to see where 

those members opposite will be on this issue, Mr. Speaker — 

on the side of ethical oil safely piped from Saskatchewan and 

Alberta, or on the side of unethical and conflict oil from 

undemocratic regimes, refined in countries with little or no 

environmental safeguards and transported around the globe in 

supertankers. These are quite simply the choices that North 

America is facing, Mr. Speaker. I wonder which side those 

members opposite will be on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like at this time to read the motion into the 

record: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties in the federal 

Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the Keystone 

XL pipeline project without further delay. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Thunder Creek: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties in the federal 

Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the Keystone 

XL pipeline project without further delay. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 

recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

for me to enter the debate on this motion since this is a project 

that is so vitally important to the province of Saskatchewan, to 

the country as a whole, to our American friends. 

 

But I can speak most specifically about the importance of this 

pipeline to the constituency of Cypress Hills. I was just looking 

at the map on Google a few minutes ago and the pipeline 

originates in the community of Hardisty in Alberta, works its 

way east to the Saskatchewan-Alberta border, parallels that 

border for a while, and enters the province of Saskatchewan just 

northwest of the community of Burstall. And anybody who’s 

ever travelled in the Burstall area knows that that area is well 

known for petrochemical production, natural gas production, 

and is a very important player. And the pipeline, the Keystone 

XL pipeline enters the province in that particular region and 

works its way in a very straight line to the southeast, right 

through the constituency of the Cypress Hills, and eventually 

exits the country at the port of Monchy, which is in the 

constituency of Wood River. 

 

I’ve seen the impact of that pipeline already. Even without the 

permission of US federal authorities, we’ve seen a tremendous 

amount of work undertaken to prepare for the construction of 

the pipeline. Literally hundreds and hundreds of trucks each 

week are stockpiling pipe south of Shaunavon and in another 

area to the northwest of the community of Maple Creek. And so 

preparations are being undertaken for the construction of this $7 

billion megaproject which is just pending approval of US 

authorities. But not only has this created a lot of employment in 

the southwest part of this province; it’s created a lot of 

excitement for the potential and the economic opportunities this 

pipeline will create for a broader part of the province and 

obviously for the construction projects south of the border. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this pipeline has found itself embroiled in 

unnecessary controversy. The entire project has been developed 

and worked on and exquisitely proven itself in terms of 

environmental responsibility over a long period of time. This 

isn’t the kind of project you would pull out of thin air and 

decide to construct in a couple of days or even a couple of 

months. This project has been thoroughly designed and 

developed over an extensive period of time, and it is done in the 

spirit of co-operation and mutual benefit with our American 

neighbours. 

 

[12:15] 

 

There is some frustration, I understand, among the proponents 

and people who support the pipeline with the kind of radical 

and unfounded arguments that are being made against this 

pipeline for environmental and other economic reasons. And I’d 

have to say, Mr. Speaker, having heard a lot of these arguments 

and knowing some of the details of the project proponents, the 

disparity, the conflict of intellectual and scientific opinion on 

the validity of this project is quite amazing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I really thought our society had gotten to the point 

where it had enough faith in science, solid science, that we 

could put aside some of the more silly kinds of arguments that 

we’re hearing, but apparently that’s not the case. And our 

country and the American national economy, the people of the 

United States are going to be severely harmed by the kinds of 

rhetoric we’re hearing about this project if in fact that rhetoric 

takes hold in the political people in the US that are going to be 

making the final decision on this project. But you know, I could 

go on at some length as to why this project is of value to the 

American economy. 

 

But what really surprises me, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a 

group of individuals in our own country that, rather than 

support this project and look at it with a clear set of unjaundiced 

eyes, who are now prepared to argue against the project — 

which is in our national best interest, which is in our economic 

and our job creation best interest — which is in, in many ways, 

against our international interests as well. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when I hear that there are members of the 

federal NDP who have actually gone to the United States and 

asked for a hearing where they have argued severely and 

aggressively against this project, it is absolutely not just a 

disappointment; it’s worse than that, Mr. Speaker. Now I would 

suspect that the opposition members in this House today would 

want to distance themselves from the silliness that some of their 

federal counterparts are espousing on this particular project. I 

think that they would want to put the interests of Saskatchewan 

ahead of the political interests of their friends in Ottawa. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be calling on all members 



December 15, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

of this House to support this resolution when time comes to 

vote on it. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills has moved 

adjournment on debate on the motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon all parties in the federal 

Parliament of Canada to unite in support of the Keystone 

XL pipeline project without further delay. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move 

adjournment, but before I do that, I would ask leave to make a 

brief statement to the House regarding a recess. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a statement regarding adjournment. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you to members. I would like to take this opportunity 

to wish all members of the Assembly a very Merry Christmas 

and a very Happy New Year going forward. Also I’d like to 

recognize all of the families of members in the Assembly who 

make it possible for us to be here, who sacrifice a great deal for 

us to be here, and I want to acknowledge their contribution to us 

being able to serve. 

 

I want to thank all of our staff, whether that be in the building, 

our constituency assistants who do such a great job in all of our 

ridings to make this province a better place and to serve our 

respective constituencies and our respective ministries as the 

case may be. 

 

I’d like to thank all the staff here in the legislature: the Clerks, 

your staff. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank you for the job you’ve 

done and your staff as well. Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff, you 

really do, all do a fantastic job here in making it possible for all 

of us to do our jobs representing our constituents. 

 

I’d like to thank our constituents who make it possible for us to 

be here, who provide advice and guidance in making us better 

members of the Legislative Assembly and make it possible for 

us to be here. 

 

And I think this a wonderful time of the year to reflect on just 

how blessed our province is and has been. How lucky we are to 

live in the best province, in the best country, in the entire planet, 

Mr. Speaker, and just how lucky we are to be here and be able 

to serve. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish again all 

members a Merry Christmas, a Happy New Year, and a safe 

number of months before we reconvene. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the Government House Leader in terms of 

saying thank you and Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year 

to everyone. 

 

Certainly the list that the Government House Leader had 

enumerated of all the people that we have to thank in helping us 

do this important work on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, we certainly agree with that — the people inside 

the building, the people in the constituency office, but most 

importantly the people of Saskatchewan who entrust us with 

this important work to be done. 

 

I guess the folks I’d like to add within the building, Mr. 

Speaker, from the Clerk’s Table through to the folks that keep 

this building looking good. It’s been a particularly busy time for 

them, certainly with the start of a new legislature and the great 

amount of moving around. So they did that with their usual 

dispatch and, you know, made us, kept us all well equipped to 

do the work that we have on behalf of the people — let alone 

the folks in the cafeteria that keep us all well fed, some better 

fed than others apparently, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly, this being the start of a new legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, yourself, this being your first legislature in the Chair, 

thank you to you and your staff. You as the head of this 

institution, but certainly everyone from the Clerk’s Table on 

through to the Journals branch to the folks that keep us well fed 

and keep us organized and on the go. The Pages, who have had 

this as their first session — we haven’t scared any of them away 

yet, Mr. Speaker — but thank you very much for the good 

service and help in the House here. 

 

And as well, I’d like to thank not just the members on our side 

of the House and the folks that we work with to help us do this 

work, but I’d like to say thank you to the members opposite and 

particularly the Government House Leader. We’re on the start 

of a new relationship here and it’s . . . I don’t want to, I don’t 

want to get misty, Mr. Speaker, and nor should his, you know 

. . . Obviously there’s nothing untoward going on here other 

than frank and honest communication. But the work that we 

have to do in terms of making sure that this House stays on the 

tracks and that if we’re going to have fights, Mr. Speaker, may 

they be about issues and policy and not about the process and 

procedural wrangling. 

 

Because again, to come back around to where I’d started, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re here to do the people’s business. And at this, the 

Christmas season, we’ve got a lot to be thankful for, and we’ve 

got a lot to be mindful of as we set about doing that business. 

So again to all members of the Assembly at this, the start of a 

new session of a new legislature, and to everyone that helps us 

to do the job and to everyone that we seek to serve in this 

Assembly, on behalf of the official opposition, we wish a very 

Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. 

 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard December 15, 2011 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take this opportunity to join with 

the two House leaders in wishing everyone a Merry Christmas 

and a Happy New Year. As the members return to your families 

and friends, may you enjoy the holiday seasons. We need to 

give thanks for the benefits that we all received during the past 

year. As well I would like to wish everyone a healthy and 

prosperous, joyous coming year. 

 

I would like to thank our families, the staff of my office, and the 

Clerks and Pages for greatly supporting a newly minted 

Speaker. And thank you as well to both caucuses for making the 

job interesting, and to the staff of the legislature, all of the staff, 

for their support throughout the year and on an ongoing basis. 

May everyone have a Merry Christmas and a joyous new year, 

and please drive safely. 

 

I’d also like to remind members to please be back in their seats 

prior to 1:15 p.m. for the Lieutenant Governor’s appreciation. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands adjourned to 

the call of the Chair. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:25.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 235 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 235 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Best Wishes for the Holidays 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

 Lloydminster Seniors’ Winter Gala 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

 Jimmy’s Law 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 236 

 Blaine Lake Community Cash Lotto 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 236 

 Moose Jaw Rotary Carol Festival 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 236 

 Musical in Moosomin 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 237 

 The Meaning of Christmas 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 237 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Pension Plan Funding 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 237 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 237 

 Plans for the Future 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 238 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 238 

 Support for Seniors 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 238 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 238 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 239 

 Shelter Accommodation 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 240 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 240 

 Timing of Assistance Payments 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 241 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 241 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 242 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 35 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 242 

 Bill No. 36 — The Constituency Boundaries Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 242 

 Bill No. 601 — The Jimmy’s Law Act 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 242 

 Bill No. 602 — The School Bus Drivers (Saskatchewan) Appreciation Day Act 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 242 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 243 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Reporting of Government Finances 

  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 243, 253 

  Ottenbreit .......................................................................................................................................................................... 245, 253 

  Chartier ............................................................................................................................................................................. 247, 253 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 249 

  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 250, 253 

  Wilson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 251, 253 

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 252 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 253 



 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 253 

  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 253 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 254 

  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Support for the Keystone XL Pipeline 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 256 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


