




















































Hansard: May 12, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 61A  THURSDAY, MAY 12, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7619 

 May 12, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly two gentlemen seated in your gallery, no 

strangers to many of us in this Assembly: Mr. John Hopkins, 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina & District 

Chamber of Commerce, and Mr. Victor Thomas, the president 

of the Regina & District Chamber of Commerce. 

 

And I wanted to note as well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Thomas last 

month received the Public Policy Forum’s 2011 Emerging 

Leaders Award for Canada, presented by New Brunswick 

Premier David Alward, being the only person west of Toronto 

recognized at these awards. And I congratulate Mr. Thomas and 

welcome him and Mr. Hopkins to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the minister 

in welcoming our friends from the chamber of commerce, the 

Regina chamber, of course Victor Thomas, president — good to 

see you here — and also to John Hopkins, the CEO of the 

Regina chamber. These are important members of the business 

community, representing not only Regina but playing a big role 

in the provincial chamber as well. I want to welcome you both 

here today and ask you and invite you to keep up the good work 

on behalf of not only business but the community you 

represent. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the House, I’d like to introduce a 

friend, Lori Pulai, seated in your gallery. Lori is a social 

worker. And when we had the absentee assessment team project 

going, Lori was the coordinator of that project which identified 

and worked with families of children who were not attending 

school on a regular basis due to many social reasons. And 

statistically the program did very well. And I’d like to welcome 

her to her Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I’d like to introduce a very special group of grade 

4 students from Wadena. They have with them today their 

teachers, Lindsey Harvey, Stephanie Ochitwa, and chaperones, 

Korey Murray, Dwight Pomedli, and Lisa McMartin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to speak with them for a few 

minutes before we came into the House, and I have said I will 

go back after the pictures are developed and bring some back to 

the school so they can ask me more questions. 

 

I’d ask all my colleagues to welcome these young students to 

their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we know that freedom from poverty is an enshrined human 

right by the United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to 

social and economic security. And we know Saskatchewan’s 

income gap between the rich and the poor continues to grow, 

and now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in deepening 

poverty. And we know citizens living in poverty have long 

identified affordable solutions. 

 

Recent national and provincial initiatives including the 

Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty, Dignity for All campaign all call for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 



7620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2011 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the people of Saskatchewan are owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic resource, and as the owners of that resource they 

deserve to receive the maximum benefit. Additionally, Mr. 

Speaker, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan CEO has said 

that there’s a new norm for potash moving forward in the world 

today, and that was proven by the $732 million first quarter 

profits that they recently reported. Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from the 

city of Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition today to protect tenants from unreasonable 

rent increases through rent control. Since 2007 far too many 

Saskatchewan tenants have suffered monthly rent increases of 

hundreds of dollars, with average rent increases of over 35 per 

cent in Saskatoon and Regina. The majority of Canadians now 

live in provinces with rent control guidelines, including 

Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince 

Edward Island. In rent-controlled Winnipeg, they generated 

more housing units from 2007 through 2009 than Regina and 

Saskatoon. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately address the deepening 

housing crisis in Saskatchewan evidenced by the soaring, 

unaffordable increases in rent which have placed the cost 

of shelter out of reach for far too many Saskatchewan 

residents, and make known that Saskatchewan’s housing 

crisis has worsened by the extremely low vacancy rates in 

Saskatchewan’s urban centres, which has resulted in 

drastically reduced options for renters; and in so doing, 

bring to the government’s attention that the leave it to the 

market approach has proven to fail Saskatchewan renters 

and now, at this time, Saskatchewan renters need 

protection from their government to prevent further large 

rent increases. 

 

And accordingly, Saskatchewan people would be best 

protected by enacting rent control without delay to ensure 

that the basic human need of shelter is put within reach of 

Saskatchewan’s renters, thereby making Saskatchewan 

once again an affordable place to live, work, and raise a 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again, one more time in 

this sitting of the legislature, to present a petition signed by 

hundreds of Saskatchewan residents requesting public 

consultations on human rights law before a Bill like Bill 160 is 

enacted into law. It’s probably the last day that I will rise on 

this petition, Mr. Speaker, given today’s agenda. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And today the petition is signed by dozens and dozens of 

residents from North Battleford, Moose Jaw, Regina, Tantallon, 

Carnduff, Carlyle, Carievale, Arcola, Yorkton, Esterhazy, 

Maple Creek, Rouleau, Saskatoon, Battleford, Conquest, Maple 

Creek, and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the 

record of the Sask Party that includes the running of deficits 

and increasing of debt at times of record highs in revenues, Mr. 

Speaker, three consecutive years of loading debt to the tune of 

well over $1.3 billion — this year alone adding $548 million to 

the people’s public books, Mr. Speaker — and of course being 

out of line with public sector accounting standards and the rest 

of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 



May 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7621 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens and 

good folks from Arcola, Oxbow, Kenosee Lake, Conquest, 

Regina, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Nursing Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote today from an open 

letter from Judith Shamian, Canadian Nurses Association 

president: 

 

May 9-15 is National Nursing Week, a time when 

Canadians can honour and celebrate the outstanding 

contributions nurses make to our society. Every day, 

nurses apply their extensive knowledge, experience and 

skills to ensure the well-being of individuals, families and 

communities across the country and around the world. 

Nursing research advances the frontiers of nursing science 

and provides the evidence on which we base clinical 

decisions, best practices and health policies. 

 

This year’s theme, Nursing - the health of our nation, 

reflects the positive impacts our nurses and our profession 

have on the lives of every citizen, and the cumulative 

effects of those impacts towards building a healthy 

society. It also speaks to the important advocacy work that 

nurses carry out in the public interest: spearheading action 

on patient safety and disease prevention, promoting 

healthy lifestyles, and working to address health and 

social inequities. 

 

May 12th is an especially significant day as it not only 

marks the birthday of Florence Nightingale, but is also 

International Nurses Day. Closing the gap: Increasing 

access and equity, the theme for 2011, underscores the 

commitment of nurses globally to promote social justice 

and health equity and to address social, environmental and 

economic determinants of health. Let us join our nursing 

colleagues from around the world in celebrating this 

important occasion. 

 

Thank you to Ms. Shamian for a very eloquently put statement. 

And I hope we all agree that nurses contribute a wonderful 

amount of work and benefit to our society. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, May is Cystic Fibrosis 

Awareness Month in Canada. Cystic fibrosis is the most 

common fatal genetic disease affecting Canadian children and 

young adults. In Canada, two children are diagnosed with cystic 

fibrosis and one person dies each week from the disease. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no known cure for cystic fibrosis. CF 

[cystic fibrosis] is a multi-organ disease, primarily affecting the 

lungs and the digestive system. A buildup of thick mucus in the 

lungs causes severe breathing problems, making it difficult to 

clear bacteria from the lungs, leading to cycles of infection and 

inflammation, inflicting damage to delicate lung tissues. 

 

With early detection of cystic fibrosis, comprehensive treatment 

programs have dramatically extended the lives of people with 

CF. Today half of all Canadians with CF are expected to live 

into their 40s and beyond. Saskatchewan is one of the few 

provinces that includes cystic fibrosis as part of its newborn 

screening program. The earlier the detection, the sooner the 

treatment program can begin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although there is no known cure for cystic 

fibrosis, research inspires real hope. Cystic Fibrosis Canada 

funds CF research and provides supplementary support for CF 

treatment programs at 41 Canadian clinics and five transplant 

centres. 

 

Please consider making a pledge to CF Canada this month to 

ensure that Cystic Fibrosis Canada will be able to continue the 

research and find a cure for this disabling disease. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Fibromyalgia Awareness Day 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 

Assembly to recognize May 12th as Fibromyalgia Awareness 

Day. May 12th was chosen because it coincides with the 

birthdate of Florence Nightingale, the English army nurse who 

inspired the founding of the International Red Cross. 

 

Fibromyalgia is a complex and common chronic pain disorder 

that affects people physically, mentally, and socially. It’s a 

syndrome rather than a disease. Unlike a disease, which is a 

medical condition with a specific cause or causes and 

recognizable signs and symptoms, a syndrome is a collection of 

signs, symptoms, and medical problems that tend to occur 

together but are not related to a specific, single, identifiable 

cause. 

 

Fibromyalgia has a devastating effect and impact on people’s 

lives, people’s work, and their families. It affects about 2 per 

cent of the population, and it occurs in people of all ages, even 

children, but mostly women. Roughly a quarter of people with 

it are work-disabled. 

 

Fibromyalgia was widely misunderstood when it first came to 

the public’s attention, just as multiple sclerosis was labelled 

hysterical paralysis before medical understanding and public 

awareness caught up with the disease. Unfortunately treatment 

options for sufferers have suffered from this delay in diagnosis. 

Fibromyalgia requires the visionary support from health 

professionals, researchers, and our Ministry of Health. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 



7622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2011 

New Legislation 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

past, criminals who stole cars and injured themselves in 

collisions could get away with more than a vehicle. They could 

also get away with pocketing benefits from the province’s Auto 

Fund. That’s because this province’s legislation used to require 

the Auto Fund to pay benefits to criminals who stole cars and 

injured themselves in crashes. That’s right, Mr. Speaker: 

insurance premiums from law-abiding Saskatchewan people 

were being used to pay benefits to car thieves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government changed that with the passage of 

Bill 173. Our government’s new legislation makes sure that 

criminals who crash stolen cars can’t get away with insurance 

benefits paid for by premiums from law-abiding drivers. This is 

another example of initiatives we’re implementing to make our 

communities safer and hold criminals accountable for their 

actions. Additionally this legislation will ensure a more 

efficient use of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] car 

insurance premiums. 

 

We know that there’s more work to be done, and we’re going to 

keep working hard to keep Saskatchewan moving forward. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Battlefords Journalists Receive Awards 

 

Mr. Taylor: — The newspaper business in Saskatchewan has 

always been an exciting place to work. From the early days of 

the Northwest Herald, published in pioneer Battleford, to the 

recent pages of The Battlefords News-Optimist and the 

Battleford Regional Optimist, the stories of Saskatchewan 

people have been told in words and pictures. I’m pleased today 

to inform the members of the Legislative Assembly that the 

telling of these stories is continuing to win awards for the fine 

people who work in print journalism in The Battlefords. 

 

Late last month the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers 

Association’s annual awards program gave three first place 

honours and five runner-up awards to the North Battleford 

News-Optimist and Regional Optimist. The first place honours 

were recorded as follows: best sports story by Trent Cey; best 

research story by Tara Scaglione; and best tourism series put 

together by Jayne Foster, John Cairns, and Trent Cey. 

Runner-up awards included Michelle Berg for the best colour 

photo, Jayne Foster for the best research story and best editorial 

coverage, Tara Scaglione for best agriculture story, and Becky 

Doig for best black and white photo. In responding to the 

awards, editor Becky Doig said all those nominated were proud 

to be acknowledged as amongst the finest in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

fine people who have dedicated their working lives to 

journalistic endeavours in The Battlefords, and who by their 

award-winning efforts have made the residents of The 

Battlefords better informed and more knowledgeable about 

important matters going on around them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

Saskatchewan Unemployment Rate Lowest in Canada 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people are working. Saskatchewan’s April 

unemployment rate of 5 per cent was the lowest in the country, 

well below the national rate of 7.6 per cent, according to 

Statistics Canada’s March labour force survey released on May 

6th. 

 

There were 518,700 people working in Saskatchewan in April 

of 2011, the second highest on record for the month of April. 

Regina, Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert all saw a strong year 

over year employment growth. The labour force survey follows 

a report from the Conference Board of Canada which indicates 

Saskatoon and Regina will have the first and third highest 

economic growth rates in the country in 2011. 

 

Employers in our largest cities and across Saskatchewan are 

expressing confidence in their future and in the economic future 

of our province. As a result, Saskatchewan is and will continue 

to be the best place in Canada for skilled workers looking for 

new opportunities. Additionally the number of unemployed in 

Saskatchewan dropped by 1,800 year over year, and the 

unemployment rate for youth is the second lowest in Canada at 

11.1 per cent. 

 

April was also another strong month for saskjobs.ca where 

Saskatchewan employers posted 11,410 jobs. The site also has 

more than 8,000 jobs available right now in communities across 

the province. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, people are working. It’s the 

Saskatchewan advantage. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

George Reed Golf Tournament 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some athletes come 

and go. Others are iconic, and the mere mention of their name 

is immediately identifiable with Saskatchewan. George Reed is 

one of those people. 

 

Yesterday a media conference was held at the Wascana Place to 

announce the 2011 George Reed Golf Tournament for 

Saskatchewan Special Olympics. The second annual George 

Reed Golf Tournament will go on Monday, June 27, 2011 at 

the Wascana Country Club. You can sign up as an individual or 

with a foursome, but for sure it will be a fun-filled afternoon 

that you will not want to miss. 

 

George Reed has lent his name and volunteer efforts to 

Saskatchewan Special Olympics almost from its inception in 

1969. He’s also worked with countless other organizations over 

the years. In 1978, Reed was awarded Canada’s highest civilian 

honour, the Order of Canada. The presentation had everything 

to do with Reed’s accomplishments away from the football 

field. 

 

The mission of Special Olympics Saskatchewan is to provide 

individuals with intellectual disabilities the opportunity to 

achieve their maximum potential through training and 



May 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7623 

competitive sport experiences. At the core of Special Olympics 

is a belief that it is a fundamental right for everyone to 

participate fully in life and to be valued for who they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to support George Reed and, 

more importantly, the Saskatchewan Special Olympics, 

working with others to achieve common goals. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Rent Controls 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question deals with the 

housing crisis in Saskatchewan that is not limited to Regina and 

Saskatoon, but really is a crisis across the province, and 

especially for those families who rent. And the fact is that rents 

are going up by 10, 20, even as much as 100 per cent. And the 

Premier has said that the solution to this problem is housing, 

but the housing also is so expensive. Average house is over 

$300,000. 

 

In light of the fact that rent is going up far faster than the rate of 

inflation and especially faster than wages are being increased 

and especially by this government, can the minister tell the 

people of Saskatchewan why in the world we can’t look at a 

form of rent control similar to the other provinces that have it 

that have achieved two things: a cap on rent and a better record 

of construction of rental units than the province of 

Saskatchewan? Why can’t we at least look and discuss that and 

move quickly to put a cap on rent in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that housing is an 

important issue to everyone in this province. I know the 

members opposite are talking about rent control, and our 

government has a five-point plan dealing with the housing 

shortage. We are investing $252 million on 4,600 new rental or 

rental units in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working with municipalities. We’re 

working with developers. We’re going to increase the supply of 

housing, and that in turn is going to decrease pressure on the 

rental units in this province. Mr. Speaker, the average rent 

increases in Saskatoon has declined from 21 per cent under the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] to 4 per cent today. There’s more 

work to do, Mr. Speaker, and we’re working on it. We’re 

rolling up our sleeves and making sure there are homes in this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know the minister is 

impressed that they’ve had housing conferences, but the fact is 

that rent is going up at a rate that families in this province just 

can’t, can’t afford. And I have a letter here from Maureen 

Mckenzie who lives in downtown Regina on Lorne Street, and I 

quote from the letter. She indicates, and I quote, “I’m a senior 

on a rapidly diminishing income, a renter in an old downtown 

Regina apartment block for 20 years. My rent will be increasing 

from 610 to $800 per month as of October, with notice that it 

will be going up to $1,000 within the next year.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a rent increase for an individual, a senior, 

someone who’s helped build the economy of this province, an 

increase of 65 per cent. Now in the letter, she also indicates, 

and I quote, “the five-point plan that Premier Wall promotes is 

geared toward homeownership which is not an option for me.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of these kind of letters — and we are 

getting them from all over the province from families who can’t 

afford their rent — can the minister again explain to Maureen 

how it is that they are supposed to afford a 65 per cent increase 

in their rent, over the next year, when they’re on a limited and 

fixed income? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, I 

am aware that there are people who are facing hardship because 

of the issues of rentals in this province. And I do know that the 

reason why we are building more units is to make sure that 

people who have the ability to own a home can actually go out 

and buy one. And they’ll leave more rental spaces for people 

who are absolutely . . . [inaudible] . . . spaces for people. Mr. 

Speaker, there’ll be 4,600 more spaces available to people in 

the province. 

 

And I do know that there’s seniors that are on fixed incomes . . . 

have opportunities for things like the seniors’ income plan and 

for a rental supplement. There’s more work to do, and I assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, everyone in this province is important to us, 

and we’ll continuing to talk to them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s to the 

Premier. And in light of the fact that when we raised this issue 

before about another building where rents were going up by as 

much as 100 per cent, the Premier said this was unacceptable. 

And in light of the fact that he has also written a letter back to 

Maureen explaining how the housing program would work for 

her and she has indicated it doesn’t work, can the Premier 

explain to people in this province and especially seniors who 

are on fixed income . . . who have no opportunity to buy a 

home, which he is promoting, because at 70 or 80, it’s very 

difficult to go to a bank and get a mortgage, as he well knows, 

if you have no large treasure chest of money that you’ve been 

able to accumulate over your life. What are these people 

supposed to do? Can the Premier explain why we can’t have 

protection of rent control for Maureen and other Saskatchewan 

residents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government’s 

plan for housing is very much to focus on the supply of 

housing. Mr. Speaker, we know that if there is increased home 

ownership in the province, there will be greater vacancies in 

rental accommodations. We know, Mr. Speaker, if there are 

more student housing opportunities in the province, that will 

also ease the rental markets in the province of Saskatchewan. 



7624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2011 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

members to now allow the Premier to respond as the members 

give the Opposition Leader the opportunity to express the 

question. The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The NDP looked carefully at the issue of 

rent control on a couple of occasions. One was quite some time 

ago, when they actually decided to cancel rent control in the 

province of Saskatchewan. But then very recently, very recently 

when vacancy rates were actually lower than they are today, in 

2007, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the current member for 

Eastview was asked by the then leader to do a study including 

rent control, and they came to the conclusion that, 

notwithstanding the fact it might have political appeal, it’s not 

proper, effective housing policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re not going to play politics with the issue. We’re going to 

pursue policies we believe that will work, that have been tested, 

that will work for the province of Saskatchewan. And for 

seniors, for example, Mr. Speaker, we’ll work to improve their 

status, their ability to afford things in this province by 

increasing the income assistance for seniors, Mr. Speaker, by 

dropping 114,000 low-income people from the tax rolls, and by, 

Mr. Speaker, pursuing a very effective five-point plan for 

housing in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Security of Health Information 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in March over 100,000 personal 

health records were found in a dumpster in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. Since then there’ve been at least four similar breaches 

where health records have been found in garbage dumpsters in 

the city of Regina and around the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Clearly the government isn’t doing enough to protect people’s 

personal health records. Mr. Speaker, will the government agree 

today to setting up and operating a provincial repository for 

health records for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

discussed this certainly a lot, and we still remain with the same 

opinion that personal records being found in recycle bins is 

absolutely unacceptable. That’s why the SMA [Saskatchewan 

Medical Association] has sent a letter out to physicians around 

the province. I too have sent a registered letter out to physicians 

around the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think if you did a survey across Canada, in fact I 

know that if you did a survey across Canada, there isn’t one 

other province that has a repository, a provincially run 

repository. There are places for physicians to dispose of their 

records. There are companies that do this type of work, Mr. 

Speaker. What we need to do is make sure that the physicians 

know the regulations, know the legislation. We are, though, Mr. 

Speaker, in turn talking to the SMA and the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, along with the Ministry of Health, to 

deal with this issue as we move forward. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is the 

government’s responsibility to ensure the protection of people’s 

personal health information, Mr. Speaker. People look, people 

look to the government for leadership. Mr. Speaker, the law 

requires doctors keep health records for seven years after they 

quit practising medicine or they leave the province, Mr. 

Speaker. So doctors by law in this province are required to keep 

those records for seven years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last week a former head of the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, Dr. Joe Pfeifer, suggested a health repository, a 

health records repository, Mr. Speaker, a logical solution to a 

problem where you’re required to keep records for seven years 

after you practise medicine or leave the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time to quit talking about the problems and 

saying it’s significant. It’s time to put practical solutions in 

place. Will the minister agree today to implement a health 

records repository in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said at the general 

assembly of the SMA last week, when asked that question in 

the general assembly, I said that, back to the doctors, we don’t 

have a central repository for lawyers. We don’t have a central 

repository for accountants. We don’t have a central repository 

for banks, Mr. Speaker. Those professions are responsible for 

the disposal of those records, as are physicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said it’s time to stop this 

talking. Mr. Speaker, we have done something, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we have sent a registered letter to every physician, 

and, Mr. Speaker . . . well they’re catcalling. Mr. Speaker, let 

me quote what the Leader of the Opposition had to say at the 

end of Premier estimates on this very issue. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Allow the minister to 

finish his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Leader 

of the Opposition had to say on May 3rd at the end of Premier’s 

estimates: “I just want to say to the Premier that that approach 

to the health records is a huge improvement, and one that I 

think the public will very much appreciate.” That’s what the 

Leader of the Opposition said. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it was an improvement that the 

minister finally did something. He sent a letter after doing 



May 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7625 

nothing. But, Mr. Speaker, the difference is with other 

professions is this. Under the HIPA [The Health Information 

Protection Act] legislation, the province of Saskatchewan, the 

government, is ultimately the trustee. In the legislation, 

ultimately the government has the responsibility. There have 

been five breaches in just over a month. The minister has 

allowed others to access health information through health 

foundations and claimed that the Privacy Commissioner had 

been consulted. We found that to be untrue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we’re bringing forward a Bill that has a 

practical solution to a serious problem of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been able, 

through co-operation, to pass Bills in less than a day, Mr. 

Speaker. This is an occasion where the government can agree 

that there is a problem that we can fix and we should fix, Mr. 

Speaker. Will the minister today co-operate and pass our 

legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there has been much 

work done on this file, much more work to be done. I know the 

SMA are very aware, as are the physicians of the province are 

very aware of what has been done. As I said, a letter has been 

sent, a registered letter, to all physicians. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Well the Leader of the Opposition is kind of laughing at it. I 

don’t know; a week ago he thought it was just absolutely 

wonderful. In fact, Mr. Speaker, last week the Leader of the 

Opposition had to say, “I just want to say to the Premier that 

that approach to the health records is a huge improvement . . .” 

Where are you today, Mr. Speaker? Where is he today? If 

there’s a huge improvement a week ago, it’s a huge 

improvement today, more work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Accounting Practices 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a story being told 

today by the Sask Party government to the Saskatchewan 

people with respect to our public finances. Sadly this is simply 

just a story. It’s not fact. It’s fiction. It’s a tall tale. And while 

this government is telling Saskatchewan people that they’re 

decreasing debt, the real answer is located right within their 

own budget book on page 61. That page shows that this 

government is massively increasing the province’s debt to $8.9 

billion and has increased debt for the last three consecutive 

years. It’s not going down at all, contrary to the government’s 

claims and contrary to the statements in their caucus television 

ads — publicly funded television ads — that simply aren’t 

accurate. 

 

Why is this government not telling Saskatchewan people the 

story they deserve, the true state of our province’s finances? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we follow a practice in this province where we 

have both the budget based on the General Revenue Fund, and 

we have a budget based on summary financial statements. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a practice that was followed by the NDP 

when they were the government. It’s a practice that we follow 

now. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the last Provincial Auditor’s statement, and I 

quote directly from that statement of June 4th, 2010, says: “In 

my opinion, these financial statements present fairly in all 

material respects the financial position of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.” Mr. Speaker, that is an independent officer of 

this Legislative Assembly who’s doing the job that he is 

entrusted to do. He’s doing it very, very well, Mr. Speaker. And 

in Canada, Saskatchewan is recognized as having one of the 

best transparent accounting systems in all of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s entirely insincere for 

that minister to misrepresent the position of the Provincial 

Auditor which he’s doing here today. In the report of the 

Provincial Auditor, the outstanding recommendations continue 

to be made. I reference the 2010 volume 2 report where it’s 

highlighted again continued use of inappropriate accounting 

policies and highlights very specifically what we’re speaking of 

here today, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan people deserve to 

have the straight goods as it relates to our finance. 

 

This government is not using generally accepted accounting 

standards as it relates to the public sector. They’re not reporting 

from a primary focus from a summary perspective, and the Sask 

Party’s simply not telling the entire story. 

 

Since this government doesn’t use accepted accounting 

methods, I will be introducing a private member’s Bill here 

today in just a few minutes that would ensure compliance and 

bring us not only into compliance but in line with the rest of 

Canada — every other province, territory, and the federal 

government. This government thinks it’s more important to 

show a debt reduction that’s not really happening instead of 

using proper accounting methods. Will they support the 

legislation and help us fix this today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we rely on the auditor for 

an accurate assessment of the province’s financial positions. 

We’ve relied on that as residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan under the NDP government. We relied on that, 

Mr. Speaker, and we believe that the Provincial Auditor 

produces an accurate financial statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how the member is referencing the 

fact that somehow the material that we have presented is 

inaccurate. I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from Hansard of May 

5th. You know and, Mr. Speaker, the most, the highest level of 

scrutiny has been done by this individual. This individual, Mr. 

Speaker, quotes in Hansard on May 5th on page 7545, and it 

says this. I quote, “. . . it’s not as if we’re in a deficit, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not as if our debt is growing, Mr. Speaker.” Mr. 

Speaker, that quote is from the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for days, literally for days on days on days, I’ve 

listened to the member opposite talk about the fact that, oh Mr. 



7626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2011 

Speaker, we’re somehow not disclosing that this is a deficit 

budget, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite stands only a few 

days ago and says there is no deficit, Mr. Speaker; the debt is 

not going up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer with respect to 

whether they’d support that piece of legislation, which is 

disappointing for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Saskatchewan people truly do deserve to get the full story 

as it relates to our finances from a trusted source — no 

disrespect to the member from Athabasca. With that in mind, I 

will also be tabling a Bill that will create an independent budget 

office. The independent budget officer will be charged with 

regularly giving Saskatchewan people a report of the true status 

of the government’s finances. This position would be 

independent of government as an expert authority providing 

openness and legitimacy. 

 

This government continues to report a view of our finances that 

is incomplete and that manipulates the current system simply 

for political purposes, highlighting the need for an independent 

budget officer. Will this minister support the role, a role that 

would serve the best interests of all Saskatchewan people, and 

support legislation today to enact and empower a budget officer 

for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have that 

budget officer, and he is the Provincial Auditor. And we’re 

going to rely on him, Mr. Speaker. But we’re going also rely on 

the fact that the budget that we have produced this year is 

balanced not only from a point of the General Revenue Fund, 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s balanced also from the point of summary 

financial statements, which we also do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, the ironic thing . . . and the 

member opposite doesn’t want to talk about the unique position 

of Saskatchewan, the unique position of Saskatchewan and 

Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. We now have all of the provincial 

budgets from across Canada. Mr. Speaker, the only provinces to 

have a balanced budget that is with a surplus are the provinces 

of Saskatchewan and Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker. We said that 

this budget would be unique, that it would be unusual in all of 

Canada because, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that’s balanced, 

that’s balanced on both the General Revenue Fund side and the 

summary financial side, Mr. Speaker. And the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan are proud of this budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not only does the Finance minister 

misrepresent the position of the Provincial Auditor, he also 

continues to refer to that individual as a he. Well I’ll enlighten 

the minister. Our Provincial Auditor is Ms. Bonnie Lysyk, the 

first ever female Provincial Auditor in our province’s history. 

 

Saskatchewan people deserve to understand the true state of our 

finances. That’s why we’re introducing these two private 

members’ Bills here today, because complete and proper 

accounting of our government’s finances is what’s best for 

Saskatchewan people, ensuring sustainability of budgets and 

planning for the long view. 

 

Earlier this week this government showed a willingness to 

co-operate with a piece of legislation. We ask for them to do so 

with these two pieces of legislation as well. In the spirit of 

co-operation, will this government take the two pieces of 

legislation which are good for Saskatchewan people and either 

turn them into government Bills or work with us to make sure 

that these are passed by the end of this legislative session? 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, very quickly for the 

member opposite, since the Provincial Auditor has taken office 

on April 1st, I’ve had a chance to meet with her. We had a great 

discussion about how she’s going to move forward with the 

provincial audit, Mr. Speaker, and I’m looking forward to that 

plan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, here we are at the end of a 

term where we’ve seen this government, at a time of record 

highs in revenues, manipulate our books, Mr. Speaker, drain 

huge revenues from our Crown corporations — almost $2 

billion, $2 billion from our rainy day fund — at times of the 

so-called unlimited prosperity in this province. This is a time 

where we should both be moving Saskatchewan forward 

fiscally and readying ourselves for the future. 

 

It’s not only the management of our finances but the reporting 

of our finances. I simply look to this minister again. He has a 

record that’s a shameful record as it relates to our finances. Will 

the Sask Party government support these two pieces of 

legislation that are simply good for the people of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to 

rely on the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to 

continue to rely on the member from Athabasca who says “. . . 

it’s not as if we’re in a deficit, Mr. Speaker. It’s not as if our 

debt is growing. Mr. Speaker.” What a tribute to be paid to our 

budget from the member from Athabasca. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should know 

that the member from Athabasca actually failed high school 

accounting, Mr. Speaker. And he has many strengths, but that 

aspect isn’t the one we rely on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the facts are the fact, Mr. Speaker. And this Sask Party 

government has authorized and paid for with public money ads 



May 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7627 

that suggest that we paid down massive dollars of public debt, 

which isn’t true, Mr. Speaker. And they’re using public dollars 

to do so. 

 

It’s time, Mr. Speaker, for us to come in line with the rest of 

Canada, all other provinces, all territories, and the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker, and allow the Saskatchewan people 

to see the full view of their finances to comply with public 

sector accounting standards. It’s a matter of transparency. It’s a 

matter of accountability. We call on this government to do the 

right thing here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether in 

fact the member from Athabasca failed an accounting class but, 

Mr. Speaker, I know that he could probably give more accurate 

accounting descriptions to the member opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we see it with this 

government in so many ways — the use of public money to put 

forward a picture that’s simply not true, Mr. Speaker. We see it 

in the caucus ads they run right now — where we see them 

when you’re watching the evening news — that aren’t true, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s unfortunate. 

 

What we’re calling for today, Mr. Speaker, we’re calling for 

Bills that provide openness. We’re calling for Bills that provide 

legitimacy. We’re calling for accountability. We’re counting for 

transparency, and we’re asking for this government to quit 

looking at things in a very short political view but to plan for 

the long term, Mr. Speaker. I call on this Minister of Finance to 

support these two pieces of legislation or somehow describe to 

the people of Saskatchewan how he doesn’t support this 

principled position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question we’re 

looking to the long term, Mr. Speaker. This government has 

reduced debt from over $6 billion inherited from the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve reduced it down to $3.8 billion. Mr. 

Speaker, that debt load is the lowest since 1982, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re proud of that record, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of the 

fact that this province is growing. Our population is over 1.052 

million. We’re now having nearly 15,000 births in this province 

on an annual basis. Mr. Speaker, these are exciting times for the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I encourage the member 

opposite to keep talking to the member from Athabasca. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask all members to come to order. 

Order. I’d ask all members to come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 626 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

that Bill 626, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved first reading of Bill 626, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 627 — The Oil Sands Environmental Impact 

Financial Compensation Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 627, The Oil 

Sands Environmental Impact Financial Compensation Act be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 627, The Oil Sands 

Environmental Impact Financial Compensation Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 628 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 628, 

The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 



7628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2011 

moved first reading of Bill No. 628, The Financial 

Administration Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 629 — The Independent Budget Officer Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 629, 

The Independent Budget Officer Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 629, The Independent Budget 

Officer Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 630 — The Health Document Storage Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 630, The 

Health Document Storage Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 630, The Health Document 

Storage Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the Government House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has a point of 

order. I would ask the Government House Leader to state his 

point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during question period, the member from Rosemont stated in 

one of his questions that the Deputy Premier was, and I quote, 

“misrepresenting the statements of the Provincial Auditor.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a long-held tradition in this Assembly that a 

member should not impugn the honour of another member or 

accuse them of lying, Mr. Speaker. I would ask that the member 

withdraw those remarks and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw 

and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 168, 

The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2011 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee on the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave that Bill No. 168, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7629 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 168, The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 be now read the third time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By agreement 

with the official opposition, I move that this House do now 

adjourn to go to committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn to move to the work, in 

order to allow the committee work to proceed. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 10:54.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7619 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7619 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7619 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7619 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7619 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7619 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7620 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7620 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7620 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7620 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Nursing Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7621 

 Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7621 

 Fibromyalgia Awareness Day 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7621 

 New Legislation 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7622 

 Battlefords Journalists Receive Awards 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7622 

 Saskatchewan Unemployment Rate Lowest in Canada 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7622 

 George Reed Golf Tournament 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7622 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Rent Controls 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7623 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7623 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7623 

 Security of Health Information 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7624 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7624 

 Accounting Practices 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7625 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7625 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 626 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7627 

 Bill No. 627 — The Oil Sands Environmental Impact Financial Compensation Act 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7627 

 Bill No. 628 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7627 

 Bill No. 629 — The Independent Budget Officer Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7628 

 Bill No. 630 — The Health Document Storage Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7628 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7628 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7628 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7628 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7628 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7629 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


