




















































Hansard: April 12, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 12, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7207 

 April 12, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce His Excellency, Dr. 

Georg Witschel, ambassador of the Federal Republic of 

Germany to Canada, who is with us today in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s accompanied by Ms. Barbara Hoggard-Lulay, 

honorary consul in Saskatchewan. 

 

Dr. Witschel was appointed ambassador to Canada in 2009 and 

he is now making his first visit in that capacity to the province 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, His Excellency met this 

morning with the Lieutenant Governor, the mayor of Regina, 

myself, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration, and the Minister of Enterprise. 

Dr. Witschel was also hosted by the Provincial Secretary and 

the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly for a luncheon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the long-standing 

relationship our province has with Germany through the 

Partnership of Parliaments, a non-governmental, non-profit 

organization whose goals are to provide new contacts, promote 

transatlantic dialogue, and to improve political, economical, 

and cultural relations amongst its members who include 

representatives from Germany, Austria, the United States, and 

of course Canada. 

 

Last fall German parliamentarians visited Saskatchewan for a 

study tour and this year, Mr. Speaker, members of the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly will be visiting Germany. 

It is unmistakable, Mr. Speaker, that the relationship continues 

to benefit both the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Germany. And we look forward to exploring future trade and 

investment opportunities. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming His 

Excellency to this Assembly and to our province. We want to 

wish you an enjoyable stay here and to say thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Deputy Premier in welcoming His Excellency from the 

Republic of Germany, Ambassador Witschel to the Legislative 

Assembly, and also our honorary consul, Barbara 

Hoggard-Lulay, who is with us again. I just want to say a big 

welcome to both of you and especially to the ambassador. As 

the Deputy Premier says, with all the relationships we have 

between the two countries, and of course between 

Saskatchewan and the Republic of Germany, there’s a huge 

amount of trade and development that has happened and much 

more to be done in the future. 

 

I also understand that the ambassador, it’s his first visit to our 

province, but not his last as I think he intends to come back for 

the national day in October. And we look forward to seeing you 

again at that point in time. But thank you for coming by the 

office, saying hello, and a great visit. And thank you, Barbara, 

for being here. And I know all members will want to join with 

me in welcoming the ambassador and His Excellency here to 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services, the member for . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly a group 

of 30 grade 10 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate in the 

constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They are here with 

their teacher, Michelle McKillop. 

 

Winston Knoll is a wonderful school with great students and 

staff. I hope they enjoy observing question period and that they 

will be enlightened by the lively debate and the proceedings. I 

would like everyone to please join me in welcoming them 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

for me to join in the greetings to the ambassador for Germany 

today. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

So I would ask all my colleagues to join with me in again 

welcoming the ambassador from Germany to Canada to the 

legislature today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways, the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to welcome in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a good friend of mine and also a 

colleague and a mentor in municipal work, Jim Angus from 

Harris. Jim is the administrator at the RM [rural municipality] 

of Harris, and he’s in town this week for some Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency meetings. I hope he enjoys 

the Assembly today, and I’d ask all members to please give him 

a warm welcome to his Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present a petition from people who are supporting maintaining 

quality health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 



7208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding areas; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding area will not serve the needs of the residents.  

 

They also want the Government of Saskatchewan to 

realize that the utilization and value of the full range of 

professional skills offered by health care providers is 

promoted through the address of critical retention and 

recruitment issues and by ensuring safe staffing levels; 

and 

 

That such promotion can only be achieved through the 

commitment of adequate public funding to publicly 

administer publicly accessible health care. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Wakaw, 

Bellevue, Saskatoon, Osler, Rosthern, Duck Lake, Carlton, and 

Alvena. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for protection for tenants from unreasonable 

rent increases. 

 

In the past four years, too many Saskatchewan tenants have 

faced surging rent increases that are simply making living in 

Saskatchewan unaffordable. And that since 2007, far too many 

tenants have suffered monthly rent increases of hundreds of 

dollars of average rent increases of over 35 per cent in 

Saskatoon and Regina, meaning tenants in many cases are 

paying well over $3,000 more each year. And we know that the 

majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control 

guidelines including Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], 

Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. I would like to 

read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition come from 

Regina, Maple Creek, Swift Current, LeRoy, North Battleford, 

Candle Lake, Gerald, Yorkton, Sturgis, Esterhazy, Kamsack, 

and Estevan. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the petition is about 

the need for a new school for their children: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of a potash royalty review because the 

residents of Saskatchewan are the owners of a 1,000-year 

supply of this strategic resource and the owners, we believe, of 

this 1,000-year resource deserve to get the maximum possible 

benefit for the resource, and that the government has refused to 

review the current potash royalty system. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from the strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Meadow Lake, Turtleford, and the city of Prince Albert. I so 

present. 

 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7209 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again to present a petition to 

restore funding equity to Regina Catholic schools. Regina 

Catholic schools receive $275 less per pupil than Regina public 

schools, amounting to a funding inequity of $2.7 million in 

total. That funding inequity places program delivery and 

staffing levels at risk. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

denied Catholic school boards in the province representation on 

the government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or a public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effect that Bill 160 will have 

on human rights law in the province if enacted. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Osler, 

and Asquith, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record that includes 

the running of deficits and increasing of debt at times of record 

revenues within this province. They reference the record that 

includes an increase of $1.3 billion of debt over the last three 

years and this year alone, increasing our debt by $548 million, 

of course recognizing that this has consequences now but also 

well into the future, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Rouleau and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Year of India in Canada 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, celebrations have been 

planned all across Canada for the year 2011 to celebrate the 

Year of India in Canada. This past weekend I had the privilege 

of meeting with and touring the Legislative Building with some 

of the leading personalities in this celebration, one being 

Tanusree Shankar and her dance company. 

 

Tanusree Shankar is one of the top dancers and choreographers 

in India, based in Calcutta, where she was born. Her husband, 

the late Ananda Shankar, was the world famous music 

composer and worked to fuse the musical traditions of that 

great land. And the music and dance in the family is a tradition, 

Mr. Speaker, because her husband was himself the son of 

dancers, Pandit Shankar and Amala Shankar, and also the 

nephew of the master sitar player, Ravi Shankar from India. 

Tanusree now leads the dance company and one of the leading 

performers of contemporary dance in India. She has evolved 

her own modern style, uniting the graceful traditions of Indian 

dance along with western ballet. 

 

Tanusree and her company of over 20 dancers also had the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of touring the Legislative Assembly 

and also enjoyed some impromptu philosophical and political 

discussions here on the floor of the Chamber. Mr. Speaker, it 

was a pleasure to show them around the city as well and this 

beautiful building, and I would like to ask all members to join 

with me in honouring the Year of India in Canada. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Emergency Telecommunicators Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

acknowledge and pay tribute to the hard-working people who 

dedicate their time to public safety. Each day hundreds of 

Saskatchewan people rely on the expertise and dedication of 

public safety telecommunicators, more commonly known as 

911 call takers. 



7210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

These individuals save countless lives by answering emergency 

calls. Their expertise in high-pressure situations allow rapid 

emergency response and compassion in times of great distress. 

The skills of these men and women could literally mean the 

difference between life and death to someone in a crisis or a 

dangerous situation. 

 

National Telecommunicators Week is taking place this week 

across Canada. Saskatchewan is doing its part to support these 

individuals by proclaiming April 11th to 17th, 2011 as 

Emergency Telecommunicators Week in our province. By 

officially recognizing public safety telecommunication 

professionals, it is our hope to increase public awareness and 

promote education regarding important public safety issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year marks the ninth year the province has 

celebrated Emergency Telecommunicators Week and the 

contributions of Saskatchewan’s 911 operators and other 

emergency dispatchers from police, fire, and other emergency 

medical services who handle calls. I ask all members to join 

with me in thanking the men and women who have dedicated 

their lives to helping others through Saskatchewan 911. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Little Penguins Child Care Centre Opens 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Quality child care in 

any community but, more importantly in a growing community, 

is essential to the well-being of the child, the child’s family, and 

the community as a whole. 

 

That’s why I rise today to acknowledge, thank, and congratulate 

the parents association at  in North Battleford who have worked 

hard over the past two years to develop and implement their 

plans for a brand new francophone child care centre within the 

Fransaskois school. The child care centre, which will be home 

to 25 children aged 18 months through three years and known 

as Les petits pingouins, or Little Penguins in English, was 

opened officially this year. Parents group spokesman Roxanne 

Reynoldson said she is so happy that her two-year-old son will 

now have child care in the same facility in which he will one 

day attend elementary school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the parents group and the francophone school 

board have developed a working partnership with the province 

to make this happen. They understand that every $1 spent on 

children below the age of five saves hundreds of dollars later in 

life. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me today in helping 

École Père Mercure, the francophone parents in The 

Battlefords, and the Little Penguins celebrate the opening of 

these new child care spaces. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Volleyball Team Wins Bronze Medal 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to 

stand in this Assembly and congratulate a group of young men 

from the constituency of Thunder Creek. I would like to 

recognize the Briercrest College Clippers men’s volleyball 

team, who captured the 2011 Canadian Colleges Athletic 

Association men’s — that’s the CCAA, Mr. Speaker — men’s 

volleyball bronze medal at the Canadian nationals March 11th 

to 13th. Prior to this the team won the Alberta Colleges Athletic 

Conference, the ACAA title. This was a first for any Briercrest 

team since joining the ACAA. Mr. Speaker, it’s also the first 

time that any school from outside of Alberta has ever won an 

ACAA title. 

 

These athletes are exemplary ambassadors of Briercrest College 

and Seminary and the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to conclude by adding that the Briercrest College 

and Seminary located at Caronport is a great asset to Thunder 

Creek constituency and to the province. This latest 

accomplishment is just another example of this organization’s 

commitment to excellence. 

 

On behalf of the government, I commend the Clippers men’s 

volleyball team on a great season and wish them luck in 

repeating as ACAA champions next season, and further success 

in the CCAA. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Regina Anti-Poverty Benefit Concert 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday, March 13th, a 

benefit concert was held for Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry at 

Rosemont United Church. My wife, Stephanie, and I were 

pleased to join with friends at the concert and thoroughly 

enjoyed our evening. The concert was exceptional. I want to 

thank the lead organizer, Ms. Wilma Bell Wessel, and also 

Reverend Christa Eidsness and the congregation of Rosemont 

United for their support of this event and for striving for social 

justice in our community. 

 

The church was packed. Attendees were treated to a fine 

display of musical talents and the good work of Mr. Lee Cowie 

serving as MC [master of ceremonies]. I want to recognize two 

incredibly talented choirs that performed, the Rosemont United 

Choir and also the Regina Ladies Choir. The concert included 

exceptional tenor, cellist, soprano, and also impressive piano. 

We were treated to a very special duet by Ms. Wilma Bell 

Wessel and Ms. Lisa Welder. The concert was held as a benefit 

for the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry, an advocate for social 

and economic justice. As but one example is their call for rent 

control and a comprehensive housing plan to address the needs 

of Saskatchewan families and people. Peter Gilmer and Bonnie 

Morton spoke passionately about the purpose of the ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in thanking all that made this concert a great success for 

their meaningful contribution to our community. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Restaurant Wins President’s Award 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was an honour 

for me four years ago to recognize the achievements of a local 

Martensville business. The A&W in Martensville was awarded 

the Gold Standard Award for Excellence in late 2006. They 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7211 

won the Gold Standard Award again in 2010. They were one of 

the top three A&Ws in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to rise again today to announce that 

earlier this year, Brian and Bernice Buffin, the owners and the 

operators of the A&W in Martensville, were awarded the 

President’s Award. They are now the number one A&W in all 

of Canada. Mr. Speaker, this is a remarkable achievement. The 

restaurant that receives the President’s Award goes through 

rigorous scrutiny, including a thorough examination of 

operating practices as well as customer and employee 

interviews. As Brian said, everything has to be perfect. 

 

Brian and Bernice are well known and well respected in their 

community. I believe Brian and Bernice are shining examples 

of the hard-working spirit of the people of Saskatchewan. I 

want to thank them for investing in our province, for creating 

jobs, and for their commitment to our community. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Brian 

and Bernice for their amazing achievement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Helping Friends 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we know the Premier is always 

ready to spring into action to help out his Conservative friends 

in Ottawa. After taking a neutral stand on the federal election, 

he turned a backflip in the rotunda to attack the Liberal 

platform while skipping over the Conservatives’ long record of 

ignoring Saskatchewan. Sacrificing consistency to help out 

Harper’s do-nothing 13 MPs [Member of Parliament] was a bit 

of a risk, Mr. Speaker, but the Premier’s always eager to appear 

helpful to the federal Conservatives. And he asks nothing in 

return, at least nothing for the people in Saskatchewan that he 

represents. 

 

Why all the work to impress his Ottawa cousins, Mr. Speaker? 

Could the rumours be true? Despite this helpful appearance, is 

the Premier secretly hoping that Stephen Harper takes a tumble 

in this election so he can make the jump to federal politics and 

become Canada’s new top Tory? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he better looks before he leaps. A federal 

Conservative candidate in BC recently had to jump off the 

campaign bus following revelations of his troubled financial 

past, including only one bankruptcy. According to media 

reports, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative Party demanded his 

resignation once his history became public. 

 

Time to cancel the French lessons, Mr. Speaker, and no more 

hopping flights to Toronto to the Albany Club to give speeches 

or fundraisers at John LaBatt Hall. Out of the race before he 

jumped in. He’ll have to settle for anecdotes of life in Ottawa 

from the member from Meadow Lake. It seems, Mr. Speaker, 

even the federal Conservatives don’t set the bar low enough for 

this Premier to clear. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

Contract Negotiations  

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, today with us in the 

Speaker’s gallery, we have a number of teachers and 

professional workers from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] who have come here out of 

frustration because after two years of negotiations they still 

don’t have a contract. And like many other families, renters in 

this province, people who work in health care who are 

frustrated with the lack of protection from this government and 

the lack of wage increases that they deserve, they’ve now been 

offered less than 2 per cent per year to settle. 

 

My question to the minister is this: at a time when there is so 

much wealth in this province, wealth that we can pay CEOs of 

health boards 20 per cent on top of 300,000 a year, the CEO of 

the Potash Corporation has an open end to receive rewards from 

the bounty of our potash, how is it that working people, these 

people from SIAST, the health care workers, are restricted to 

less than 2 per cent per year? How is that fair, and how is that 

reasonable to the teachers of our children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update regarding post-secondary 

education in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we can see from the commitments and 

investments that our government has made, more than $2.8 

billion in the time that we’ve been in office, Mr. Speaker, these 

have included, Mr. Speaker, significant investments in SIAST. 

These have included capital investments, and they’ve also 

included a 10 per cent increase overall since 2007 and an 18.5 

per cent increase since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to support SIAST. Mr. Speaker, 

we will continue to support SIAST. Mr. Speaker, we will just 

simply refer the members opposite to allow the bargaining 

process to continue to work itself out. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the members of SIAST, the 

teachers and professionals who are here today I think would 

question that minister’s words about how well off they are and 

how great the increases have been over the last three years, 

when for the last two years they’ve been negotiating a contract. 

It seems a little hard to believe. 

 

And even at that, with the less than 2 per cent that is being 

offered, they’re also told that, by the way, embedded in the 

contract is a clawback that will take back about 1 per cent of the 

less than 2 per cent increase because they’re going to have to be 

paying for their own parking from now on if they accept this 

contract. How is it fair to these workers, the teachers in this 

province at SIAST, that they would get not the 2 per cent or 

less than 2 per cent, but in fact less than 1 per cent after the 

clawbacks? How does that fit with what the minister has just 

said? 



7212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Again since coming into office, we’ve invested more than $2.8 

billion into post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

meant to ensure that our students can succeed not simply in 

their studies, Mr. Speaker, but in their careers, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly we know how important, we know how 

important SIAST is, Mr. Speaker, to our province, especially at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, he makes reference to the 

ongoing negotiations. I will just simply say, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

up to the respective parties to actually continue with this 

process. We hope that we’ll conclude shortly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I can do, Mr. Speaker, is draw to the attention of the 

member opposite, as far as the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] 

commitment to SIAST, Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak directly to the 

students. And that is while the members opposite were in 

power, tuition went up by 263 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite turned their back on the students, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to continue to support SIAST and the 

students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister forgets to 

mention that this is the government that ended the freeze for 

tuition that was put in place by the previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the teachers and the professional staff 

at SIAST who will suffer as a result of the lack of negotiations 

going on. It’s our understanding that the staff, the teachers have 

also been threatened with lockout if they don’t accept the offer 

of less than 2 per cent a year. That is sad and shameful record 

for this government that they would threaten to lock out the 

teachers that would jeopardize the graduation and the 

completion of the school year for many of the students at 

SIAST. 

 

Can the minister make the commitment that he will not take the 

draconian approach of locking out the teachers and the staff at 

SIAST to force an embarrassing contract on the workers, the 

teachers of SIAST in their negotiations that are ongoing? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, since coming 

into office more than $2.8 billion has been invested in the 

post-secondary system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that includes 

significant capital investments across SIAST, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve also seen, Mr. Speaker, an 18.5 per cent increase in 

operating funding for SIAST, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding the direct question, I will just simply refer to the 

member opposite to say let the two sides continue this process, 

Mr. Speaker, of bargaining. Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly not 

going to bargain here on the floor of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that our commitment relates to students; we 

know, Mr. Speaker, relates to our institutions, faculty members, 

and staff, Mr. Speaker. And I would just simply invite the 

members opposite to allow these negotiations to continue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Gynecologic Oncologists 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For three years, the 

minister has ignored the pleas of women with ovarian cancer to 

address the problematic working conditions of Saskatchewan 

gyne-oncologists. Many of those women are with us today in 

the gallery. 

 

Several gyne-oncologists have left their practices, and women 

with ovarian cancer were left struggling to find a specialist. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister’s failure to address the issue of working 

conditions has put the lives of women with ovarian cancer at 

risk. To the minister: when is he going to stop turning his back 

on this issue and provide the funding and leadership needed to 

improve the working conditions in order to recruit and retain 

gyne specialists? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, any time we 

start talking about cancer treatment in this province, I don’t 

think there’s probably a person within this House that hasn’t 

been affected either directly or indirectly by the terrible disease 

cancer, Mr. Speaker, in whatever type of area it came, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been working hard with the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency since we became government to 

make sure that we have the proper complement of oncologists. 

I’m pleased to announce that a new gynecological oncologist 

has started on December 2010, Mr. Speaker, filling the void 

that was there. Mr. Speaker, for the first time, the Cancer 

Agency is reporting a full complement of oncologists, Mr. 

Speaker, in the southern region and maybe one vacancy in 

Saskatoon. So with that, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing wait times 

come down for all treatment of cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asked what we have done 

over the last three years. In the last three years of our 

government, funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency has 

gone up 55 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s $43 

million more coming from this government to deal with cancer 

issues across the province such as staffing, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

made progress. More to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’re on the right 

track. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as usual the minister can’t focus 

on the actual issue. Mr. Speaker, gyne cancer care in 

Saskatchewan is reaching a critical low for women with ovarian 

cancer and their families. Women with ovarian cancer are 

concerned about the lack of quality controls for women with 

suspected gyne cancers, with women being misdiagnosed, and 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7213 

women receiving surgery from obstetrician gynecologists rather 

than gyne-oncologists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he commit today to designing 

and implementing a gyne cancer program to provide direction, 

ensure quality of care, and provide quality control for women 

with ovarian cancer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my 

first answer, we have a full complement of gynecological 

oncologists in our province, Mr. Speaker. With the recent hiring 

in December of 2010, we have three full-time and one part-time 

gynecological oncologists working through the Cancer Agency, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To her second question, we are working with a gynecological 

oncology program advisory committee that’s looking at the 

delivery of cancer care, Mr. Speaker, this specific type of 

cancer care in the province. Recommendations come from that 

advisory committee. We listen to those recommendations and 

implement those recommendations. 

 

Nothing could be further from the truth to say that nothing has 

been done over the three years of our government, Mr. Speaker. 

I am and our government is very proud of our record in this 

area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I think what’s frustrating for the 

women who are here in the gallery is that, while the 

bureaucracy grinds along, their friends and their family are 

dying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by setting up specialized gyne-oncology units in 

Regina and Saskatoon, the minister can take a step towards 

ensuring the recruitment and retention of gyne-oncologists and 

improving the care for women with ovarian cancer. 

Gyne-oncology units provide specialists with the support staff 

and equipment needed to provide higher quality controls and 

give women with ovarian cancer a better chance of beating the 

disease. 

 

These were the issues that saw the gyne-oncologists leave 

Regina, and the minister took until December to get back some 

specialists in this area. So he hasn’t done a very good job, 

didn’t address the issues that made them leave, now took so 

long to recruit them. And the issues are still there, so will these 

ones stay too or will they leave also? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he finally, after three years, 

listen to the needs of ovarian cancer patients and do the right 

thing and set up gyne-oncology units in Regina and Saskatoon? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

general public that under the leadership of Scott Livingstone, 

the CEO [chief executive officer] and the new board Chair Dr. 

Stewart McMillan, the Cancer Agency has made great strides, 

Mr. Speaker. A news release that came out on March 14th talks 

about lean initiatives, improved access to cancer care, average 

wait times improved by 92 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is certainly committed to the 

delivery of cancer care in whichever it may be, whether it’s 

gyne-oncology, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s gynecological cancer 

delivery, Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to it. 

That’s why we have a working group, Mr. Speaker, made up of 

many interested groups that advise the government for 

improvements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone a long ways. We’ve increased the 

number of funding, increased the funding, Mr. Speaker, in three 

years. I’m not saying there isn’t more work to do but, Mr. 

Speaker, we have gone a long, long ways from where it was 

when we started in 2007. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education admitted last night in committee that he learned of 

the criminal history of the now-fired joint CEO of Carlton Trail 

Regional College and St. Peter’s College last May. To the 

minister: when alerted to the convictions of Glen Kobussen for 

defrauding the Fire Fighters burn fund, why did he do 

absolutely nothing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important to keep in 

context the state of Saskatchewan’s post-secondary education. 

And I’ll just quote from the Canadian University Guide, Mr. 

Speaker: “There has never been a better time to consider 

Saskatchewan as the place to attain a great post-secondary 

education,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the case that the member opposite references, Mr. Speaker, 

we received a proposal, Mr. Speaker. That proposal arrived last 

June. We then undertook an independent analysis through 

Meyers Norris Penny regarding a proposed merger, Mr. 

Speaker. The recommendation was that that merger not move 

forward, Mr. Speaker, not move forward. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there were a number, there were a number of questions and 

concerns that were raised. 

 

As part of our follow-up, we are ensuring that those questions 

are being addressed by Meyers Norris Penny, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we know, what we know, Mr. Speaker, 

is we are committed to ensuring that we will track every one of 

the public dollars, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll ensure that if there is 

anyone to be held to account, that will also happen, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s in the benefit and in the interest of our students, 

Mr. Speaker, and in the benefit and interest of the entire system. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 



7214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard those speaking 

points now for about three weeks. The minister is not answering 

the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be good for Saskatchewan people to 

know that we learned some lessons from past incidents in 

which individuals with histories of fraud convictions 

misappropriated public funds. And as a result of those 

incidents, the NDP government put fraud prevention measures 

in place including criminal record checks and a restriction on 

those with histories of fraud from dealing with public money. 

 

But the problem here is that the minister did not heed those 

lessons, and he did not follow those processes. He failed to 

ensure that a proper background check was done. And when he 

found about the history of fraud, he simply ignored it. To the 

minister: why did he deviate from appropriate procedure, and 

why did he put millions of taxpayers’ dollars under the control 

of an individual with a history of fraud? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to respond. Mr. Speaker, regarding the individual in 

question, Mr. Speaker, I’d point out to the members opposite 

that while they were in power the individual was actually 

selected to be the president of the St. Peter’s College in both 

2004 and 2005. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I will also say is, Mr. Speaker, regarding the 

policy that they put in place in 2006, Mr. Speaker, this policy 

did not apply, did not apply to the post-secondary sector. In fact 

it focused exclusively on the executive of government. Mr. 

Speaker, to this end I am working with my deputy minister, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that if and as we can expand this to the 

post-secondary sector, we will, Mr. Speaker. We’re doing that 

work right now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, members can check Hansard 

from committee last night. When asked about when he was 

alerted to the convictions of Mr. Kobussen, the minister said it 

was last May. And he said he did absolutely nothing once he 

found out that information. 

 

The reality is, the minister dropped the ball on this by failing to 

ensure proper background checks and then ignoring the 

disturbing information when it came to his attention. Now 

almost a year later we have accusations about misuse or 

misappropriated public money, and we have a whole lot of 

organizations trying to get to the bottom of this mess, including 

the Ministry of Justice, Meyers Norris Penny, KPMG, and an 

individual from Deloitte & Touche who is being paid over 

$50,000 per month. 

 

But we also learned last night that the minister’s own office is 

acting as a private investigation firm. In recent weeks, the 

minister’s political staff have been actively investigating the 

suspicious fire at St. Peter’s and looking into whether or not the 

fired CEO actually has a pardon. To the minister: what kind of 

sense does it make for his political staff to be playing such an 

active role in the investigation when his fingerprints are all over 

this mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, obviously there are a number of lessons learned and 

things that I could have done better and certainly the ministry 

could have done better. We were working with long-established 

guidelines, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As far as the references, Mr. Speaker, as far as the references to 

what the member opposite is accusing my staff, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve ensured that any information that has come forward, we 

have forwarded to the appropriate authorities in Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. We will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, we made the right decision 

through an independent process under which there were a 

number of questions and concerns that were revealed, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to date that’s what we’re dealing with: a 

series of questions, concerns, and accusations. We’re going to 

get to the bottom of this, Mr. Speaker. We are going to ensure 

that we track these public dollars, Mr. Speaker, and that there’s 

a full accounting to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s speaking notes 

would have the people of Saskatchewan believe that he is part 

of the solution. That is not the case, Mr. Speaker. That minister 

is at the root of the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing about this minister’s approach to this 

situation has been appropriate. He failed to look into Glen 

Kobussen’s background. He put millions of taxpayers’ dollars 

under Kobussen’s control. When he found out about 

Kobussen’s history of defrauding the burn fund, he ignored it 

so he could plow ahead with his merger. 

 

And now we have learned that despite having at least four other 

organizations looking into this mess, including one individual 

that is being paid $50,000, over $50,000 per month, the 

minister’s own political staff are acting like private 

investigators. So here we have a minister who put millions of 

public dollars at risk, failed to undertake any due diligence, and 

now he’s interfering with independent investigations. 

 

To the minister: before he causes more problems, will he step 

aside as minister until this situation is fully and properly dealt 

with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we came into office, we knew that there was much 

work to be done within the post-secondary sector, Mr. Speaker. 

More than $2.8 billion, Mr. Speaker, investing in students today 

and into the future, Mr. Speaker. We’ve ensured, Mr. Speaker, 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7215 

that we’ve been attentive to the grassroots, responsive as we 

could be, and at the same time responsible to taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker. We continue to work on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding the case that the member opposite is referencing, Mr. 

Speaker, we received a proposal last June, Mr. Speaker. We 

ensured that there was an independent process. That 

independent process, that independent process, Mr. Speaker, 

came forward with a recommendation not to proceed with the 

proposed proposal, Mr. Speaker. There were a number of 

questions. Those questions are being investigated, Mr. Speaker. 

We will ensure that, if and as appropriate, those dollars are 

going to be responsibly addressed and accounted for, Mr. 

Speaker. We know how important this is for students and for 

taxpayers, and we’re going to continue to do this work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Reporting Political Donations 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Justice. Yesterday when 

questioned about the failure to disclose the 2009, $1,000 

contribution to the Saskatchewan Party made by Glen 

Kobussen but paid for by St. Peter’s College, the minister said 

that he was in possession of an interpretation bulletin from the 

Chief Electoral Officer saying that the political parties, and the 

Saskatchewan Party in particular, can deduct fundraising 

activities and expenses from contributions before disclosing 

them and disclose them for a different fiscal year than the year 

they were contributed. To the minister, he also said that he 

would provide all the information that he had. To the minister: 

will he fulfill that undertaking today and table the interpretation 

bulletin he claims he has from the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the simple situation and 

the simple answer is that there is a guide prepared by the Chief 

Electoral Officer. There’s no secrecy to that. It’s online. It’s 

available from the Chief Electoral Officer. If the members 

opposite would like it, I’ll certainly see to it that they get a copy 

of it. 

 

What it says, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Very simply what it says is that where 

tickets are purchased and there’s a portion of the ticket price 

that’s a donation and a portion that goes towards the lunch, you 

can only give a tax receipt for the eligible portion of that 

donation. You can’t determine the eligible portion until the 

meals have been set or the events have taken place, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s been the long-standing practice of the 

Saskatchewan Party, that they will file based in the subsequent 

year after the events have taken place so they can properly do it 

so that they do not give a tax receipt for some . . . in excess of 

what a donor is entitled to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again it’s say anything 

time. We’ve had a case where the Minister of Health claimed to 

have consultations with the Privacy Commissioner. It turned 

out those were consultations with the previous NDP 

government. 

 

We now have a case, Mr. Speaker, where the Minister of 

Justice says he has an interpretation bulletin. And when he’s 

asked to table it, Mr. Speaker, what he does is he gets up and 

says, well there’s this guide and we interpret the guide to mean 

such and such, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister in fact have a 

document from the Chief Electoral Officer saying that, in the 

case of not ticket sales, Mr. Speaker, but contributions and 

donations, that a party is allowed to deduct fundraising 

expenses from those and disclose them in a different year than 

the year for which they were contributed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer is this: 

you cannot give . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — You cannot give, Mr. Speaker, a tax 

receipt until you determine what portion of the donation goes 

towards the meal cost, what portion is the donation cost. It is a 

simple thing. It is dealt with in the guide that’s provided by 

them. The members opposite have the guide. If they want 

another copy of it, if their photocopier’s not working, I’d be 

glad to provide them with another copy of it. There is nothing 

untoward, nothing unusual. You cannot possibly, Mr. Speaker, 

give a tax receipt for a portion of a donation . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin had the privilege of presenting the question without 

interference. I’d ask the same privilege be allowed the Minister 

of Justice. Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

seems to think that there was something untoward with this. 

There is nothing untoward with this. You cannot give a tax 

receipt for a donation that is improper. You must give a tax 

receipt for a portion that is a donation. The simple reality, Mr. 

Speaker, is you must resolve how the portion is applied to the 

meal and what portion is applied to the donation. And the party 

has done that and will continue to do that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Winston Churchill once said 

that Americans will always do the right thing after they’ve 



7216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

exhausted every other alternative. The members opposite have 

finally done the right thing on special access after they exhaust 

every other alternative. It is now time for them to do the right 

thing on disclosure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister has made it quite clear that they have exhausted 

every other alternative. Now will the minister admit, will the 

minister admit that yesterday he said he was in possession of an 

interpretation bulletin specifically covering this circumstance 

— not of a ticket sale, Mr. Speaker, but of a donation, of a 

contribution from which the Saskatchewan Party has been 

deducting fundraising activity expenses and then disclosing in a 

different fiscal year than for which it was contributed, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the simple answer is this, 

Mr. Speaker: if a donation is made in 2009 as a simple 

donation, it will be receipted and a tax receipt issued for 2009. 

If it is for a membership or tickets . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — If it is money that is receipted in 2009 

for an event that takes place in 2010 where you have to allocate 

between a ticket portion and a donation portion, then it will be 

receipted and the funds will be processed in the subsequent 

year. There is no other way to do that where the funds are going 

to be dealt with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of the funds are accounted for. The returns are 

filed and, Mr. Speaker, I would urge the members to have a 

look at them, review them, and move on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

for leave to move a motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked for leave to 

move a motion. Can the minister explain the motion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the nature of the motion is 

to recommend an appointment to the Public and Private Rights 

Board pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure 

Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to move a 

motion in regarding to a change of a member on a board if I 

understood correctly. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment to the Public and Private Rights Board 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This address 

will recommend that John Glen Gardner of Regina be appointed 

as the member of the Public and Private Rights Board pursuant 

to section 6 of The Expropriation Procedure Act. The 

appointment would be effective April 15th, 2011 for a term of 

five years. Mr. Gardner will be replacing the existing board 

member, Mr. Ken Acton. 

 

Mr. Acton has been a member of the Public and Private Rights 

Board since July 1, 1990, and I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank him on behalf of this Assembly for his 

leadership in this role. Mr. Acton was the recipient of a 

Centennial Medal in acknowledgement of his leadership in 

mediation and collaborative problem solving. His work with 

expropriating parties to encourage them to adopt a more 

collaborative approach has decreased the number of complaints 

received by the board. Mr. Acton has now moved on to a 

different senior role in the Ministry of Justice, and it is 

appropriate that a new person be appointed to this position. 

 

Glen Gardner graduated from the College of Law at the 

University of Saskatchewan in 1980 and has worked with the 

dispute resolution office since 1988. He has served as acting 

director of that office starting in 2008 with a departure from 

that position of Mr. Acton. And since January 1, 2010, he has 

assumed the role of director of the dispute resolution office. As 

part of his duties as director of the dispute resolution office, he 

is teaching a class at the College of Law, University of 

Saskatchewan in support of the training to new lawyers. In 

recognition of this work, he was appointed visiting scholar to 

the University of Saskatchewan, College of Law in 2010. 

 

Mr. Gardner managed his own farm operation until 1998. Mr. 

Gardner has done mediation work in a number of areas 

including commercial, lender/debtor, and family conflicts. He 

has also done facilitation work with merging and developing 

organizations. He has recently been involved in a number of 

new initiatives in the labour relations area, such as using 

collaborative problem solving in collective bargaining and 

union management joint initiatives and the use of mediation in 

workplace disputes. 

 

Glen Gardner is clearly a leader in Saskatchewan in modern 

dispute resolution methodologies. Mr. Speaker, having the 

director of the dispute resolution office also perform this role 

has proven to be very useful. The primary function of the 

dispute resolution office is to provide mediation, facilitation, 

and other collaborative problem solving processes to assist 

parties in resolving disputes. 

 

The Public and Private Rights Board provides a dispute 

resolution process in relation to The Expropriation Procedure 

Act. The Public and Private Rights Board has the authority to 

review matters relating to the expropriation of land or the 

intention to acquire land by expropriating authorities in an 

effort to help the parties reach mutually acceptable solutions. 

Landowners may request the board to review either or both of 

the following: firstly the root situation or the design of a public 

improvement, and then secondly the amount of compensation 

offered for the expropriated land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the similar roles of the board and the 

dispute resolution office, the appointment of Glen Gardner as 

the member of the board is entirely appropriate. 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7217 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that John Glen 

Gardner be appointed as a member of the Public and 

Private Rights Board effective April 15th, 2011, for a term 

of five years pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation 

Procedure Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved: 

 

That a humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that John Glen 

Gardner be appointed as a member of the Public and 

Private Rights Board effective April 15th, 2011, for a term 

of five years pursuant to section 6 of The Expropriation 

Procedure Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 169 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 169 — The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 

afternoon to make some comments about Bill No. 169, An Act 

to amend The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment Act effectively moves a part of 

the department that has been standing on its own for a number 

of years into the supervision of the Financial Services 

Commission. And I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we 

take a bit of a look at what this particular part of the Ministry of 

Justice is before we pass this Bill. 

 

In many governments, in Canada and the United States, there 

are specific ministers or secretaries in charge of consumer 

protection. And, Mr. Speaker, what this particular Bill does is 

further suppress or put down or eliminate the profile of 

consumer protection for the individuals of our community. 

 

And I think all of us should be watching this pretty closely 

because, as we know when we are working in our constituency 

offices, often the issues that arise are issues of the poor or 

weak, weaker consumer dealing with a larger organization that 

has somehow caused them difficulty. Now that can involve 

things like purchases of appliances or dealing with salespeople 

in various situations where there isn’t necessarily a balance 

between the individuals who are involved. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to be careful when we’re looking at this to 

make sure that we’re not doing something here which will in 

any way diminish that. 

 

Now one of the national ministerial groups, groups of ministers 

that would get together, was the ministers of consumer affairs. 

And I know that this group didn’t always have a high profile, 

but they were working on some very important issues. And they 

continued to work on those issues, whether it was full 

disclosure of the cost of buying things where interest rates were 

hidden in prices or where there wasn’t full disclosure of what 

the terms of some long-term membership in a health club or 

other organization, or what some of the terms that might be in a 

purchase agreement, which was actually a lease, or some hybrid 

of a purchase agreement in a lease. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these issues that are being dealt with here are 

important, and we need to understand what it is that we’re 

doing. And so, Mr. Speaker, if we go right to the legislation 

itself, I think it’s worth going through and looking at which 

particular pieces of legislation are being transferred from an 

independent department within the Ministry of Justice into the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission. Later, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll talk a bit about some of that organizational 

structure, but at this point, I want to outline what things are 

being moved. And I think we can get a strong clue about that if 

we look at section 2 which . . . Or I guess it’s section 3 of the 

amended legislation which effectively amends section 2 by 

adding sub (a.1), which is a definition of consumer protection 

legislation. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So the first item in that list is The Auctioneers Act. Now 

anybody who’s grown up in Saskatchewan knows that there are 

lots of very careful rules around auctions, whether it’s 

household goods or farm machinery or farm land. And all of 

those rules are important because people have rights when 

they’re making bids and also when they’re selling items using 

auctioneers. So this is an area of the law that’s going to be now 

defined as consumer protection legislation to be administered 

by the Financial Services Commission. 

 

And I think what we should also remind ourselves is that the 

Financial Services Commission now has the job of 

administering a number of things: credit unions, mortgage 

brokers, pension plan administration, investing and dealing 

with pension funds, selling and providing insurance, advising 

with respect to securities, lending money, dealing with and 

purchasing mortgages on property on land, security interests in 

personal property and accounts receivable, buying and selling 

accounts receivable, and any other similar activity designated in 

the regulations. So, Mr. Speaker, those are all very important 

and big jobs. In fact any one of them could, I think, consume 

the whole operation of a financial services commission. 

 

And then you go and look and see what the existing pieces of 

legislation that are dealt with by this Financial Services 



7218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

Commission. They’re The Co-operatives Act, The Credit Union 

Act, 1985, The Credit Union Act, 1998, The Mortgage 

Brokerages and Mortgage Administrators Act, The New 

Generation Co-operatives Act, The Pension Benefits Act, The 

Saskatchewan Insurance Act, The Securities Act, The Trust and 

Loan Corporations Act, and other related Acts as far as 

financial services are concerned. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re moving all of these other pieces of 

legislation, which are very important to individuals in our 

community, into an area which has been traditionally dealing 

with the credit unions, the insurance companies, the mortgage 

brokers, and all of these rather large institutions. And if you 

notice, Mr. Speaker, often the consumer issues relate to 

complaints about these other groups. So now we’re going to 

have them all in the same place. And I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, 

whether this makes sense.  

 

But let’s go through some of the other areas here and find out or 

at least come to some conclusions about whether we should be 

doing this. So the first one I mentioned was The Auctioneer’s 

Act. Everybody understands that one. 

 

The next one, Mr. Speaker, is The Cemeteries Act. And so 

people will wonder, well why would The Cemeteries Act be 

here? Well, Mr. Speaker, many times people will buy a plot in a 

cemetery and hopefully won’t use it for 60 or 70 years. And so 

the issue becomes, is that consumer who’s purchased a lot 

protected over the long term? Also there are issues around 

purchasing of cemetery plots on time. And those are the kinds 

of things that are dealt with by the consumer protection section 

of this new Financial Services Commission that would be in 

place after this legislation has been passed. 

 

Third area, Mr. Speaker, is The Charitable Fund-raising 

Businesses Act. And, Mr. Speaker, this is an area where there 

are continual issues about educating people to make sure 

they’re following the rules correctly, but also in dealing with 

both the scrupulous and careful businesses that are involved 

with fundraising but also those that do take advantage of both 

organizations, charitable organizations, and of individuals. So, 

Mr. Speaker, this would be under this new legislation. 

 

The next area is The Collection Agents Act. And this is an Act 

which has in it licensing provisions for collection agents, but it 

also deals with these skip tracers and others that we often see 

programs on television about, who often live right on the edge 

of the rules. And so, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have the same group 

that are managing our credit unions and insurance companies 

also running around looking for skip tracers and others who 

might be causing troubles. I’m not sure if that’s the right spot 

for them or not. 

 

The next one is The Consumer and Commercial Affairs Act. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of provisions in this kind 

of legislation which relate to appropriate business activity and 

protection of consumers. And so it fits right into the heart of 

some of the work that’s to be done here, also The Consumer 

Protection Act, which has further protections for consumers. 

 

Another Act that’s here is The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will have the same group of people that are 

working with the credit unions and mortgage brokers, and 

wanting to maintain good, solid relationships with those senior 

executives and boards of those institutions, who are also there 

to administer this Act, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, and 

protect individuals and small companies around the actual cost 

of credit. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is another area 

where there may be some real challenges in having both the 

consumers and the credit unions and banks and mortgage 

brokers that are involved understanding this dual role of this 

new commission. 

 

The next piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is The Credit 

Reporting Act. And as we all know, The Credit Reporting Act 

relates to the rules around how much information can a 

financial institution or business obtain about you to effectively 

decide whether or not you’re a credit risk or not. And these 

types of legislation have been passed to protect individuals, to 

protect people who don’t have a lot of power in our society. 

And so these Acts will be administered by the same people who 

are working and making the rules for the lenders. That seems a 

little bit of an interesting challenge here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another piece of legislation that’s being dealt with here is The 

Direct Sellers Act. And The Direct Sellers Act is the Act that 

sets the rules for the people who come around to your house 

and sell appliances or sell encyclopedias or other things. There 

are some very clear rules about cooling-off periods and things 

like that, but we also know that many times those sales 

contracts are in turn wrapped up and sold to larger financial 

institutions. So we will have the person who’s protecting the 

individuals who might get caught in one of these kind of 

situations, also the ones who would be writing the rules for 

some of the other bankers. 

 

Another area here, Mr. Speaker, is The Film and Video 

Classification Act, and we know that this is a long-standing 

challenge, to appropriately identify those types of, forms of 

entertainment that need to have specific warnings on them for 

consumers. So this will be in this same task. 

 

Another area is The Funeral and Cremation Services Act. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago when I was the minister of 

Justice, we looked very carefully at this whole area of funerals 

and cremation services to update the legislation to make sure 

that it was both positive for the profession, the funeral directors, 

and the people involved with that, but also that it made 

everything clear to individuals who are having to make some 

major financial decisions often at a time of grief. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this type of legislation is legislation that can be 

somewhat challenging to get it appropriate so that it does 

provide protections for individuals. 

 

Another piece of legislation that’s defined as consumer 

protection legislation under this new Act is The Motor Dealers 

Act, and this sets out the rules that apply to motor dealers and 

how they treat individuals, and to make sure that the rules are 

there to protect the purchasers of motor vehicles. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as we know, given the price of many motor vehicles 

today, there’s a large banking element in purchasing of vehicles 

and so once again you’ll have the person or the group that is 

regulating the financial institutions that are lending the money, 

also the one that’s set up to protect the person who may need 

some help in dealing with the motor dealer. So there are some, 

on the face of them, difficulties that arise with this particular 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7219 

piece of legislation. 

 

Another Act that’s included in this as consumer protection 

legislation is The Sale of Goods Act. And once again The Sale 

of Goods Act sets out those rules that protect a consumer if 

there’s some problem with the item that’s been purchased, and 

then the remedies that are available for that person. And so 

there again it’s a protection of the individual. 

 

And then the other one that’s specifically listed here is The 

Ticket Sales Act. And we know that has to deal with the broader 

issue of scalping of tickets and some of the rules as it relates to 

that. So one of the, so the question we have here is we have a 

whole number of specific pieces of legislation that have been 

passed to protect primarily individuals who are in an unequal 

power relationship with a larger vendor or service provider. 

And all of those pieces of legislation are now going to be 

transferred unto the responsibility of the regulator of the large 

financial institutions, the large insurance companies, large 

mortgage brokers. And so there are some fundamental 

questions about how this is going to be done. 

 

And once again I’ll return to the fact that in many jurisdictions 

this type of a role is held in a completely different department 

or ministry than all of the regulation of financial institutions. 

And so we need to ask that fundamental question: who is going 

to be making sure that the little person is being protected? 

Because if we look at most of these pieces of legislation, they 

have been brought forward in this legislature because a person 

has suffered damage or has been treated poorly, and the goal 

was to somehow balance the playing field and make sure there 

was protection for the consumer. So, Mr. Speaker, we have this 

type of legislation which involves the transfer of these services 

to the Financial Services Commission. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at the existing legislation and 

looks at the definition of financial services regulator, what 

you’ll see is that the financial services regulator under that 

legislation has taken over the role of a number of traditional 

roles throughout the system that we’ve developed in 

Saskatchewan. So the financial services regulator is the 

registrar of credit unions. The financial services regulator is the 

superintendent of insurance. The financial services regulator is 

the superintendent of pensions. The financial services regulator 

is the Saskatchewan superintendent of financial institutions. 

And so what will be added in this particular legislation is that 

this person will now be the superintendent of a whole number 

of different areas. 

 

And so when you look at section 2, the amendment, the second 

part (a.2), it talks about the consumer protection regulator. And 

so the consumer protection regulator, in juxtaposition to the 

financial services regulator, will mean these things: 

 

(i) the registrar designated pursuant to The Auctioneers 

Act; 

 

(ii) the registrar appointed pursuant to The Cemeteries Act, 

1999; 

 

(iii) the registrar of charities appointed pursuant to The 

Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act; 

 

(iv) the registrar designated pursuant to The Collection 

Agents Act; 

 

(v) the director appointed pursuant to The Consumer 

Protection Act; 

 

(vi) the registrar appointed pursuant to The Credit 

Reporting Act; 

 

(vii) the registrar appointed pursuant to The Direct Sellers 

Act; 

 

(viii) [consumer protection regulator means] the 

Saskatchewan Film Classification Board. 

 

So in other words, this consumer protection regulator becomes 

the Saskatchewan Film Classification Board. 

 

(ix) [the consumer protection regulator means] the appeal 

committee appointed pursuant to The Film and Video 

Classification Act; 

 

(x) [consumer protection regulator means] the 

Superintendent of Funeral and Cremation Services; 

 

(xi) [the consumer protection regulator means] the 

registrar designated pursuant to the motor . . . [vehicles] 

Act. 

 

And number xii goes to say any other person or commission 

who: 

 

(A) is given responsibilities or powers pursuant to 

consumer protection legislation; and 

 

(B) is designated in the regulations”. 

 

So we don’t know what that particularly entails but, Mr. 

Speaker, I have a suggestion. If we’re going to start doing these 

things, this is exactly the place where we should have, 

consumer protection regulator means the person who sets up or 

takes care of rent control, the person who is the rent controller. 

And so therefore you would have somebody with specific 

powers that relate to all of these different issues who would 

protect consumers on one of the largest expenditures in their 

lives, which is the amount of rent that they pay. Because if 

you’re going to go and look at all of these things and put them 

in this particular legislation, it seems like this would be a 

perfectly appropriate place to start talking about rent regulation 

as a way of protecting individuals. So there are some 

opportunities here to take some further steps that may assist. 

 

Now when one looks at this legislation, there’s another aspect 

to it as well. It’s not entirely clear how the legislation will be 

administered other than it seems to be clear that there is some 

ability to delegate some of the roles of the person who is head 

of the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission, the 

chairperson. It’s possible that that person can delegate to 

vice-chairpeople or members some of these particular powers. 

So we assume that that may happen but ultimately it will be the 

chairperson of the Saskatchewan Financial Services 



7220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

Commission that has all of these different roles. 

 

Now it’s not entirely clear, although in the speech from the 

minister yesterday he did talk about the budget and how there 

was going to be some realignment of some of the costs as it 

relates to this. And I think his specific words yesterday were 

that: 

 

. . . the programming and staff of the consumer protection 

branch . . . will be transferred to the SFSC. The fee 

revenues and related expenditures of the consumer 

protection branch will be handled through the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Fund. 

Reference to this transition is made at page 109 of the 

budget Estimates document. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the section at the back of the budget 

Estimates, there are a substantial number of reorganizations. 

Many of them, like this one, relate to transferring employees to 

self-financed groups based on fees. And when I have looked at 

the pieces of legislation that we’ve had this year as we move 

forward — and this one fits into it again and as we’ve been 

told, this is a budget piece of legislation — it appears that the 

Finance minister together with the Minister of Justice are 

attempting to meet this arbitrary goal that they set of 15 per 

cent reduction in the number of employees that are in the 

ministry. So it will be very interesting for us to see how these 

jobs are reported and whether they will continue to be reported 

in the ministry or if in fact they will somehow be reported as 

being funded out of this Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission. 

 

And what makes me especially curious about this, Mr. Speaker, 

is that they’ve had to make special provision in this legislation 

to deal with the funeral services and cremation area to make 

sure that the monies that go in that area are not in any way 

hooked together with some of the other money. At least that’s 

how I understand what’s being said here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have once again a move to reorganize 

work in a way that doesn’t truly reflect what is the government 

service involved. And we’ve seen it in the environment 

legislation which is The Natural Resources Amendment Act 

which we have before the legislature now, where they’re 

attempting to give the money . . . or use the monies available in 

the wildlife fund to actually pay for salaries as opposed to the 

capital projects that have traditionally been done there. 

 

What we need to understand, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to this 

legislation, is whether what is being done is once again being 

done to somehow make it difficult to follow where various jobs 

have gone so that, as it relates to particular ministries, the jobs 

are reduced and therefore have been able to meet some of the 

artificial goals that have been set by the Ministry of Finance. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be watching that particularly. 

 

And once again, when these things are done, it causes 

uncertainty for the employees, but more importantly, everything 

we’re talking about in this legislation relates to protection of the 

little guy, protection of the little person who is trying to deal 

with an imbalance of power. And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want 

to have these roles removed from the role of government by 

some means that satisfies some budgetary perspectives and 

leaves people out in the cold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of legislation sets out in its changes 

another area which raises some concerns, and it’s this same area 

about how funds are used. And traditionally the funds for 

consumer protection have all come directly from the General 

Revenue Fund and have been provided as part of the overall 

budget of the government. When we look at this particular 

legislation — and I guess it would be the section no. 10 — what 

we see is that section 23.5 is repealed and the following is 

substituted. And I think that what we need to understand is that 

changes are being made in how these funds are used and for 

what purposes they can be used. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the auditors will be watching 

this carefully, but often they don’t get a chance to review what 

happens until a couple years down the road. So we are 

concerned that there’s advance notice that we will be watching 

how this area is administered, how the funds are being used. 

 

And we want to make sure that there are sufficient funds 

available to provide all of the services that are required for the 

protection of consumers. Mr. Speaker, when one takes steps to 

lump together protection of consumers with the regulation of 

large institutions, it raises many questions about the ultimate 

motive of the government in doing this. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that all of us should be careful as this goes forward. I 

know that many of my colleagues will want to look at this 

legislation and also attempt to decipher what the government’s 

intentions are as it relates to the specific areas where consumers 

are being protected. And once again, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

we would all be pleased if the government would introduce rent 

control legislation, which is consumer protection legislation of 

the best kind, into this particular area if they’re not willing to do 

it in some of the other areas that they have in their 

responsibility, as it would show that they are listening to what 

concerns people have in the community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will leave it to some of my colleagues to 

make further comments on this legislation. At this point I will 

move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 169. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to enter some thoughts on Bill 167, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act that was 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7221 

introduced by the Sask Party government earlier this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to simply begin by simply stating that the 

Grain Car Corporation of Saskatchewan was set up in the 1970s 

with a purchase of 1,000 grain cars, a rolling stock of 1,000 

hopper bottom grain cars. We’ve all seen them if we’re paying 

any attention as we drive down the highways and the roads of 

Saskatchewan because they’ve got the grain sheaf, the 

Saskatchewan emblem painted proudly on these grain cars. And 

some of them have been subsequently repainted with an 

updated logo, and that looks pretty attractive. 

 

But in the mid ’70s, there was a transportation crisis, a crisis. 

I’ll call it that because the problem was that the railways had 

boxcars that were increasingly inefficient. And by that I mean 

you had to deliver them to the siding where the grain elevators 

where, and then the grain elevator staff had to go through a 

process that was called coopering the cars. And what it simply 

meant was you had to nail the doors shut either with wood, in 

the case of many of the boxcars, or there was a cardboard with 

metal bands strapped through it, and there was a process where 

you’d have to nail that. And then you’d nail a one-by-six on the 

top and hang a ladder and crawl out. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I’m not trying to give the complete description, but it was hard 

work. And it was a job that, on a couple of occasions or a few 

occasions, I had the pleasure of doing. My recollection is I got 

paid $1 a car the first time I did it, and I think it was double that 

the second time I did it. So it didn’t exactly enhance my 

retirement plan, but it helped for Friday night and Saturday 

night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the boxcars, once they got coopered and then 

there was a dirty, dusty process of loading them from the grain 

elevator. And it involved getting a spout in and tying it up, 

fastening it tight. And then of course the grain elevator agent 

would have to stick always his head — I don’t know of any 

women grain elevator agents, maybe there were some, but I’m 

not aware of them — but they always had to stick their head in 

and see how full it was, and then spin it around and do the other 

end of the boxcar. It was a dirty, dusty job, and on some days it 

was incredibly hot as well. 

 

Then when the boxcar loading was done . . . The wheels of the 

boxcars didn’t have a bearing. They had a different system that 

required that it always be in oil, but they didn’t run as freely as 

the bearings on the new undercarriages of railcars. So it took 

more locomotive power to move the boxcars. It certainly took a 

lot more power to jack a full boxcar away from the elevator so 

that you could move the next car into place to load it. And this 

was almost always done one car at a time. 

 

And so you can appreciate the difficulty that elevator operators 

had in loading boxcars. You can appreciate with the harder 

rolling stock, the undercarriage of the boxcars, how that 

required more locomotive power, particularly through the 

mountains, if the grain was going west to the port of 

Vancouver. It just caused grief. 

 

And so in the ’70s, there was a move afoot to update that 

rolling stock and move into hopper-bottom cars, and that was 

certainly for easier loading from the grain elevators in 

Saskatchewan and across the Prairies. But it also had an added 

advantage at the terminal that they were incredibly, relatively 

easy to unload as opposed to the old machines that used to pick 

up a boxcar and they’d open the door and then it would tilt it 

both ways. And I think it had to go a couple of times each to 

make sure that the boxcars were completely empty. 

 

With the new hopper cars from the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation and from the Alberta grain car corporation and 

from the Canadian Wheat Board, with the inclusion of those 

cars into the railroad running stock, the turnaround at the ports 

was hugely faster, hugely faster. So that’s the way the Grain 

Car Corp was initially set up, was to try and help move 

Saskatchewan farm product, primarily wheat and grains, oil 

seeds to port, to terminals, so that it could be done at a lower 

cost — the transportation, that is — and a faster transportation. 

 

I know in those days the Port of Vancouver was constantly 

congested, Mr. Speaker, constantly congested. Well at the time 

I was working for a company then known as Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool and we used to get weekly reports of how long it 

took for what they called the turnaround of the grain cars, how 

long the turnaround took. And it just kept getting longer and 

longer and longer, and you’d just despaired because I knew 

from my farm background and I knew from the company I 

worked for that farmers needed the grain cars to get to 

terminals, to get unloaded, and get back to the grain elevators 

on the Prairies so that they could be loaded up again and just 

keep that cycle. 

 

If my memory serves me right, the cycle went from something 

like 8 spins a year to . . . it got up to nearly 16 spins a year. That 

is, a car would get loaded and unloaded an awful lot more often 

in the later years as the efficiencies were realized and they did 

some things with spotting of cars. And there were just various 

improvements over the years. 

 

But that’s the beginning of the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation. And it was an exciting corporation in the 1970s 

when it was set up. And everybody was convinced that it was 

part of the solution, that indeed farmers desperately wanted to 

see their product moved to port so that it could be shipped 

overseas so that they could get their money for the produce that 

they were selling. 

 

Now once it became fairly apparent that Saskatchewan was not 

in any . . . there was a lesser need, I think would be the way I 

would describe it, for Saskatchewan to purchase additional cars 

— you know, an additional 500 or 1,000 or, you know, 

significant number of grain cars in the rolling stock — once that 

determination was made, then for the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation the question became, well how do we manage? 

How is it that we should manage this fleet of 1,000 grain cars? 

So the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corp was set up. And 

ultimately it is today a Treasury Board Crown corporation that 

has one person in charge of it. And there’s some, I believe, 

some clerical support staff because the job of the Grain Car 

Corporation of Saskatchewan is simply to make sure that the 

appropriate lease payments are collected by the Grain Car 

Corporation from the railways. Every time they use a car, 

there’s a certain amount of rent, lease money that is due to the 

province. 



7222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

The Grain Car Corporation also is responsible for the 

maintenance of that rolling stock to make sure that when the 

undercarriage needs to be replaced, as has been the case in 

recent years, that they entered into contracts and in fact were 

able to replace that rolling stock in a timely fashion. By timely I 

mean before the bearings seized up, before the rail cars started 

causing derailments, before it became problematic. 

 

They also, as part of the rejuvenation, was a repainting of many 

of the railcars. And that was done, interestingly enough, just 

west of Regina at a plant called GE [General Electric] Rail. 

And I know a little bit about that operation as well, Mr. 

Speaker, because my son-in-law worked there for just about 

two years, certainly well over a year. And I can tell you that it 

was dirty, dirty work grinding the old paint off and the old rust 

off and taking the undercarriage off of these cars. 

 

But there was a steady workforce there, and the guys worked 

really hard and in not the greatest of conditions. But they 

worked really hard to see that the fleet was effectively 

maintained. And maintained it was, Mr. Speaker, with the 

exception of . . . There have been a few of the thousand grain 

cars that have been removed from service. After wrecks they 

weren’t, after derailments they simply weren’t, it wasn’t 

cost-effective to repair them. They weren’t salvageable to be 

put back on the rail tracks and utilized for their original 

purpose. So those would have been disposed of one way or 

another, and they’re no longer running on the railway tracks. 

 

But we have a very relatively easy operation right now to run 

the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. You see that the cars, 

the railcars are paid for as is appropriate, as is covered under 

the Act. You see that the maintenance is done as is appropriate, 

and there’s no rocket scientry to this. It’s not a case of a grain 

car needing an oil change every 5000 kilometres or anything 

nearly as absurd as that. They have very, very limited ongoing 

maintenance needs, and so it’s pretty easy to schedule. And 

they maintain the record of when a car was painted or when the 

undercarriage was replaced or when it came into service, and 

frankly they all came into service in the 1970s. But that’s where 

we’re at right now. 

 

And then we get to this Bill 167, the Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’ve got to tell you, I’m really nervous about this Act. And I’ve 

got to tell you why I’m nervous. 

 

I was one of three members on this side of the House that 

served in the Roy Romanow government when we took over 

from the Grant Devine Conservative government in 1991. And 

I remember all too well how difficult those times were. I 

remember there not being money, and there was reasons for 

there not being money, Mr. Speaker. And the Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation was part of the reason that we had no 

money — a small part relative to many other things but a part 

nonetheless. When I say a small part, it was a $36 million 

problem, $36 million the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 

cost us in 1991 because we had to write off a bad loan deal. 

 

By way of history on the Grain Car Corporation and how we 

got to that $36 million problem, I want to say that in 1991 we 

got elected and it was the most difficult time of my life to that 

point, because we didn’t have money. Literally we weren’t sure 

we could meet payroll. We literally did not know if we could 

meet payroll, and somehow or other managed to keep doing 

that. And I could tell you some of how that happened, but the 

fact is it did happen. 

 

And I can recall many times when we were cautioned not to 

simply speak of how bad things were in Saskatchewan because 

it would create a crisis of confidence. And we needed 

confidence. We needed people to know that we were going to 

work our way through that problem, and that in fact 

Saskatchewan would see good times again. And the rest of it is 

history. 

 

1991, Roy Romanow brought in a Donald Gass to do the Gass 

Commission, and he made a whole series of recommendations, 

Mr. Speaker, around finances and around how we should be 

more open and transparent than the previous government had 

been. And we respected that Gass Commission report. Part of 

the Gass Commission was a recommendation that a Financial 

Management Review Commission be set up. And I have in my 

hands a Financial Management Review Commission, a progress 

report dated November 10th, 1992. But I want to read just some 

excerpts of it by way of explaining the Grain Car Corporation 

and why I have some real concerns with Bill 167, the Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Act. 

 

[15:15] 

 

To the Financial Management Review Commission of 

November, the progress report November 10th, 1992, in its 

introduction it says: 

 

On November 19th, 1991 The Financial Management 

Review Commission was established. Prompted by the 

public’s desire to know the true financial position of the 

Province, the Commission opened the books, and on 

February 18th, 1992 issued its report. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, it is . . . I should just be clear. It is a, this 

progress report of November 10th, 1992 is certainly available 

through the Legislative Library. It was a publicly released 

report. It’s a 23-page report, and I do not propose to read the 23 

pages at all. I’m just trying to keep it germane by way of 

enough background so that we understand The Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation Act and the concerns that I have with it. 

But I have to do a little bit of explanation out of this report. 

 

On page 4, it talked about — in this progress report — it talked 

about the Crown Investment Corporation’s financial condition. 

And I want to quote two paragraphs with just three bullets in it. 

It’s less than half a page, page 4, of that report: 

 

At the end of 1991 CIC’s financial condition was 

extremely weak. It had an accumulated deficit of $584 

million, $875 million in non-recoverable investments and 

over $3 billion in debt. CIC had no prospect of earning a 

profit. For the Crown sector policy to be meaningfully 

administered, the Government had to restore CIC’s 

financial health. There were three components to CIC’s 

restructuring that occurred this spring: 

 

[Bulletin 1.1:] CIC’s accumulated deficit of $584 million 

was eliminated; 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7223 

[Bullet 2:] $875 million of CIC’s debt to the Consolidated 

Fund was converted to equity; and 

 

[Three] the Consolidated Fund will subsidize CIC’s 1992 

operations with a $39 million appropriation. 

 

With respect to the role of Crown corporations, the 

Commission’s report states, “public disclosure is the most 

important element in ensuring that governments remain 

accountable to their publics.” Through its actions to 

restructure CIC and restore its financial integrity, this 

Government is demonstrating its fundamental agreement 

with this position. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve just outlined a lot of debt. 

 

Now I get to the Grain Car Corporation because this is part of 

the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

report. And the Grain Car Corporation . . . Earlier in my speech, 

I said there was a $36 million problem in 1991-92 that we had 

to address, at a time when $36 million would have been 

welcome for any other purpose than simply writing off that 

debt. And recommendation on page . . . Pardon me. I see it’s 

appendix 3, but I want to get the page number. On page 3, 

recommendation 2-4, and this is even shorter than the previous 

quote: 

 

The Commission recommends that transactions involving 

loans, which can only be repaid through future budgetary 

appropriations by the Government, should be treated as 

expenditures rather than assets (i.e. loans receivable), in 

the Government’s financial statements. 

 

ACTIONS TAKEN 

 

The Government will implement this change for 1992-93. 

 

[Bullet 2] Loans that fell in this category at March 31, 

1992 were written off against the accumulated deficit and 

included the following: 

 

[Bullet 1] $713 million [Mr. Speaker, $713 million], 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

$182 million, Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

$36 million, Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation [$36 

million]. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out I was one of three on our side 

that were part of that Romanow government, 1991, that had to 

cut the frills and pay the bills. I was one of three that’s still 

standing in this legislature, that helped in my small way. I credit 

then Premier Romanow, a great and wise individual, and others. 

I credit a team effort. And many times in this legislature, I’ve 

stood up and I’ve credited Saskatchewan people who just dug 

in, knew that we had a problem, knew that we could work our 

way through it, and they did. 

 

But what we had in 1991-92, Mr. Speaker, was a Saskatchewan 

Grain Car Corporation that had been leveraged, and there were 

loans that turned out to be unrepayable. You could not charge 

enough lease or rent on the 1,000 Grain Car Corp. cars to pay 

for the loans. It’s like having a rental house and a house that 

should rent for — just for nice round figures, this is going to be 

a palace — we’ll say $1,000 a month. And then you borrow a 

half a million dollars against the house and think that the rent is 

going to somehow pay for the taxes and the upkeep and the 

interest charges on the house. 

 

And that’s what they did, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we 

inherited was a situation where the Grain Car Corporation had 

an unsustainable debt — as had Property Management 

Corporation, as had the General Revenue Fund, as had Crown 

Investments Corporation — more than $3 billion in debt, a 

prospect according to the Donald Gass, a prospect of earning 

money that year, zero, not possible, not possible without 

fantastically jacking up power and gas rates for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is why I have some concerns about Bill 

167, the Act to amend the Saskatchewan Grain Car 

Corporation. I don’t want to see, when the NDP get into power 

again in Saskatchewan — and we will — I don’t want to see us, 

I don’t want to see us inherit debt from the Sask Party that we 

had to clean up previously. I just will do everything in my 

power, Mr. Speaker, to see that it does not happen. 

 

I’m trying to provide a bit of background. There are darn few of 

us that lived through it, and I don’t want to start involving 

individual MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] other 

than to say, Mr. Speaker, that three of us on this side did live 

through it. Three of us on this side did live through it. The hon. 

member for Saskatoon Nutana, myself, and the Leader of the 

Opposition was there in cabinet in 1991. He certainly saw this 

firsthand. He certainly saw the mess. 

 

And to have a Grain Car Corporation that is just a turnkey 

operation . . . I don’t mean to denigrate it. It’s a nice little 

operation. They’ve got close to 1,000 railcars. In my memory, 

it’s four that are written off, but that would be the minimum 

that are written off because of derailments and the cars were not 

salvageable. I suspect, I mean if anything, the number is greater 

than that, but it’s a very tiny per cent all these years later of the 

thousand Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation cars that have 

been derailed and written off because they couldn’t be put back 

on the tracks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a relatively good operation. It provides a 

service for, I argue, Saskatchewan producers — grain, oil seed 

— Saskatchewan commodity producers. It provides a service, 

and it helps get Saskatchewan product that needs to hit export 

markets to the ports, in the case of grains and oil seeds, to the 

terminals. That’s what the Grain Car Corporation is good at. 

 

And with a very small support staff — one person in charge and 

a bit of financial support, I’ll describe it that way — they just 

have to make sure that the lease rent is collected and paid, and 

that’s a fairly straightforward operation because they’re dealing 

with so few payors if I can describe it that way. 

 

It’s not like they’re dealing with every individual farmer and 

saying oh you know you used that car to haul your canola or 

your wheat or your barley or your — you know, whatever — 

your beans. They don’t say we used your car, so you owe us 

$10.28 or whatever the lease payment is. They don’t do that. 

The lease payments are paid in lump sums by the railways as 

they use the cars, not as the cars are sitting but as they’re used. 



7224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a simple operation. It’s an operation that more 

than pays the salary of the people that are charged with 

operating it. But it’s not an operation that lends itself to us 

again leveraging these cars. 

 

I mean, how many times do we want Saskatchewan taxpayers 

to buy these 1,000 grain cars? We’ll have the Sask Party — by 

this legislation, Bill 167 — with the ability to enter into 

agreement with individuals to help them buy our cars, the cars 

that Saskatchewan taxpayers already own. And then we can 

enter into agreements with individuals so that we can help them 

buy the cars that we’ve already bought, we Saskatchewan 

taxpayers have already bought. Imagine that. Taxpayers get to 

buy the grain cars. Then we get to help somebody else buy the 

grain cars with our money. And at the end of the day, they have 

the grain cars, and we’ve paid for the cars twice. What kind of 

an operation is that? 

 

And worse yet, when New Democrats again form government 

at some point in the future . . . I’m not predicting when. That’s 

not the purpose of this speech. Campaigns will take place. 

Voters will have their opportunities. But how is it that when 

that happens, Mr. Speaker, that we get tagged with again a 

situation of mounting debt? 

 

We’ve already got . . . The member for Rosemont has, I think, 

everyday this session — if there’s been an exception I don’t 

recall it — every single day presenting petitions about the 

growing indebtedness of the Crowns. And that’s where the debt 

is growing. The General Revenue Fund debt is going down. 

The Crown fund, the Crown corporations’ debt going up at a 

faster rate, Mr. Speaker, than the GRF [General Revenue Fund] 

debt is going down. 

 

And this is a Treasury Board Crown. The Grain Car 

Corporation is a Treasury Board Crown. I see the pattern 

re-emerging. I see it re-emerging, and I’m not liking what I’m 

seeing. I don’t think that my constituents in Regina Coronation 

Park want to have to buy grain cars a second time, a third time. 

I mean how many times do we have to write off Tory bad debt? 

How many times, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[15:30] 

 

And the only thing I can think to say at this particular moment 

is Bill 167 . . . you read the Bill as proposed. You read the 

explanatory notes as proposed. You read the old Bill. This is 

allowing for the borrowing of money against it, and it’s 

allowing to provide means to transfer, sell, or otherwise dispose 

of rolling stock, plant, and equipment. It allows many of the 

same things that it allowed before, but there is an important 

change in that it now allows for the financing and funding of 

the sale of assets to individuals that was not there in the 

previous Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And further, if we pass Bill 167, what it does is gives some 

additional ability for a handful of — very few — government 

MLAs that sit on Treasury Board to say this is what we’re 

going to do and then it’s done, does not come back here until 

well after the fact, well after the fact. We can raise it in question 

period, or the Sask Party can raise it in question period if they 

were in opposition, after the fact. But it should not be, we 

shouldn’t be contemplating this, Mr. Speaker. 

What we have is 1,000 grain cars. If the government wants to 

sell 1,000 of the Sask Grain Car Corporation cars to whomever, 

they should have the courage to stand in the legislature and say 

we want to sell them, you know, and make their reason, make it 

their argument for how it is better for Saskatchewan farmers, 

better for Saskatchewan taxpayers, better for the Saskatchewan 

treasury, better for . . . Or they can stand here and say, we’re 

going to do it. Why? Because we can. That’s acceptable too. 

Then they’re at least facing the scrutiny of the opposition and 

the public have an opportunity to at least be meaningfully 

apprised in a meaningful time of the events that are happening, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we have here is a Bill that will allow a very few 

government MLAs . . . No opposition MLAs sit on Treasury 

Board, Mr. Speaker, not one of us, not one of us. And that’s by 

design. That’s the way government works. Treasury Board has 

a specific function. And I’m arguing that specific function is 

not to unilaterally dictate the policy on when we can own or not 

own railcars, when we can help individuals buy the railcars that 

we already own, when we can finance at whatever terms 

Treasury Board direct, at whatever terms this can be done. 

 

So who are the friends that are going to wind up owning the 

grain cars? You know, I say facetiously, I’d like to be on that 

list. I’d like to own 1,000 grain cars that just turn a nice, tidy 

little return every year — and if you’ll finance the sale of it to 

me, all the better. It seems to me my risk is the sum of zero. 

And at the end of the day, I’ll just keep cashing the cheques that 

come my way. And at the end of a longer term, I’ll own the cars 

outright, and then I’ll probably sell them back to the 

government. You know, and I mean it’s just . . . I get frustrated 

at the number of times that the taxpayers are expected to buy 

things and then to finance the sale of it and then to buy it back 

when it gets into trouble, all for the greater good. 

 

Government has an obligation to say we don’t want the grain 

cars. We think it’s inappropriate that government is in the grain 

car business. And if that’s how they feel, then say so. You 

know, we can have a philosophical debate. We can have a 

debate around the practicalities of it, Mr. Speaker. But I think 

it’s incumbent on the government to have the courage to say 

what it is they want to do with Saskatchewan’s Grain Car 

Corporation in an upfront manner, not in an underhanded way 

that Bill 167 allows. 

 

It is wrong on every count that this Grain Car Corporation can 

be set up — set up by a government that should know better, set 

up for failure, set up to repeat the lesson they should have 

learned when they were in government last time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the Premier was a senior aid to Grant Devine, he should 

have learned something. He said, I’m sure I heard him say, that 

he’d learned something. I’m sure I heard him say in the media 

that he’d learned something of his time in that government 

when he was a chief of staff, Mr. Speaker. I’m positive that he 

said I learned some lessons of that time. I learned some lesson 

of that time. Well all he learned was to be a little sneakier in 

this instance, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 167. 

 

The things that this does, the $36 million we had to write off at 

a time in Saskatchewan’s history when . . . there was no time in 

our history that we could less afford to have to write off $36 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7225 

million than in 1991. And that’s what we did with the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. We wrote off $36 

million, wrote it off as a bad loan, bad deal by Grant Devine, 

bad deal, bad deal. And who got left picking up the pieces? The 

people of the province, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, it took not one term and not two terms, 

but we were well into our third term by the time we had a little 

bit of breathing room. And I say with the benefit of hindsight, 

we loosened the purse strings too late. 

 

Actually the Romanow government was like Saskatchewan 

farmers of 25 years ago. We were a product of the depression 

like the farmers of 25 years ago were a product of the 

Depression of the 1930s. The Romanow government in many 

ways was a product of the ’82 to ’91 Conservative, Grant 

Devine Conservative government and the legacy that was left 

for us to clean up. And so we did not ever want to go there 

again. 

 

That’s why I’ve spent the time I have dealing with Bill 167, the 

Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. In a time of revenue that 

exceeds $10 billion this year . . . the provincial treasury is 

getting more than $10 billion in revenue, and here I am stuck on 

$36 million. It seems minute, Mr. Speaker. Thirty-six million 

dollars seems minute, but I absolutely guarantee that $36 

million would do an awful lot more than a million and a half 

that the government put into housing, into public housing. 

Thirty-six million dollars would build an awful lot of houses. 

Thirty-six million dollars can be used many, many, many ways 

and all of them better ways than simply paying off bad Tory 

debt. 

 

Every one of the $36 million you could, you know, you could 

throw it out of a car window and it’d be better than simply 

writing off bad Tory debt. Thirty-six million dollars that we had 

to write off in 1991-92, Mr. Speaker, and I desperately do not 

want it to happen again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your patience with me. I know it may 

even seem that I’ve tried to find new ways to say the same 

thing. And actually — actually, I am guilty of it. But I am 

guilty of trying to find new ways to express it because I care so 

deeply. I care so deeply that we not repeat the historical 

mistakes that have been made in the past. Any, any operation 

that does not learn from its history is doomed to repeat those 

very mistakes. 

 

And I’m trying in my own way, as best I can to say, please 

don’t repeat those mistakes. Please don’t refinance the 

Saskatchewan rail car corporation. Please don’t help by 

financing the purchase of the grain cars to an individual or what 

have you, that this legislation allows. Don’t have taxpayers 

finance the sale of their own asset and at the same time run up 

the debt. Don’t do that. Don’t do that. We own the rail cars. 

We’re collecting the lease payments. It’s a nice little operation; 

it’s helping out farmers. It is not hurting. In fact, I could argue 

it’s helping the Saskatchewan treasury in a very small way, but 

a good way. It’s helping in a very small but good way. And it’s 

not costing us $36 million. 

 

If this legislation goes through, we run the risk of again, at 

some point again having a huge debt. So, Mr. Speaker, actually 

on this one, I’m going to urge that the government, you don’t 

have to withdraw the Bill, but you do control . . . You just don’t 

have to call it up again. You control the agenda. Just don’t 

bring it forward. Let it die on the order paper, and you won’t 

get any complaints from this side. Just let this die and . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 

from the heckling, I think my entry fell on deaf ears, and I’m 

feeling bad about that. But I’ve said my piece, and thank 

goodness for our democracy that allows for that. 

 

Thank goodness we have an opportunity to be opposed to bad 

legislation. Thank goodness we have the opportunity to speak 

up on behalf of our constituents and the people of 

Saskatchewan, pointing out the pitfalls of this and potential 

pitfalls of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I have colleagues that have other 

things to say on the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Bill 

167, so at this time I move to adjourn debate on Bill 167. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 167. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 168 — The 

Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 

Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 

to weigh in on debate here today specific to Bill No. 168, an 

Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

I have just gone through this Bill and done a little bit of 

research on it and certainly gone back and recognize the 

statements that were made by the minister, Mr. Speaker. And 

the purpose of this Bill is simply to clean up a mistake of the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. It is a housekeeping Bill 

at that, to clean up for the mistake that was made to not have 

this done in fact many years prior. 

 

What’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that this stems from contract 

negotiations and contract settlement from a few years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, in October of 2007, and that we see the legislation 

here before us here today to clean up the mistake. In fact this 

should have been in by way of legislation at that point of time, 

in the first term of this government. Now that was overlooked, 

and that’s not the point I’m trying to make. Certainly this cleans 

up an error of this government, but what’s interesting is that we 

now have this Bill before us to clean up a mistake of legislation 

that was never provided for three and a half years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, by this government. And in fact the contract for which 

this responds to is actually expired at this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker. So certainly slow to respond and to get this in place, 



7226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

but sadly, Mr. Speaker, the circumstance is that the contract for 

which this is a direct response from is actually expired. 

 

And that relates to the teachers’ contract, Mr. Speaker, and 

teachers have been without contract for the better part of this 

past year, Mr. Speaker. Bargaining not in great . . . The Sask 

Party government not bargaining in good faith with teachers, 

Mr. Speaker, and have delayed those negotiations. So it’s sad 

that we are here today speaking about a Bill that cleans up 

legislation that should have been put in place three and a half 

years ago instead of having the discussion about a fair contract 

that should be provided to the fine educators of this province. 

And this really speaks to the slow response and inaction of this 

government and the failures of this government as it relates to 

education, a Sask Party government that has put education on 

the back burner, Mr. Speaker, evidenced here today in fixing 

legislation that should have been done three and a half years 

ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Sadly what we’re not speaking about here today is a remedy 

and a response as it relates to adequate and sustainable funding 

that ensures educational excellence in the province of 

Saskatchewan because that promise has been broken by the 

Sask party. And in fact they’ve now punted the entire funding 

model and those resources that enable our professionals and 

enable our education sector and empower our communities and 

our students, Mr. Speaker, until after the next election — a 

massive, fumbled process by this government and something 

that has consequences for education both now and well into the 

future. 

 

So instead of talking about what the new funding model is and 

watching and being a proud day to institute that model and 

enable and empower educators and students across this 

province, we’re speaking about doing housekeeping from an era 

that should have been taken care of three and half years ago on 

a contract that’s expired now, Mr. Speaker, almost a year. 

 

And it’s a sad circumstance that this . . . of the disparities 

between settlements, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to contracts. 

Because this is about a contract, Mr. Speaker, and the 

disparities that one sector can receive a settlement that far 

exceeds what other sectors are receiving. And we see that here 

in the treatment of educators this past year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see it with health care professionals across this province as 

well, where individuals and professionals that are vital to the 

well-being of our province are in fact being offered less than 

the cost of inflation, Mr. Speaker, can’t keep up with the quality 

of life and expenses that they’re incurring, where other sectors 

get massive increases, Mr. Speaker, in comparison to what 

teachers have been offered or what health care workers have 

been offered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s a sad day that we are discussing and a disappointing day 

that we’re talking about legislation that relates to an error from 

a contract that was negotiated more than three years ago, more 

than four years ago, Mr. Speaker, settled in October 2007 

instead of addressing the needs of today, that being the need for 

adequate and sustainable funding in our education sector, Mr. 

Speaker — that’s a broken promise of this government — or 

the contract that our teachers are deserving, Mr. Speaker, a fair 

contract that provides for them the quality of life and the 

respect and dignity that their profession should be treated with, 

Mr. Speaker. Teachers are vital to the well-being of this 

province as is education, and teachers are vital to education and 

the role it plays within this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as we look at other aspects here, it’s disappointing that we 

don’t have, don’t have this discussion around educational 

assistants and the support systems required for our diverse 

needs within our school systems to make sure that we provide 

an enriching education for all learners, Mr. Speaker, regardless 

of their abilities, Mr. Speaker, and their backgrounds and the 

circumstances they come into the school system with, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we’ve seen under this government is not only the broken 

promise as it relates to funding education adequately and not 

bargaining in good faith with teachers, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

seen both of those things. We’ve also seen a massive reduction 

of the number of individuals that serve as educational assistants 

in this province, Mr. Speaker, EAs [educational assistants]. And 

by a direct mandate that was provided from this Education 

minister, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party, we’ve seen that 

string play out and seen many, many supports that are vital to 

classrooms, that are vital to students, that are vital to parents, 

that are vital to communities, Mr. Speaker, being removed from 

those classrooms. 

 

So it’s clear to say, Mr. Speaker, that education’s been placed 

on the back burner by this government, and that doesn’t serve 

Saskatchewan well. And it’s clear to say that when we are at the 

end of a term of this government and they’re cleaning up a 

mistake that was missed three and a half years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, instead of addressing the priorities of today by way of 

that adequate and sustainable funding model, by way of 

ensuring the needs of students are supported in our classrooms, 

Mr. Speaker, or supporting our teachers, our educators with a 

fair contract that they so deserve, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

disappointing to recognize that we’re spending time today 

talking about a Bill that’s of a housekeeping nature, cleaning up 

mistakes from the early period of this government. 

 

It’s rather astounding that it’s taken the entire term for them to 

come to the realization that this mistake has occurred, but like I 

say, it’s representative of a government that hasn’t had 

education as a . . . not even a top priority, hasn’t had it as a 

priority, Mr. Speaker. And certainly I know many of the 

members on both sides of the Assembly will have chatted with 

parents and with teachers that have heard about and that have 

recognized the consequences of that, Mr. Speaker. We see 

through this Bill a little bit of the cleanup of those mistakes. We 

certainly have some more questions that we’ll have in 

committee, Mr. Speaker, and want to do a thorough 

consultation with the entire education sector. 

 

But again I just share that I’m disappointed that I’m up here 

today to be talking about a cleaning up of legislation from an 

error of three years ago, about a contract that’s expired, instead 

of talking about what we’re doing to empower and enable the 

education sector by way of adequate and sustainable funding — 

a promise broken by this government, Mr. Speaker — that 

we’re not talking about how we’re providing all students, Mr. 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7227 

Speaker, and all classrooms and all parents and all students with 

the supports they need, when we see a massive reduction of 

educational assistance and supports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m disappointed we’re not talking about a fair and 

adequate contract that respects the role of teachers within our 

province and the important role they play, not only in the needs 

of today in the lives of those children, but the important role 

they play from an economic and social perspective to ensure the 

bright future that Saskatchewan people expect, Mr. Speaker, 

and to ensure the bright future that Saskatchewan students 

should be able to count on. 

 

So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have further 

comments with respect to this Bill that cleans up a mistake from 

three years ago. I will have questions certainly for committee, 

or we will, I should say. As the opposition New Democrats, 

we’ll continue our consultations on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And 

at this point in time I would simply like to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 168, An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation 

and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 168, The Teachers 

Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to wade into the debate and discussion about Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act. 

 

When introducing this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister 

talked a little bit about the natural resources or the natural 

environment here in Saskatchewan, our beautiful and pristine 

lakes, rivers, our native prairies that . . . And we couldn’t agree 

more here on this side of the House that our natural 

environment is unsurpassed in Canada and perhaps in the 

world. We have very unique and ranging diversity in our 

ecosystems here in the province. And I know for myself, I’ve 

had the privilege of travelling throughout North America, the 

United States and Mexico and in Europe and across Canada, 

and you know, I still say my favourite place is Saskatchewan. I 

have yet to see . . . I’ve seen some wonderful and amazing 

places, but there is no place like Saskatchewan. 

 

Myself, I’ve got a fondness for northern Saskatchewan. I grew 

up camping in northern Saskatchewan, travelling. I have a 

particular love, myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the boreal 

forest. I can talk a little bit . . . My own experience canoeing on 

the William River which flows into Lake Athabasca, that 

actually if I had to pick any moment in my life travelling 

throughout Saskatchewan or the world, that this particular 

experience on the William River, canoeing the William River 

with a group of about eight others into Lake Athabasca, I’ve 

never had an experience like that in my life. And I’m sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that I never will. There’s nothing quite like seeing the 

boreal forest on one side of the river and sand dunes on the 

other stretching as far as the eye can see. It really is quite 

amazing. 

 

The environment, our natural environment — and the minister 

had said this as well — it’s key to sustaining our economic 

growth and, I’d say, enhancing our citizens’ prosperity. We 

think about the natural environment and tourism opportunities, 

cultural opportunities, our natural heritage. Heritage just isn’t 

about the built environment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s about our 

languages, our culture, but it’s about our natural heritage. 

 

We in fact have two heritage rivers. Well we have one heritage 

river here in Saskatchewan and . . . The Clearwater River has 

been designated as a heritage river, and we’ve got the Churchill 

River which is nominated as a heritage river. So the 

environment is absolutely critical to, I think, our culture of life. 

Maintaining and sustaining a healthy environment is absolutely 

critical to our quality of life and our way of life here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One key piece of Bill 155, The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, is around . . . It’s very much about housekeeping, but there 

is one piece of this Act which is around the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund. The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, was established in the mid-1970s when 

hunters, anglers, and trappers asked the government to put a 

duty, basically, on hunting and fishing licences. And this 

money would be used, this revenue would be used to purchase, 

improve wildlife habitat. So currently right now, there’s about 

30 per cent of the revenue generated from the sale of hunting, 

angling, and trapping licences directed into the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund. So this amounts to approximately 

$3.5 million annually. 

 

I just want to quote actually something that the Minister of 

Environment said in his remarks: 

 

The Fish and Wildlife Development Fund provides the 

money necessary to secure habitat to support a diversity of 

fish and wildlife species. To date the fund has acquired, 

through purchase or donation, approximately 212,000 

acres of land for wildlife habitat purposes, with many acres 

under joint title with various partners. Aside from the 

obvious benefits to hunters, anglers, and outdoor 

enthusiasts, it is important to note that much of this land 

continues to be made available to local communities for 

haying and grazing. 

 

I think it’s a bit ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this time a 

year ago we were also talking about protected land, that was 

about 3 million acres that fell under the protection of the 

wildlife protection Act and through The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act was removed from protection. So it’s interesting 

how the minister touts the importance of the wildlife, the Fish 



7228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

and Wildlife Development Fund and the role it’s played in 

protecting hundreds of thousands of acres of land, and this is a 

government who less than a year ago was taking protected land 

out of that umbrella of protection. So I think that that’s a bit 

ironic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So just to tell you a little bit about what this Act is going to do 

with respect to the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. So 

amendments to section 20 in the Act will broaden the scope of 

activities that are covered under the fund to include restoration 

of fish or game populations or habitat necessary for fish or 

game species. So the amendments to the section also include 

the addition of two new subsections to allow the fund and the 

advisory council to contract services that are deemed necessary 

for the management of the fund. These services would include 

contracting expertise from groups such as Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, or 

Ducks Unlimited Canada for management of land within the 

fund. 

 

I think though, Mr. Speaker, I have to apologize. I’m getting a 

little bit ahead of myself. Right now I have to say that the 

Ministry of Environment directs the use of the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund. Right now this is currently what 

takes place. So the Ministry of Environment directs the use of 

the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund funding under the 

advisement of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

steering committee. And the steering committee is made up of 

representatives from Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

Saskatchewan Bowhunters Association, the Saskatchewan fly 

fishers association, Nature Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 

Trappers Association, and the Saskatchewan Outfitters 

Association — all organizations that have done some really 

great work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And what happens with these amendments? They’re moving 

from, what is going on is they’re moving from a committee, a 

steering committee and evolving into an advisory, the 

development of the Fish and Wildlife Development Advisory 

Council. So what these amendments are doing is turning the 

previous steering committee into a more entrenched body of the 

Wildlife Development Advisory Council, which is just fine, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

As I said, the organizations that have sat on the steering 

committee have done stellar work. In fact last year when The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was before us, when the 

government had claimed that they’d consulted with respect to 

that Act, many of these organizations came forward and said, 

this isn’t the case, that there wasn’t real and meaningful 

consultation. These organizations have done great work and are 

committed to the biodiversity of this province in protecting our 

environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what is going to happen now is it’s a more . . . this council 

has a more defined role, shall we say. And I’d like to just 

outline what the duties of the council are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So wildlife . . . the natural amendment Act, Bill No. 155, 

section 20.2 outlines that: 

 

(1) The council shall advise the minister on: 

(a) the allocations and expenditures of the fund, [the 

acquisition of expenditures of the fund]; 

 

(b) the acquisition of lands pursuant to clause 20(6)(a); 

 

(c) the administration of lands acquired pursuant to clause 

20(6)(a); 

 

(d) the disposition of lands acquired pursuant to clause 

20(6)(a); 

 

(e) proposed changes to this Act or the regulations with 

respect to the fund; 

 

(f) the annual budget and the financial statement of the 

fund; and 

 

(g) any other matter determined by the minister. 

 

So the council, this new council has a more entrenched role. 

And I think a concern that the opposition has is not with the 

organizations that would be participating on this council, but 

one concern that we’d just like to flag is the minister had 

mentioned it’s about $3.5 million that comes, is allotted into 

this fund annually. And so the scope of this previous steering 

committee being moved into a council has been broadened. It’s 

not just about the acquisition of land any more, but possibly 

about projects. And so when you are entrenching a body, it’s 

important to make sure that that body has the necessary funds to 

be able to do its work well. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I trust that if this fund will need more 

than the 3.5 million, or approximately 30 per cent that’s 

currently allocated to it, that if the demand is there for, and the 

need and the demand is there for increased funding, that the 

government will step up to the plate and ensure that this council 

has what it needs to protect the biodiversity of our province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I just want to point out again that it is a bit rich coming from 

a government that a year ago was in fact taking land out of 

protection. Sensitive lands now are able to be up for sale 

without having to come before the Legislative Assembly. They 

can be sold at the minister’s behest basically. So that is a 

concern. But so it’s funny, a bit, as I said, ironic that the 

minister touts the importance of the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund this year, but this time last year, this 

government was taking protected lands out of protection. 

 

And again I had flagged for you, flagged for you one of our 

concerns is making sure that the development fund continues to 

have the money it needs not just to secure and put under 

protection land but to ensure that if they’re embarking upon any 

projects, that they have what they need to be able to do the 

necessary work. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that I have many colleagues 

who would also like to wade into the debate on Bill 155, The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act. And with that, I would like 

to adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 155, The 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7229 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 164 — The 

Police Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This time 

I would like to rise and make a few comments on Bill No. 164, 

An Act to amend The Police Act, 1990. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, overall what we find before us here, the 

minister put forward in his remarks generally amendments here 

proposed to make some procedural changes, improve fairness, 

efficiency, transparency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, among the 

Saskatchewan municipal police service, police boards, and 

again outlining some of the role of independent observers to 

internal investigations of the police. 

 

Further there were discussions here about what we would term 

whistle-blower protection, of officers raising concerns about 

police chiefs, and some training for police municipal boards, 

police commissioners, mandatory training. And then there 

would be also some amendments to provide municipalities with 

flexibility in choosing their own police provider. This again 

was a very . . . This is one of the things I will be returning to, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But one of the concerns that or one of the 

points that jumped out at me as I read through the changes in 

the Act, wondering who had requested this and why we were 

moving on this area. There didn’t seem to be any notes in the 

explanatory notes in terms of why we were doing this, who was 

consulted. But I will get back to that in a bit. 

 

The other things that, just as a general thing in The Police Act, 

was the things that were in it were that the government would, 

the ministry would pick up some of the costs to the tune of 

between 55,000 to 85,000 of costs of investigations and other 

mediation services that would be provided. 

 

Overall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some things that we see on the 

face of it that are changes that are simply where there is 

transparency or providing more fairness. The problem of course 

comes in as we have had many experiences with the other side 

in terms of the consultation process is not being followed, to in 

terms of they not exactly have . . . the Sask Party government 

there does not exactly have the market cornered on the issue of 

transparency or consultation. Many different examples of how 

they have failed to do that in the past. 

 

But again here there was an indication that the police chiefs, 

there was consultations with the Saskatchewan association of 

police chiefs, the Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers, 

the Police Commission, municipal boards of police 

commissions, and Ministry of Justice, and the Attorney 

General, that this was talked about. And also that a lot of the 

investigations would be shared between the Attorney General’s 

office, Minister of Justice, and the minister in charge of, 

responsible for Corrections and Public Safety. So a lot of the 

reports would be going back through both these departments or 

ministries. 

 

Again as I mentioned, the many changes, in terms of a couple 

changes I wanted to look at and to . . . One was the section 

55(1); 55(1) was an added section which talks about: 

 

“. . . an allegation of misconduct by a chief is made to the 

board by a member, any disclosure of information for the 

purposes of that allegation does not constitute an offence 

for which the member may be disciplined pursuant to this 

Act or the regulations, unless [Mr. Deputy Speaker] it is 

determined that the allegation is: 

 

(a) trivial, frivolous or vexatious; or 

 

(b) unfounded and made in bad faith”. 

 

Again on the face of it, an addition such as this offering 

protection to members of the police service when they find that 

they have to bring things forward . . . interesting enough that it 

comes under this minister who not exactly a frontier breaker in 

the area of legislation around whistle-blowers, in fact has, to his 

credit, probably a sad tale of getting himself into the magazine 

The Parliamentarian being censured for going after, in fact, 

going after somebody in the corrections department for 

speaking up. But we will see how section 55(1), in terms of the 

members being able to bring forward concerns about police 

chiefs, works. 

 

So this is again one of those times when things are being said, 

talking about this transparency where they speak of being not 

only transparent but making things fair and equitable. You 

would see why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why we might have some 

doubts as to their sincerity regarding the changes being made 

here. 

 

But as I mentioned before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over all, the 

changes that were where they were simply saying where the 

police complaints commission . . . And the role that they play 

where they’re outlining what the police complaints commission 

will do any time that this process can be made fair, transparent, 

equal, so there’s a sense of justice being done. Things like that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can most certainly look at favourably 

from this side of the House and say that these are amendments 

that we could potentially agree with. 

 

Again going through a number of the changes outlining times 

within which investigations would be done, in which 

appointments of investigators by the Attorney General could be 

done — these are all important things that are in this Act. The 

entire area of mediation, the recognition that perhaps some 

issues are best to be mediated and then providing coverage, 

providing money for this work to move forward is again 

something that I think that we could look forward to in this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, again just to return to the financial 

implications, to outline, to foresee, to look ahead and say that 

there are some financial implications on this and that we should 



7230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

be taking that and not putting that cost to municipalities, as they 

have done in other times, downloading onto rural municipalities 

or the cities, which is sort of what this government has come to 

do. Even in times of when we have resources and we have 

money in the coffers, we find that what is happening is that 

they’re downloading — again, and for what is very surprising 

for the rural municipalities — and almost downloading where 

they were having to assess extra levies for services, be they in 

health care or whether they’re services where some of the urban 

centres are starting up their own rental programs, having to do 

that before the government moves. 

 

And a lot of times this has been, Mr. Deputy Speaker, three and 

a half years before this . . . People have been waiting for 

services out in . . . whether it be rural communities or the cities, 

and now the government has moved. But in this case where 

they are providing some financial assistance — be it only 

55,000, $85,000 to provide an orderly process — I think that’s 

important recognition of things that would make the police and 

the functioning of the police service better. And I would return 

to some of the details of how that’s being done, and as I 

mentioned previously, whether that be in the mediation services 

or whether that be hiring the investigators or, again as I said, 

mediation. 

 

Now the issue regarding . . . which is in fact the first, one of the 

first things that are in Bill 164, the changes, and that is simply 

the subsection 23(1) is repealed and the following is substituted 

in here and that is, if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, read that into 

the record: 

 

“(1) Subject to the approval of Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, a municipality having a population greater than 

the minimum size prescribed in the regulations [and that is 

20,000 in the regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker] may enter 

into an agreement with the Government of Canada to 

employ and pay for a sufficient number of members to the 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police to provide policing 

services within the municipality.” 

 

Now I wondered, when I read that, what in fact was up, why 

they were attempting to . . . because we are talking in terms of 

municipalities in that range. We’re talking about Saskatoon, 

Regina, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and some of these places in 

terms of having service and RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] because they have their local police service. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So what brought this on? There was no discussion about what 

consultations, why this was needed. Are the cities considering 

to move to the RCMP? Or perhaps in there is there a huge stick 

here to beat to the police services, those that have associations 

in times of bargaining, to say that, you know, maybe we could 

move to the RCMP and have a contract with the RCMP as 

opposed to that. I don’t know. I would hope that that isn’t the 

case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But I wonder if in fact that is not being used as a bit of a threat 

since there is nothing here to indicate, even to the police 

services in Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would no 

longer be needed. I don’t know what else to . . . Why the need 

for this change? What would be the need to say to the police 

service in Saskatoon, we no longer will be in need of the police 

service? We will be looking at the contracting with the RCMP 

because we’ve now been allowed to do that in legislation. 

 

And what would the process be? What would the process be to 

do that and the ramifications? And if we look at that through a 

lens of how serious the implications of that would be, to even 

contemplate that, when we look at the number of people that we 

would be impacting . . . Would you run a dual service? Would 

you? What would you do? Run a dual service of RCMP and 

local police? Or simply that you would lay off people because 

you would say, well we will contract with the RCMP, and 

that’s what we will do under the circumstances. 

 

I know that back in the mid-’90s the police service in Saskatoon 

were into some difficult negotiations. There was talk at that 

time of a strike, and fortunately they were able to reach a 

collective agreement with the city. But I’m not certain what this 

might mean to the police throughout there. I can only imagine. 

There’s the couple members in the government side who have 

backgrounds as police officers. More than two, I would say 

three. And what input they had on this and what the thinking 

was to put in this Bill the right that the RCMP should take over 

. . . I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems quite clear in the 

changes, and again here there’s been nothing from the minister 

to say otherwise. It says: 

 

“Subject to the approval of Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, a municipality having a population greater than 

the minimum size prescribed in the regulations may enter 

into an agreement with the Government of Canada to 

employ and pay for a sufficient number of members of the 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police to provide policing 

services within the municipality.” 

 

Now I wonder what the police associations in places like Prince 

Albert, places like Saskatoon, places like Regina had to say 

about that. Maybe the members on the government side who are 

from there had input on this, and maybe they have some insight, 

and maybe we should hear from them on what it was that they 

. . . the thinking was here to do that. What was that that said that 

we should make this change? What brought this about? 

 

Again here we have again the largest . . . I think it was raised 

the other day that perhaps it was in Surrey where it has the 

largest place where the population of 450 to 500,000 people 

have a contract with the RCMP. Perhaps there was some 

discussion with the folks in Surrey as to why that was better. 

And are we looking at that in the province? Are we looking at 

that and saying this is the way we want to go? 

 

I’m not sure that those police officers in, as I was talking about, 

the negotiations in the mid-’90s and how they were going at 

that time would have appreciated had they been told that we 

could get the RCMP coming in. Again it’s a very sensitive kind 

of area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say that one force is better than 

the other. We have a hugely proud tradition of the police force 

across this province, and they do important work. They’re 

providing an important service to us all in the province. And to 

now say to them that we now have legislation that the cities 

here could look at employing the RCMP . . . 

 

Now I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Maybe the 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7231 

government has some insight into this that they haven’t shared 

with us. Perhaps they have their reasons for doing that. There is 

nothing here in the notes before me, other than the Bill, to say 

that this was necessary. 

 

They do talk about . . . The minister spoke about meeting with 

all these different groups, though we will be checking on this 

because we have to check on them. A number of ministers over 

there have said time and again that they have consulted, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I don’t want to get into the whole list; it’s a 

long list. I think there’s more important things to talk about 

than the work that the members across do or don’t do. And 

there’s many examples of the times that there were no 

consultations on issues that were brought before into the House. 

And that’s unfortunate, but those are the kinds of concerns then 

when we have something without the explanation where they 

bring in a change, an amendment, and they say, we will be 

looking at bringing in the RCMP. 

 

Now there’s nothing wrong with the RCMP, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I mean, the RCMP have a proud history not only in 

this province but across this great nation of ours of providing 

the policing services that we require. And in through this Act, 

which is a very . . . What the amendments were to deal with 

were where things have gone off the rails, where there has been 

a need for termination, where there has been need for some 

discipline, that this brings forward the procedures in here and 

outlined procedures that are transparent and that move the 

issues forward on the policing in our province and across 

Canada. And the minister has brought forward ways of dealing 

with . . . [inaudible] . . . mediation, covering costs, removing 

some of that burden off the municipality, and saying we’re 

willing to take that on to deal with these issues. These are 

important things. 

 

But that wasn’t enough in this piece, in this amendment, they 

had to have an add-on, and that add-on is of some consequence. 

It is not simply something that was talked about in the others to 

make it transparent, to have investigations, to make the process 

more efficient. This in fact is a fairly, I dare say, maybe perhaps 

even dramatic is the right word, the right thing to say, change in 

the way that things will operate in this province. 

 

How will we look at this? What will we do? Well again as I 

come back and I ask, they said they spoke to the police 

services, the associations, I would hope the members of the 

services. And I would want to see if there was an actual brief or 

a presentation or a meeting or some notes from this that said to 

the minister that this was fine. 

 

No, the minister did talk about, in his opening remarks, he did 

talk about that this was as a result of compromise, I believe he 

said. This was a result of meeting with these groups and that 

this is how they came to this. 

 

These amendments to The Police Act serve to strengthen the 

support this government provides to police services. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, again here, just to see what the minister was 

saying in the spring of 2007, he goes on to say they at that time 

invited members of the police community to consult on 

amendments to The Police Act. In consultations, it looked like 

he said they were very . . . over a period of time here, over three 

years, concluding last spring. And again they listed all the 

people that they had talked to. 

 

Now there was a consultation and these were either supported, 

he said, by the stakeholders or considered a reasonable 

compromise. Now again here, these, what somebody 

considered a reasonable compromise . . . Were there some 

issues here that were raised to the minister that . . . At the point 

in time, I’m not certain who considered that. Is he saying that 

these people, if we were to go back to them and say that, did 

you consider this a reasonable compromise, would they say, yes 

we thought that that was a compromise? 

 

It was a very wide-ranging statement in his opening remarks on 

this issue. It’s an important issue that we should all be 

concerned about because it’s an issue around policing, policing 

in this province. And then again it’s just one statement, nothing 

more. 

 

There’s the section that starts out but all . . . After going 

through and outlining areas about making points about that it 

would be faster and ensuring cost isn’t a factor in constraining 

police services. So that again, making the point that the money 

would be there, that this was all designed to make the process 

flow in terms of the disciplinary actions that these changes were 

contemplating, and that this would all flow, a disciplinary 

process. This would move efficiently and we would not have 

problems. 

 

And after going through that, spending a great deal of time and 

balancing public openness, transparency, the public right to 

know which the member, the government, Sask Party 

government, seems to be struggling with. Those members seem 

to be struggling with openness, having contracts made, made 

open. They want to know under these circumstances what it is 

that is going on. And I think if that in fact does occur as a result 

of this, then that is, those are the kinds of things that you will 

find on this side that we will be agreeing to. We proposed more 

that we will be putting forward Bills on transparency because 

we see that day after day in terms of questioning of members 

opposite, whether it be at the Carlton Trail fiasco, the 

Enterprise memberships. If you could imagine that, some of the 

answers today in question period, Mr. Deputy Speaker, around 

that issue’s simply, I would say, shameful that those are the 

kinds of things that we can’t get any answers to. 

 

But again on the transparency and on this Bill, we see there are 

attempts being made and put in writing. And again there was a 

very . . . the point that there would be mandatory training for 

municipal boards and police commissioners to take mandatory 

training, to have an insight to understand the balance that’s 

required, to understand the openness that’s required. And I dare 

say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that sometimes when it’s required 

that there would be some concern over privacy, and those kind 

of things would be addressed. 

 

So this is in those kind of things is what we see and laid out 

well perhaps, well thought out. But then probably after, on the 

about the fourth paragraph there, one sentence, one sentence on 

“The amendments will also provide municipalities with [the] 

flexibility in choosing their own police service provider.” Now 

there was just one sentence which probably is one of the more 

major issues in these amendments and that takes one sentence 

in the minister’s remarks. No other explanation. No other points 



7232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

being made in terms of that this is somewhere Saskatchewan 

wants to go; this is somewhere where some of the 

municipalities with their own police services want to go. Was 

this something that the minister had just got up one morning 

and thought of that he should do? What was the thinking around 

this? No other further explanation. 

 

Perhaps just like in the proposed amendments. I mean they talk 

about what the proposed amendments would do, why they 

would have them, that they would be largely procedural, that 

they improve fairness, efficiency, transparency among the 

Saskatchewan municipal police services, and then what they 

apply to. But nowhere here does it say under where . . . It just 

says “The amendments will also provide municipalities with 

flexibility in choosing their own police service provider.” 

Nothing about that, as the minister said, on the other changes, 

whether they would be, this is more efficient, there was some 

difficulties here. 

 

[16:30] 

 

It sends all the wrong messages to the police service that we 

have. And it would be interesting I guess to see what the 

councils were saying, that they needed better police service, or 

where the service was good. This was to be used in certain 

instances. There’s nothing here to explain what the change is 

about, and yet the minister spent all the rest of this time talking 

about all the other things that are in this Bill and why the 

amendments were necessary for this. 

 

The minister went on and talked about the appointment an 

investigation observer, the cost that went into a very detailed 

thing of discipline and oversight costs related to these processes 

absorbed by the Corrections and Public Safety. Even estimated, 

even estimated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the costs — and so there 

had to have been some thought put to this — the costs of this 

being that this would be approximately 55 to $85,000, that this 

would be 55 to $85,000. So the minister would have looked at 

the cost implications relating to the disciplinary hearings and 

thought like we should probably pay for this. We should pay for 

this and deal with these things so that people would feel that 

this was not something else that was put on the municipalities 

that they would have to deal with. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by reading through the minister’s 

remarks I think you can see that there was thought put into this. 

But it is interesting again that in the one part, and I would say a 

new direction in the Bill, where there is a new direction, we 

have no explanation of what it is that is going on. And again 

here it’s just one sentence: “The amendments will also provide 

municipalities with flexibility in choosing their own police 

service provider.” 

 

And that’s all we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I stand here 

before you trying to in some way to think through what it is that 

was intended. Was there some difficulties? Had the 

municipalities raised this? What was the driving force? 

 

Again because in the rest of the Bill the changes that were 

made. And they talked about in: 

 

(2) Subsections 38(4) to (6) are repealed and the 

following substituted [in the beginning of the Bill]: 

“(4) A person who receives a public complaint from a 

member of the public . . . 

 

(a) record the complaint in the form prescribed in the 

regulations; 

 

(b) transmit the complaint to the PCC . . . 

 

and again then, the procedures for providing the complainant 

with what the complaints that were made and so forth, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And on the second section, again in terms of creating this sort 

of transparency or efficiency or having something, a 

disciplinary process that flows through, it’s quite clear what the 

police complaints commission should be doing when they go 

into details of what the police complaints commission should 

do once they receive a complaint, the procedures that’ll be 

followed, looking at those things, some thoughts, and perhaps 

some suggestion from these stakeholders in terms of how they 

make this process more efficient, more transparent. 

 

Have the public . . . The public needs to have the confidence, 

the public needs to . . . It’s more than perception. As we say, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, perception is everything. Justice must not 

only be seen to be done but it must be done, and so this says all 

the right things about transparency, about a procedure that it 

would be efficient, that everybody would have some faith in. 

 

At the end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it allows for a 

satisfactory settlement for people who find themselves in this 

situation, for police services in this province who have to, who 

we have to have confidence in, who we have to support, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and move forward. 

 

Now again as well where in particularly section 39 was 

amended, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were talks about the 

police complaints commission establish and maintain records of 

public complaints received, inform and advise and assist 

complainants, advise and assist chiefs and boards, the hearing 

officer, the commission with respect to handling the public 

complaints. Monitor the handling of public complaints and 

ensure the public complaints are handled in a manner consistent 

with the public interest, inspecting annually or at those times 

directed by the minister records, operations, system 

administration for the handling of public complaints. 

 

Again, everything here designed to give the public that feeling 

of confidence that we’re passing through, that the complaints 

are being dealt with effectively, that the complaints are being 

dealt with in a manner that we all can understand, that we all 

can feel good about. 

 

Again, mediation. The very, very . . . The changes here, the 

mediation that they would be paid for. Mediation services 

would be paid for regarding a member of the police service. 

“The board responsible for that police service shall pay [and 

then] subject to clause (b) . . .” which then says the minister 

shall pay the mediator and the remuneration determined by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the points here are interesting and 

fall under the general comments made by the minister in this 



April 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7233 

case. So, Mr. Speaker, these and the comments by the minister 

make complete sense. What in fact, what doesn’t and what 

causes the concern is again when we get to the point of 

amendments, we’ll also provide municipalities with the 

flexibility in choosing their own police service provider. We 

wonder why the minister did not make other comments on this, 

make other comments so as to make it clear what the thinking 

was here.  

 

We can only assume some of the thinking and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, sometimes that is not the best, Mr. Speaker, not the 

best thing to do because we would like to, as here when there 

are complaints being processed, that they’re being processed 

based on facts, that they’re being processed based on factual 

things that come before the investigators that are hired, facts 

that come before the mediation, mediators that are hired in the 

mediation process. These are all very important issues. And 

those are the kinds of things that I would say that the police 

complaints commission, when they deal with that, they deal 

with it, and their actions, their actions give credibility to the 

entire process, to the entire disciplinary process. 

 

Again as we move through this, that section 55 was amended 

and the following subsection is added, subsection 55(1). Now 

this was again, Mr. Speaker, a very interesting section, and in 

particular because of the minister that put it forward. As I spoke 

previously, this was the same minister that made it into The 

Parliamentarian, made it into The Parliamentarian for his 

handling of a release of a dangerous offender and then the 

following actions that he took in trying to deal with this issue. 

And it was somewhat, well perhaps we would say, hopefully a 

learning experience for that minister. 

 

But again now we see where we have a section here which 

would be, I suppose, somewhat of a whistle-blower section. 

And if I could, Mr. Speaker, this is talking about: 

 

If [there’s] an allegation of misconduct by a chief [and I 

would think that that’s a police chief] is made to the 

board by a member, any disclosure of information for the 

purposes of that allegation does not constitute an offence 

for which the member may be disciplined pursuant to this 

Act or the regulations, unless it is determined the 

allegation is: 

 

trivial, frivolous or vexatious; or 

 

unfounded and made in bad faith. 

 

So this again, not only was there some confidence that people 

would have in the entire process, but they would have 

confidence in the police services across this province to bring 

forward complaints. 

 

And perhaps this is, it is oftentimes when you see legislation 

like this, and you wonder what is going on in the office of the 

ministry of the Advanced Education minister, when you see so 

clearly when the reports are made that these members across 

the way do not listen, do not listen to people, the public 

bringing forward complaints. They simply dismiss these 

complaints as being unimportant. And yet every once in a while 

we have a section like this section which talks about — 

basically a whistle-blower kind of section — which talks that 

people are protected. There’s a recognition that you would be 

protected if you brought forward something that was legitimate 

because you would . . . that it would be important for members 

to be able to bring forward issues and that there would be 

confidence that nothing . . . that there would be no 

repercussions, no repercussions for people. 

 

Unfortunately the minister that’s bringing this forward does not 

exactly have a stellar record on that issue. But hopefully that 

when we make laws and we pass laws, that these laws will even 

withstand ministers like that who perhaps . . . It makes you 

wonder whether in fact it was something that the minister put 

forward, or maybe it was somebody else that said that this was 

time to put this in because, coming from where it is, it’s hard to 

believe that now that . . . Or perhaps it’s like going to school, 

and you write 1,000 times on the board, I will not chew gum in 

class, or something. Perhaps this is one way of alerting that 

minister to say that this is an important issue and put it forward 

and defend this issue because it’s important for all of us. It’s 

important for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s important for the 

police services in this province. And that is what we should be 

looking at, and that is what we should be doing. 

 

So every once in a while, Mr. Speaker, we get this kind of 

legislation. We get this kind of amended clause where again it 

is a reasonable kind of a clause. And we could agree with it 

even though, even though as I said, it’s coming from a minister 

who does not have exactly a stellar record on proposing things 

that are fair, that are equal, or that people should be protected 

when they raise concerns because, as we know, that that 

member went after and asked for an address when somebody 

raised a concern and asked for a name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, following on that again, and I’ve mentioned 

previously issues of mediation, issues that we need to clearly 

again . . . or one of the points in the amendments that we could 

support is that another important part in this is that prior to a 

complaint and completion of investigation, that there might be 

times when this issue could be sent to mediation, and where 

mediation can be conducted respecting the allegation of 

misconduct by a chief, the minister shall pay again for a 

mediator in these kind of things. So overall, Mr. Speaker, again 

another section that we can see having great merit in the way it 

is laid out. 

 

So overall, Mr. Speaker, the issue here is important for people 

of the province, important as we move forward in this process, 

important to the people of this province to be able to have faith 

in their police service system in the province of Saskatchewan 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 60 here is repealed and the following is 

substituted, regarding where what the chief can do in terms of a 

police member who has been suspended or has rendered 

himself or herself unsuitable for police service by being found 

guilty of a Criminal Code or an Act of parliament or any Act, 

and then list out a number of ways for what police, individual 

officers may be terminated. 

 

[16:45] 

 

One of the things that, perhaps the question that I wish the 

minister had spent some time on in answering, and that is an 



7234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2011 

issue in the section 60 (2)(6) where there is some talk of: 

 

If a collective bargaining agreement provides a procedure 

for terminating the services of a member for reasons other 

than those provided in this . . . [agreement], that procedure 

shall be used for terminating the services of member for 

the reasons provided in the collective bargaining 

agreement. 

 

This to me was a question that we needed to deal with. And I 

was again wondering why, when we spoke of allowing the 

municipalities the flexibility to choose their own police service, 

what exactly we were up to here when we mention talking 

about collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I at this time know that there are more of my 

colleagues that wish to speak on this Bill and other Bills. And 

with that, I would be adjourning debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 164. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Carried. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn so members can attend the SLIP 

[Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program] event tonight. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly is adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:47.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7207 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7207 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7207 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7207 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7207 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7207 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7208 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7208 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7208 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7209 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7209 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7209 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Year of India in Canada 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7209 

 Emergency Telecommunicators Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7209 

 Little Penguins Child Care Centre Opens 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7210 

 Volleyball Team Wins Bronze Medal 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7210 

 Regina Anti-Poverty Benefit Concert 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7210 

 Restaurant Wins President’s Award 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7210 

 Helping Friends 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7211 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Contract Negotiations  

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7211 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7211 

 Gynecologic Oncologists 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7212 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7212 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7213 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7213 

 Reporting Political Donations 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7215 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7215 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment to the Public and Private Rights Board 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7216 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 169 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2011 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7217 

 Bill No. 167 — The Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7220 

 Bill No. 168 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7225 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7227 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7229 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


