




















































Hansard: March 09, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 28A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6589 

 March 9, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to do an 

extended invitation. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked for 

leave to do an extended invitation. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Leave’s been granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to you and through you 

to the Assembly, 12 of Saskatchewan’s nearly 220 volunteer 

crop reporters. These 12 crop reporters are recognized today by 

the Saskatchewan Ministry of Agriculture for their commitment 

and service to our agriculture industry. 

 

For 25, 30, and 35 years, these crop reporters have volunteered 

their personal time during the crop season. Every week for at 

least 30 weeks out of each of those years, these reporters have 

provided information about crop and forage development in 

their areas to the ministry to meet the weekly crop reporting 

deadlines. Mr. Speaker, this helps us provide a timely and 

accurate crop report to farmers, ranchers, and the general 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize these individuals for their dedication 

to the crop reporting service. I would ask the crop reporters and 

their spouses to stand as I announce their names. Twenty-five 

year recipients are Ed Bolton, RM [rural municipality] of The 

Gap No. 39 and his wife, Linda; Ken Aldous, RM of 

Willowdale No. 153 and his wife, Lee; Einar and Barbara 

Thompson, both crop reporters in the RM of McKillop No. 220; 

Leslie Sarauer of the RM of St. Peter No. 369 and his wife, 

Deborah; Rosaire Ouellette, RM of Spiritwood No. 496 and his 

wife, Helen; David Bettschen of the RM of Elcapo No. 154 and 

his wife, Linda; Lyle Ehrman of the RM of Happyland No. 231 

and his wife, Linda; Don Payak of the RM of Weyburn No. 67 

and his wife, Charlotte; and Ron Daviduk of the RM of Excel 

No. 71 and his wife, Nancy. 

 

Thirty-five-year recipients are Ron Oliver of the RM of 

Britannia No. 502 and his wife, Wanda; Mike Shawaga of the 

RM of Fish Creek No. 402 and his wife, Celphie. 

 

There are some crop reporters and spouses who were not able to 

attend today, Mr. Speaker, and they are 25-year award 

recipients Ken Johnson of the RM of Prairiedale No. 321 and 

his wife, Lorrene; and three recipients of 35-year awards. And 

they are: Thressa Whitfield and her son Darwin Whitfield, both 

of the RM of Oakdale No. 320; and William Bindig of the RM 

of Sasman No. 336 and his wife, Luba. 

 

And I ask, Mr. Speaker, all members to join with me 

recognizing these crop reporters who have volunteered their 

time and effort to our agriculture industry and thank them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege and 

pleasure to join with the Minister of Agriculture who has 

arranged to have the crop reporters here today. I did spend a 

minute with them in the hall earlier. And I just want to welcome 

them here today but most of all to thank you for all of the work 

that you have done and will be doing in reporting on the crops 

in the province because it’s very important work and used by 

many, many farmers and many institutions across the province. 

So thank you very much for your effort and also to that of your 

family. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated 

in your gallery, I wish to introduce through you to all members 

of this honourable Assembly Mr. Matt Morrison who is the 

chief executive officer of PNWER, Pacific NorthWest 

Economic Region. PNWER, which is a public-private 

partnership established in 1991 by statute, operates in the states 

of Alaska, Washington, Idaho, Montana, and Oregon, the 

Western Canadian provinces and territories of British 

Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, the Yukon, and Northwest 

Territories. 

 

Matt’s duties include coordinating all projects of PNWER, 

which include PNWER’s Center for Regional Disaster 

Resilience and the Legislative Energy Horizon Institute. As 

director of PNWER, he also communicates with the state and 

provincial legislatures of the member states and provinces. 

 

Matt lives in Seattle, where he and his wife Beth have four 

children. I ask all members to extend a warm welcome to Matt. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

noticed that behind the bar on this side of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, a former member I think known to many members of 

the House. Mr. Rick Swenson, the current leader of the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, has joined us this 

afternoon. So I’d like to introduce him to all members and 

welcome him to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I noticed up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a great 

friend to education in this province, specifically adult basic 

education: Mr. Jack Mitchell, who hails from Lumsden. Thank 

you so much. Please join with me in welcoming Mr. Mitchell to 

his Assembly. 

 



6590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The undersigned 

residents of the province wish to bring to the attention of the 

Assembly that the Saskatchewan Seniors Association has 

approximately 180 seniors centres throughout the province, the 

vast majority of them located in rural Saskatchewan. These 

centres provide much-needed recreation and social activities as 

well as important health clinics and workshops which 

contribute to an enhanced quality of life for many of the seniors 

who use them, and due to the skyrocketing costs of utilities, 

insurance, taxes, garbage disposal, and exterior maintenance, 

approximately one-quarter of these are in danger of closing. 

The closure of these centres will lead to the deteriorating 

mental and physical health of many seniors which will lead to 

additional stress on long-term care facilities and hospitals. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And these petitions are signed by over 40 people from St. 

Walburg, Paradise Hill, Spruce Lake, and Frenchman Butte. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 

tenants to protect them from unreasonable rent increases. And 

we know that too many Saskatchewan tenants are facing a 

dangerous combination of surging rents, and combined with 

low vacancy rates, provide for unaffordable living conditions in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that the majority of Canadians 

now live in provinces with rent control guidelines, including 

Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince 

Edward Island. 

 

I would like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to consider enacting some form of 

rent control with a view of protecting Saskatchewan 

renters from unreasonable rent increases. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

community of Hampton Village, and it’s regarding the need for 

a new school in Hampton Village: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about Bill 160 and the significant detrimental effects it may 

have on human rights law in the province. And I’ll read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And the petition today, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of 

Canora, Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions today on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the two 

years of deficit budgets, the two years of debt growth, and all 

despite the fact that we have all-time highs in revenues, Mr. 

Speaker. And of course this comes at a consequence to 

Saskatchewan people, this year growing our debt load by $400 

million, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask. 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6591 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Pharmacist Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are fortunate in 

Saskatchewan to have committed pharmacists who are 

dedicated to the people of this province. I am particularly proud 

to be standing today, given that my wife is the current president 

of the Pharmacists’ Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

Pharmacists are important members of the health care team and 

health professionals most knowledgeable about drugs and their 

effects. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize 

March 6 to 12 as Pharmacist Awareness Week. Saskatchewan 

pharmacists use this time to educate patients about the key roles 

pharmacists play in health care. This week also allows us to 

formally recognize the tremendous contributions that 

pharmacists make to the health of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the provincial government announced 

expanded prescribing authority for pharmacists. Effective this 

past Friday, March the 4th, this move allows Saskatchewan 

residents more efficient access to health care services and to 

their prescription medications. Amendments to the 

Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists bylaw now recognize the 

ability of pharmacists to improve health care delivery in this 

province, working in collaboration with doctors and other 

health care professionals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pharmacists are valued health care professionals 

in Saskatchewan, and we support them working to their full 

scope of practice. I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking 

our pharmacists for their ongoing commitment to high-quality 

health care and in wishing them the very best this week. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with my colleague 

from Saskatoon Northwest in recognizing Pharmacist 

Awareness Week this week and ask people, people across the 

province, we are encouraging them to visit their local pharmacy 

and talk to their pharmacist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pharmacists are clearly an integral part of our 

health system. Our pharmacists and their association symbolize 

professionalism, accountability, and stewardship while 

advocating for and advancing their profession. Mr. Speaker, 

pharmacists have a unique knowledge about drugs and their use 

that can enhance the care of patients on an everyday basis. In 

addition many pharmacists from across the province volunteer 

on committees to assist with the activities of the Pharmacists’ 

Association of Saskatchewan, including development of 

pharmacists’ service programming and remuneration. 

Pharmacists are available to help you manage your health and 

can do much more than simply fill your prescription. They are a 

very valuable component of our health system and can provide 

assistance from helping you manage your chronic illness like 

diabetes to giving advice on changing your lifestyle to prevent 

general illness. They are able to provide advice and counselling 

on adopting and maintaining a healthy lifestyle as well as give 

advice on safely taking multiple prescriptions. Many 

pharmacies have clinics to help people with chronic illnesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must continue to advocate for the full 

utilization of these professional men and women within our 

health system, and I ask all members to join me in honouring 

these health professionals this week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Supported Employment Month 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

inform members regarding the proclamation of March as 

Supported Employment Month in Saskatchewan. The 

proclamation reflects our government’s commitment to full 

citizenship for all Saskatchewan people. We continue to work 

with the community to address barriers to education and 

employment for our people, including providing 

disability-related support and service that help citizens to 

prepare for, obtain, and maintain employment. 

 

[13:45] 

 

As demand for workers continues to grow in Saskatchewan, 

utilizing and appreciating the knowledge and skills of people 

with disabilities is vitally important to our workforce. Activities 

during Supported Employment Month include luncheons hosted 

by local community-based organizations, a conference in 

Regina including awards to honour businesses for their 

leadership and commitment to hiring people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past two years we’ve seen a change in 

how people within and beyond our borders view Saskatchewan. 

Truly Saskatchewan is a place of opportunity and more people 

than ever are seeking at finding it right here. We proudly 

proclaim Supported Employment Month and continue our work 

to open the doors of opportunity to people with disabilities in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Café Recognized 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

StarPhoenix recently in its “52 reasons to love Saskatoon” 

series gave the nod to the Park Café, owned and operated by 

Patrick Hearn and Kent Rumpel. It notes its neon sign has 

become a beacon on 20th Street West, home for Friday lunches 

and a hangover cure for the 20-something crowd. Now the Park 

Café opened in 2005 and is arguably one of two or three hip 

breakfast joints in the city offering the type of experience 

second nature to brunch crowds in Toronto or Vancouver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with the paper when it says that: 



6592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

. . . what makes it one of the city’s most special locales is 

its diverse clientele that extends far past the hipster crowd 

and its location on the same street as soup kitchens and 

pawn shops, a neighbourhood that spent the last few years 

easing itself into a new paradigm, with boosters claiming, 

“it’s good in the hood . . .” 

 

But the decision to open on 20th came long ago before the 

neighbourhood began to change, as both Patrick and Kent have 

lived in Riversdale for the past 15 years. Kent says, if you put 

out good food, people will come back. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

agree. Even though some prefer the Sunday eggs Benedict 

special, my favourite continues to be the egg and pickerel. I ask 

all members to join me in congratulating the staff at the Park 

Café and Kent and Patrick for this special recognition and for 

believing in 20th. And I invite you all to stop by for coffee and 

pie. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

2011 Farm Family of the Year Award  

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Thursday I had the privilege to attend the farm appreciation 

celebration at the Days Inn Plaza in Estevan, which was filled 

to capacity. I was honoured to present the Gilbert Wallewein 

family with the 2011 Farm Family of the Year Award. 

 

Gilbert began his farming career in 1966. Prior to this, he 

worked with the PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration] and Husky Oil. Gilbert’s first farm, which he 

still farms today, consisted of four quarters of land which he 

operated as a mixed farm. He continues, along with his sons 

Kevin and Ken, to farm this along with a sizeable increase in 

crop land which now totals 30 quarters in size. Gilbert and 

Helen raised their family on the Viewfield Farm. In addition to 

their two sons that continue to farm, the couple raised four girls, 

all of whom went on to post-secondary education. 

 

Gilbert has always been very active in his community and has 

served as a councillor for the RM of Benson No. 35 for 34 

years. As a senior councillor, Gilbert is well-respected by staff, 

council and ratepayers. He is a true leader of this municipality 

and community. 

 

Gilbert is a true farmer in every aspect, and to him farming has 

never been an occupation but a way of life. Together, Helen and 

Gilbert have instilled the farming values of hard work and 

dedication to all of their children. These are the values that have 

made their operation so successful. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 

the government, I want to congratulate Gilbert and his family 

and wish them 40 more years of success. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Hospital at North Battleford, a 100-year-old facility that has 

served the mental health community since its inception in 

Saskatchewan, is strategically located on the banks of the 

beautiful North Saskatchewan River on some of the most 

pleasant and peaceful real estate in all of Saskatchewan. There 

couldn’t be a better location for a health facility designed for 

vulnerable people whose mental health requires them to attend 

or reside in an institutional setting. 

 

It’s time, Mr. Speaker, for the provincial government to do the 

right thing, to act on plans that are in place to support the 

mental health community, and to respect the residential and 

treatment needs of some of our most fragile and vulnerable 

citizens. 

 

It’s not helpful, Mr. Speaker, yesterday when responding to 

questions about the future of the facility, that the Minister of 

Health refers to The Battlefords location as being in, and I 

quote, “the back bushes of the province,” indicating his clear 

bias against the delivery of services in rural Saskatchewan. The 

country people, Mr. Speaker, the rural people of Saskatchewan 

— people who love the grasslands, the forest fringe, and the 

bush country of this great province — take offence to the 

minister’s declared bias. And we call upon the Minister of 

Health to apologize and immediately announce the necessary 

funding so that the Saskatchewan hospital at North Battleford 

can proceed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Resource Taxation 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is moving forward, but the NDP’s [New 

Democratic Party] job-killing resource tax would drag us back. 

It would kill billions of dollars in new investment and 

thousands of new jobs. There is a growing chorus of opposition 

to the NDP’s job-killing resource tax. We have already received 

two letters from mayors in the mining community in my 

constituency. 

 

The mayor of Humboldt says this, and I quote: 

 

We are very concerned about recent discussions regarding 

changes to the royalty agreements that are in place. The 

uncertainty these discussions create will have an adverse 

affect on the investment climate and consequently affect 

our ability to take advantage of the opportunities that the 

current growth of the potash industry is presenting to us. 

 

The mayor of Colonsay says, and I quote: 

 

Our community is seeing growth largely due to the potash 

industry, and we don’t want to lose residents and future 

prosperity because of issues between the potash 

companies and the provincial government. We want 

Saskatchewan to remain the place to be for all and don’t 

think raising royalties is a way to encourage this. 

 

There you have it, Mr. Speaker. The communities where the 

miners work and live are saying no to the NDP’s job-killing 

resource tax. Saskatchewan is moving forward and they do not 

want the NDP to drag us back. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6593 

Mental Health Facilities 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Health opened a window into what his mind really 

thinks about health care delivery in rural Saskatchewan. 

Yesterday the minister criticized the idea of building a new 

mental health facility in The Battlefords because, in his words, 

it’s in the back bushes of Saskatchewan. It was a pretty clear 

statement, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health harbours some 

very negative thoughts about health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

An apology is clearly not enough, but will he today 

acknowledge this bias that he has and apologize to the country 

people, the rural people of Saskatchewan, who love this 

province as grassland and bush country like nowhere else in the 

world? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, obviously that member took the statement completely 

out of context. I was referring, I was referring to their own 

member in an introduction where he was saying that mental 

health should no longer be hidden. And I couldn’t agree more, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s why I talked about the Les Dubé Centre, 

Irene and Les Dubé Centre, and how important that is. 

 

But I will take no advice again from that member opposite, 

after being the minister of Health and doing nothing for his own 

constituency and that mental health facility in North Battleford, 

Mr. Speaker. He should have got it done and he didn’t get it 

done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they did . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Come on, Don, tell the truth. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister may wind up his 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Member from Lakeview says, 

Minister, tell the truth. I will tell the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of NDP 

government closing 52 hospitals in this province including the 

Plains Hospital, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be a long day before they 

ever get back into power in Saskatchewan and especially in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The member, the 

minister opposite seems to forget what he said yesterday, so let 

me quote it back to him, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear: “For 

once, instead of a facility being built in the back bushes for 

mental health . . .” 

 

And since the only stand-alone mental health facilities ever 

built in Saskatchewan, outside of Saskatoon, were in North 

Battleford and Weyburn, I wonder what else the minister might 

have meant by his choice of words to describe his government’s 

lack of attention to the North Battleford project. If the minister 

thinks that two of Saskatchewan’s most wonderful cities — 

North Battleford and Weyburn — are back bushes in 

Saskatchewan, what does he think about the rest of rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, for far too long in this 

province, mental health had a stigma to it — stigma, Mr. 

Speaker, to it. It was hidden. People with mental illness were 

never part of society. They were hidden off, Mr. Speaker, in 

institutions. Over the last number of years and decades, the 

attitudes towards people suffering with mental illness has 

changed, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely it’s changed and for the best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why I referred to the Irene and Les Dubé 

Centre that is in the centre of Saskatoon — beautiful property, 

Mr. Speaker, with a very good view, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

needs to happen with mental health, Mr. Speaker. It needs to be 

in the forefront. It needs to no longer be hidden, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what this government is doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is just adding to the 

evidence that he wants to build a facility in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker, and the other evidence is pretty clear as well. 

 

If the minister does not have a bias against rural Saskatchewan, 

why can’t Big River and Spiritwood find a doctor? Why can’t 

Wawota keep their long-term care beds open? Why can’t 

Hafford open their long-term care beds? And why have 13 rural 

communities continually had their long-term care beds projects 

put on hold? Why can’t the minister tell rural municipalities he 

will fund 100 per cent of their care facilities when he has no 

trouble providing 100 per cent funding guarantee for a 

Saskatoon project? 

 

If he truly doesn’t believe these people live in the back bushes 

of Saskatchewan, then why did he let that pop out of his mouth, 

Mr. Speaker? And why aren’t these communities being 

responded to? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are so many 

inaccuracies in that question; I’m not sure where to start. But 

we’ll start with the fact about there are more physicians 

working today in Saskatchewan than ever before in this 

province and certainly ever before under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 13 new long-term care facilities that will 

be built in this province, Mr. Speaker, that have been ignored 

by the NDP for year after year after year. Mr. Speaker, some of 

the living standards were unsuitable. That’s why we’re moving. 

Not only are we moving forward with those facilities, Mr. 



6594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

Speaker, but we listened to what SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] had to say. They wanted an 80/20 

split, Mr. Speaker. Our government got it done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve read the SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] resolutions 

book, and it calls for 100 per cent funding, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

what the resolution was. 

 

Five, maybe six years ago, Mr. Speaker, the Prairie North 

Regional Health Authority took a giant step forward and told 

the provincial government at the time they were prepared to 

deliver mental health services at a new facility in North 

Battleford. This was a courageous and important decision at the 

time. Prior to that, there was always a concern that when the 

time came to formally replace the Saskatchewan Hospital, it 

would be moved to Saskatoon. 

 

Now the Minister of Health has indicated a bias towards the 

delivery of mental health services on expensive real estate on 

the banks of the South Saskatchewan River. He has re-opened 

the door to every fear that has existed in northwest 

Saskatchewan in the past. Can the minister confirm today that 

all this thinking about delivering mental health institutional 

services in any location other than The Battlefords is over and 

done with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, regional health 

authorities offer mental health services throughout this 

province, Mr. Speaker. All 12 health regions offer mental 

health in this province, Mr. Speaker. In North Battleford, it is 

the provincial hospital — has been, there used to be one in 

Weyburn; he’s correct — and now there has been one in North 

Battleford for over a hundred years. That facility is aging, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why our government has put in for the first 

time $450,000 to that health region that can begin the planning 

for a new facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve heard that member opposite talk about the fact that they 

committed dollars. I have checked very, very closely. Not one 

dollar moved from the General Revenue Fund to the Ministry 

of Health. Not one dollar moved from the Ministry of Health to 

the Prairie North Health Region to do anything on that facility, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve moved 450,000 to do the planning, Mr. 

Speaker. When the capital dollars are there, the planning is 

done, and it will get built. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

mental health community was here yesterday. The mental 

health community in the foyer talked about, prior to the election 

in 2007, the public meetings that were held in North Battleford 

to discuss the plans that the Prairie North Health Region had 

done under the New Democratic Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. They know these plans have been in place for some 

time. Mr. Speaker, they also expressed concern for the 

well-being of the truly fragile and vulnerable people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The North Battleford planning project began in earnest four and 

a half years ago. The minister has had three and a half years and 

new financial resources to make it happen. If he doesn’t have 

this urban bias — which he has not denied, Mr. Speaker — and 

if he doesn’t have this desire to see projects built on expensive 

real estate along the banks of the South Saskatchewan River, 

when is he going to actually announce adequate funding to get 

the much needed and desired North Battleford project under 

way? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have been in 

government for three and a half years. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

looked at long-term care facilities. We’ve looked at acute care 

facilities. And I’ve certainly had the opportunity to go through 

the hospital in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I will say is the reality of an aging infrastructure left after 

16 years of NDP government can never be fixed in three and a 

half years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re moving forward on 

it, and absolutely that facility is a priority. And we’re going to 

be moving on it, Mr. Speaker, when we have the capital dollars 

to do it. 

 

But I’ll take no advice. When he was the minister, he did very 

little. And when they have been in government for 16 years, 

they didn’t do a thing for that North Battleford hospital when it 

should have been replaced under their watch as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Issues in Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in Wawota 

at a community meeting of hundreds of people, the member 

from Cannington admitted again that the government has failed 

to properly fund the health regions in the last budget. He 

admitted that all the health regions received only half of what 

they asked for. I was there; I heard it. Mr. Speaker, today 

there’s a story on ER [emergency room] overcrowding, 

emergency room overcrowding at Regina hospitals and people 

lying on gurneys in hallways waiting for treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister see now that he was wrong to 

underfund the health regions? Has he learned from his mistake, 

and will he commit to adequately funding health regions in the 

upcoming budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the budget for health 

regions last year was tighter. We gave them some targets which 

they have done a very good job in meeting when it comes to 

premium time pay, extra pay. When it comes to sick leave, Mr. 

Speaker, health regions have done an excellent job. In fact I 

believe that most of them will be coming in at a balanced 

budget or a surplus, Mr. Speaker, and that is very good work 

done by the health regions. 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6595 

The health regions deliver service, Mr. Speaker — absolutely. 

And the issue around overcrowding, Mr. Speaker, is an issue 

that’s faced not only here in Saskatchewan but across the 

nation. It sure didn’t help that, under their government, they 

closed 52 hospitals and sent hundreds of health care workers 

out of the province. 

 

We’re trying to rebuild a system that was broken. In fact as 

Lewis Draper a former MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and former physician would say, what the NDP left 

of this health system, it was a pig’s mess. And I would quite 

agree with how they left the health care system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, one of the root causes of 

overcrowding in emergency rooms is the lack of funding the 

government has provided to mental health care in 

Saskatchewan. Yesterday a group of concerned people 

representing the mental health care community came to the 

legislature to impress upon the minister the need for more 

investment in mental health care. People with mental health 

illnesses can’t get in to see a psychiatrist and can’t get adequate 

help from CBOs [community-based organization] who are also 

underfunded, and so they go to the ERs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to stop making 

Saskatchewan people pay the price for his mismanagement and 

finally step up and realize we need more psychiatrists, more 

psychiatric nurses, more funding for CBOs, and a new mental 

health facility in North Battleford? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would agree with that 

member on a couple of points — when she said we would need 

more psychiatric nurses, that we need more psychiatrists. And I 

couldn’t agree more. That’s why our government started the 

psychiatric nurses program after it being cancelled by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely amazing that in 2011 we need more 

psychiatric nurses, but in 2007 when they were in the 

government we didn’t, Mr. Speaker. That’s absolutely 

ludicrous. 

 

Our government is working on the proper human resources mix 

across this province. We have more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

But I can tell you; we didn’t stick our head in the sand like the 

old NDP. We’re getting it done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, 88 long-term care beds have been 

closed because of the government’s failure to properly fund the 

health regions. Acute care beds in hospitals in Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, for example, are being filled with 

long-term care patients that don’t have a long-term care bed to 

go to. Mr. Speaker, that means that there are fewer admission 

beds for people coming to the ERs. 

 

To the minister: when is he going to reopen the 30 beds at 

Muskeg Lake, the 5 beds in Wawota, the 16 beds in Canora, the 

15 beds in Melville, the 6 beds in Kamsack, the 6 beds in 

Esterhazy, and the 10 beds in Carlyle, and take the unnecessary 

stress off the hospitals? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve worked hard to maintain a proper complement 

of long-term care beds in this province, Mr. Speaker. But I will 

tell you that under 16 years of NDP government, they closed 

1,200 beds, long-term care beds in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we are making sure that there are the proper 

complement of long-term care beds. That’s why we’ve put a 

facility in Saskatoon to relieve the pressure out of the acute care 

centres, Mr. Speaker. I’ll take no advice from that member 

opposite or that opposition party when it comes to long-term 

care and especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well the minister will take no advice and leaves 

us all looking at him floundering as he tries to answer any 

question that pertains to any of these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Acute care and emergency room services are closing or being 

closed all around rural Saskatchewan in communities like 

Wakaw, Watrous, Big River, Spiritwood, Leader, and the list 

goes on. People are being left without emergency services 

because of the government’s failure to properly fund the health 

regions. People have to go somewhere for help, so they go to 

emergency rooms in Regina or Saskatoon, and these hospitals 

become overcrowded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to stop ignoring rural 

Saskatchewan and provide the funding they need to recruit 

doctors and keep their hospital emergency and acute care 

services open so that people can get the care they deserve in 

their own communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in July 17th of 2000, 

they had sent out a news release talking about closure of a 

number of long-term care beds in the province. And it was a 

very interesting quote from that very member opposite when 

she said, when she was asked about closing long-term care 

beds, and I quote, “These plans will lead to a better quality of 

long-term care overall,” Mr. Speaker. That’s how they looked 

at it at the time. Closing beds would lead to a better quality of 

care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is not our plan, Mr. Speaker. Our plan is to renew 13 

facilities, long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan, as 

well as adding 100 beds in Saskatoon under Amicus, Mr. 

Speaker. We realize the need and we’re getting it done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mental health needs are being ignored. Acute 

care and emergency services are being closed. Long-term care 



6596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

beds are being closed, and doctor vacancies are increasing in 

rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, health care is disappearing in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Last year we know the Potash Corporation made $1.8 billion 

and paid 5 cents on the dollar to the Saskatchewan people. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: has he thought of going to the Premier 

to tell him maybe more than 5 cents is needed on the dollar for 

our potash, so he could have more money to properly fund 

health care and people won’t have to suffer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to correct the member opposite in terms of her 

observations about 5 cents on the dollar for resource taxes. The 

fact of the matter is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. I recognize 

the Minister Responsible for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I’m holding in my hands a financial 

statement for Potash Corporation. They had $1.8 billion of 

revenue. If you subtract out phosphorus and nitrogen that they 

don’t operate here in Saskatchewan, they had $1 billion of 

revenue. They paid $76.5 million in provincial mining and 

other taxes. But if you look just six lines down, six lines down 

from there, when you look at income taxes, it adds up to a little 

over $350 million in taxes that they paid in Saskatchewan, not 5 

cents on the dollar that the member opposite is talking about but 

$350 million to the province of Saskatchewan. And that’s why 

we want to make sure that that doesn’t stop here in 

Saskatchewan, rather than putting in place the resource and 

job-killing tax that they want to put in place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Land Purchase 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we learned yesterday that both 

the Chair and the Vice-Chair of the SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] board have quit 

over a $6.7 million land purchase that was made without the 

needed ministerial approval. The Minister of Advanced 

Education knew about this unauthorized purchase back in 

September, but he chose to keep it a secret. We only learned of 

this when the Provincial Auditor brought this unauthorized 

purchase to the public’s attention. To the minister: why did he 

choose to keep this unauthorized $6.7 million purchase a 

secret? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

far as any notion of this being a secret, this is the furthest from 

the truth. In fact if the member opposite would’ve taken time to 

read the SIAST annual report, Mr. Speaker, within the report it 

says: 

. . . Ministerial approval is also required for borrowing and 

for the acquisition or sale of real property. During the 

year, SIAST acquired land to be used for the expansion of 

the SIAST Kelsey Campus to the amount of $6.902 

million, for which the written approval of the minister has 

not been obtained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a document that was circulated in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. This was then brought up again by the 

auditor, Mr. Speaker. This has since been addressed in the 

Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker. This has been 

available, Mr. Speaker. We have been working through it and, 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is that Pam Schwann has been 

appointed as Chair. These two honourable individuals have 

taken responsibility, Mr. Speaker. We hope and see that the 

future of SIAST is very bright, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is about transparency and 

what information the minister chooses to share on an open basis 

with the people of Saskatchewan, and we’re beginning to notice 

a pattern here. Just recently we learned that the $270 million 

carbon capture deal with Montana has been dead for months, 

but instead of being open and transparent with the people of 

Saskatchewan, the minister chose to keep that a secret too. And 

on an unauthorized $6.7 million land purchase that contravened 

the SIAST Act, the minister chose to keep that under wraps. To 

the minister: would this information have ever come into the 

public realm had the Provincial Auditor not revealed it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve already noted, actually it was in the SIAST 

annual report, and that came out in advance of the auditor’s 

report, Mr. Speaker. I would anticipate that the member 

opposite is the critic who would actually have seen that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The problem with 

this minister is one of transparency, but it’s also one of taking 

action on what he knows. 

 

The Minister of Advanced Education not only failed to make 

the information public; he failed to address the problem as well. 

Even one of the minister’s colleagues quoted earlier in question 

period, the member from Cannington, told the Public Accounts 

Committee, “I know I would not be very happy had I been the 

minister in this circumstance.” Yet instead of being unhappy, 

the minister did absolutely nothing for several months. To the 

minister: why did he drag his heels on this issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to talk about post-secondary education because 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6597 

when it comes to doing nothing, Mr. Speaker, we saw the 

members opposite do nothing. We saw them not build any 

residence at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 

see them do nothing, Mr. Speaker, when they were in office 

regarding residences in La Ronge, in Meadow Lake, Mr. 

Speaker, in P.A. [Prince Albert]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen is record investments across the 

post-secondary sector. Mr. Speaker, we know that SIAST needs 

an additional land piece, Mr. Speaker. What we have here is a 

procedural error, Mr. Speaker, a procedural error. There has 

been members held to account. SIAST is moving on. The board 

is moving on. And thankfully the province is moving on now 

that they’ve gotten rid of the NDP. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the handling of this unauthorized 

purchase is certainly concerning, but it’s also concerning that 

the former board felt it necessary to take this step in the first 

place. We know that SIAST officials have raised concerns 

about the lack of resources from this government. SIAST 

resources are stretched thin. They need new facilities, yet this 

government has largely ignored their concerns. 

 

To the minister: was the board sending a message by going 

rogue and making this unauthorized purchase to draw attention 

to the underfunding of SIAST? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. For the 

public record, what we’ve seen is increased funding to SIAST 

under this government, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen a 9 per cent 

increase in total funding and a 15 per cent increase in operating 

funding for SIAST since we’ve come in. What we’ve seen is an 

institution that is moving forward. It now has residents in one 

of its four campuses, Mr. Speaker. We know there’s more work 

to do. We’ve been able to ensure that it’s participated within the 

KIP, that is, the knowledge infrastructure program, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the case in hand, what we’ve seen is a 

procedural error. We’ve seen individuals stand up and take 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. We see SIAST moving forward, 

our post-secondary sector moving forward, and our students 

moving forward, Mr. Speaker, with more jobs in Saskatchewan 

and a bright future, Mr. Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is more than a procedural 

error. The SIAST board asked the minister for approval to buy 

two pieces of land. The minister clearly said no. The SIAST 

board went ahead and made those purchases, Mr. Speaker. This 

is more than simply a paperwork mess-up. 

 

It speaks to an attitude from the minister and the government, 

Mr. Speaker. For whatever reason, the SIAST board went 

rogue, made their own decision, ignoring a clear directive of the 

ministry, going ahead with a major project without 

authorization — with financial implications down the road. The 

minister found out about the purchase, knew it contravened 

provincial legislation, but he chose to keep it secret and took no 

steps to address the problem. He left it up to the Chair and the 

Vice-Chair months later, months later, Mr. Speaker, to resign 

and leave the board. 

 

After the carbon capture fiasco with hidden information and 

now this unauthorized purchase, we can’t help but wonder what 

else is being kept under wraps by the minister and by that 

government. Will the minister unveil today any more secrets, or 

will we have to wait several more months for someone else to 

reveal them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we have the SIAST annual 

report. Mr. Speaker, we have the auditor’s report. Mr. Speaker, 

we have the audit committee’s work and report, Mr. Speaker, 

through Hansard, Mr. Speaker. What we see is . . . earlier, 

earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, this issue — that is, SIAST 

having formal title over this land — actually came to fruition 

Mr. Speaker. It took diligence on behalf of the board and 

others, Mr. Speaker. This issue is now behind the SIAST 

institution, Mr. Speaker, and what we’re very, very pleased to 

see, Mr. Speaker, is that SIAST continues to move forward. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 658 to 667. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 658 through 667 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m not exactly sure the 

members heard which Bill was called. I believe it was Bill 161. 

I recognize the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and with thanks to the member from Cannington for 

the assist on that ruling. 

 



6598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

It’s with great interest that I rise today to participate in the 

debate on Bill No. 161, An Act to amend The Election Act. Mr. 

Speaker, in any sort of democracy, in any sort of proper, 

functioning democracy, there are two things that are kind of 

analogous to team sports. So I’ve got some background in 

terms of different team sports. And democracy, like hockey or 

baseball, it’s very — you know, not to demean the subject here 

— but it’s very important that the ump be fair, that the referee 

be fair, and that the rules be clear. 

 

And I guess when we look at the activity of this government 

when it comes to the actions and their approaches around 

Elections Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we can’t help but 

wonder what they’re up to. 

 

And I guess if we measure it alongside the situation that we see 

unfolding with the federal government right now, where we’ve 

got one of the members over there of course — the member 

from Meadow Lake, one of the ministers in that cabinet — 

involved in the in-and-out funding scandal that sees different 

Conservative operators and senators up on charges in terms of 

abridging and breaking the law under Elections Canada, when 

we see that very same member from Meadow Lake involved in 

the different activities around things like the hiring of the 

returning officer for Elections Saskatchewan, things like the 

amendments that are contained in this piece of legislation 

around amending The Election Act, and trying to change the 

regime around who gets to vote, and whether or not we make it 

easier for people to vote or more difficult, and which groups 

this affects. Mr. Speaker, we look on this with a great deal of 

suspicion and certainly a great deal of concern and perhaps 

alarm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If democracy is going to function, the rules have to be 

well-understood and observed. And those that have been tasked 

with the sacred duty of enforcing those rules, they have to be 

out of the fray, Mr. Speaker. And on both of these scores, in 

terms of the actions that we’ve seen this government perform 

around the returning officer and the actions there, in terms of 

the process that has been well-established and long-established, 

to go at it in a bi-partisan, consensus-based model and the kind 

of games that they played with the appointment of the returning 

officer, Mr. Speaker, we look at that and we see that coming 

into this piece of legislation. 

 

And we see what? You know certainly there’s a safeguard that 

must be made in terms of those that are entitled to vote being 

the people that are entitled to vote. That’s without question, as a 

well-functioning democracy should have that as one of its 

cornerstones. 

 

But as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you have a measure 

brought forward, when there hasn’t been significant or hardly 

any concern brought forward in the all-party process that takes 

place after every election, and suddenly you’ve got a move to 

follow in lockstep with something that was brought forward on 

the federal level and that has been fought in courts, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of narrowing the ability of people to get to the 

polls, then we as the opposition look at that with a great deal of 

suspicion. 

 

So in terms of requiring photo ID [identification] for those that 

get to the polls, what groups have trouble with photo ID, Mr. 

Speaker? Well, First Nations generally have some situations in 

terms of having valid photo ID or what is accepted as valid or 

what is constrained as valid by the members opposite. Seniors 

oftentimes have trouble with photo ID and how that is available 

to them. New Canadians, Mr. Speaker, those that have stood up 

in citizen courts and have sworn that oath of allegiance, there is 

another group that has trouble with photo identification. And as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, low-income people in general have 

trouble with photo identification, which in Saskatchewan’s case 

has commonly meant a photo identification that is attached to 

the driver’s licence. 

 

So what about those four groups would this government want to 

engage in activity to depress their voter turnout? Well in terms 

of debate that we understand has taken place, it’s because those 

four groups have traditionally voted a certain way, Mr. Speaker, 

and it hasn’t been in favour of the members opposite. So of 

course there’s an interest on the part of the members opposite to 

try and to depress the voter turnout amongst those groups. And 

I guess from the opposition’s perspective, Mr. Speaker, and 

from the perspective of citizens in this province, why they 

would want to do that is blatantly against the democratic spirit 

that we are supposed to be upholding in this Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen elections where the voter turnout has declined. And 

instead of taking measures to increase voter turnout, to increase 

enumeration, to provide the funding to enumeration that is 

adequate for the hard-to-enumerate parts of this province, do 

we see additional resources being allocated in that regard, Mr. 

Speaker? No, what we see is a measure coming out of the, I 

think, a brains trust of the government of this day in terms of 

trying to make, to game the rules. So we look on that with great 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of what happens come the election and how this Bill is 

actually put forward or what happens with the regulations, it’s 

going to be very interesting. We’ve seen just as recently as a 

few days ago where different representatives from that 

government, in conversation with the representatives from the 

New North — the leadership in northern Saskatchewan from 

the municipal sector — saying that okay, well you know, 

you’ve raised a concern about this. Maybe we’ll take some 

steps to try and address those. 

 

And we hope that they come forward with some concrete 

measures in that regard or perhaps pulling this legislation 

altogether, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the kind of work that 

they’re trying to set out to constrict, to restrain, to undercut the 

turnout of certain groups at the polling station, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a long-standing sort of occurrence in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, where those that try to game the process, that try to 

game the rules of democracy, they’re going to pay a price for it. 

 

And I think, again I represent Regina Elphinstone-Centre, and 

the first election that that constituency came into being for was, 

one of them was 1971. And in 1971 there was something on the 

order of 19,800 electors in what was then called Regina Centre. 

And there was a specific riding that had been carved out in the 

south of Regina, Regina South or Regina Albert Park, where 

there was of course under 5,000 electors. 

 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6599 

And one of the things that came forward as a consequence of 

that blatant attempt to gerrymander and to undercut the 

democratic process by which we conduct ourselves at the polls, 

one of the processes that came forward after that was the move 

to an independent Boundaries Commission. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that was a step forward for our democracy. 

Because it’s not just people getting out to the ballot box, it’s 

how they’re able to . . . What are the resources that are put 

forward? What is the fairness of the rules that are put forward? 

 

And in that case, Mr. Speaker, the then Allan Blakeney New 

Democratic Party came forward with the step to an independent 

Boundaries Commission. And I guess that was a marked 

improvement over the practice we had had before, where 

different people cut up the boundaries and the gerrymandering 

was alive and well, or as it was called then, Mr. Speaker, 

Thatchermandering. And the problem with the situation then 

was remedied in terms of the independent Boundaries 

Commission. 

 

And then we’ve seen different sort of variations on the 

problems that are brought forward under the guise of different 

things. But we’ve seen problems that were fought all the way to 

the Supreme Court in terms of trying to use the plus or minus 

and the efforts that were put forward by, in the late ’80s in this 

province, to try and make sure that city ridings and different 

rural ridings, to try and rejig the boundaries, Mr. Speaker. One 

of the problems, there was the plus or minus and what that did 

in terms of one vote having equal weight wherever it was in the 

province, be it north, south, urban, or rural. And that was fought 

to the Supreme Court, and then again that correction was made. 

 

We’ve seen different democratic procedures brought forward, 

be it the change to the voting age, be it the extension of 

franchise to First Nations, be it even the establishment of the 

election date, Mr. Speaker. And I well remember the Minister 

of Justice bringing forward the legislation for the fixed election 

date legislation and introducing it as the fixed election 

legislation. And at that point, Mr. Speaker, we thought, well 

okay, perhaps it’s not a Freudian slip. Perhaps this is just the 

other things being on the mind of the speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

But, you know, there are pros and cons to that particular piece 

of legislation. We’ve seen other sort of pieces of legislation 

brought forward as relates to the province and how it interacts 

with the Senate of Canada. But as it regards the very 

fundamental process of elections and who participates in those 

elections, there’s nothing more fundamental, Mr. Speaker, than 

what are the rules surrounding how people have to campaign, 

what are the rules around who is eligible to vote, and then how 

those rules are enforced by the non-partisan apparatus of 

something like Elections Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what happened in 

this province over the past couple of years, what has happened 

in this province over the last couple of years in terms of the 

games that have been played with what had previously been 

bipartisan, consensus-based processes wherein the chief 

returning officer of Saskatchewan would be appointed by these 

kind of fair, open processes and the way that that caucus and 

that government opposite reached in to affect the appointment 

of the head official as to when it comes to enforcing fairness 

and accountability in terms of our electoral process, that was 

alarming. 

 

But now we find another piece of legislation that is brought 

forward where of course they know not everybody has photo ID 

in this province. They know that’s not part of citizenship in this 

province. They know that that is affected by income level, that 

is affected by race, that is affected by age, that is affected by 

where you live in the province. And in terms of the question on 

whether or not it’s going to be a suggestion or a hard and fast 

rule, right now that is punted to the regulations. 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of seeing how this 

government has acted in terms of the process around appointing 

the returning officer, they’ll have to forgive us if we don’t have 

a lot of confidence in their ability to not want to jam this as 

hard as they can, to not want to get their fingers on the scales 

and to try to assert some kind of partisan narrow advantage 

when it comes to who’s out at the polls and who’s not, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again, it’s particularly ironic when we’re in an era where, 

you know, a few short months ago we had the chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations say that one of the 

things that that individual wants to do is to increase the 

participation of First Nations at the ballot box and do what they 

can with working with Elections Saskatchewan and Elections 

Canada to ensure that First Nations are participating fully in 

that franchise, which again, Mr. Speaker, is one of the 

fundamental components of our democracy. 

 

So again, you know, it’s interesting. You see on the one hand a 

greater willingness and a greater interest on the part of First 

Nations in the province of Saskatchewan to fully participate in 

one of our most important processes around electing who we 

represent in this Assembly, and then we see the government 

moving in to jam the rules so that those without photo ID are 

going to be forced to jump through greater hoops and have 

more of a steeplechase when it comes to getting to the ballot 

box to cast their vote. And of course First Nations are hugely 

affected by that kind of activity. 

 

So that’s something we don’t agree with, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of the opposition. That’s something that I’ve certainly added to 

the kind of opposition that has been enumerated by my 

colleagues in this Chamber, and I know that there are going to 

be others that want to add their voices in this debate as well. So, 

Mr. Speaker, with that being said, I disagree with this 

legislation. I disagree with the way that this government has 

approached some of the fundamental features of the democratic 

process in the province, and I will leave the debate to others on 

our side to continue to voice that opposition. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



6600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

continue the discussion of the changes proposed to election 

legislation in Saskatchewan, and specifically here we’re going 

to be talking about Bill No. 162 which is an amendment to The 

Local Government Election Act and also it makes some 

amendments to a few other pieces of legislation at the same 

time. 

 

Fundamentally when you look at election Acts, whether it’s the 

provincial election Act or The Local Government Election Act 

or in the federal parliament for the federal elections legislation, 

your goal is to enhance the participation of the public in 

democracy. And we have had discussions around how that 

might happen in our country at a number of different levels. But 

basically we have stuck with the system that we have now, 

which is effectively a first past the post system. 

 

One thing these pieces of legislation here in Saskatchewan 

don’t deal with obviously is the whole question of a system of 

proportional representation based on voting that would more 

accurately reflect what happens in the community. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not part of this particular legislation. But if our 

fundamental goal is to enhance the participation of the public in 

elections, in voting in those who will represent them in the 

legislature or in the local city councils or RM councils, then I 

think we’re going to need to make sure we don’t lose that 

whole discussion and that whole question. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what is happening in this legislation seems to 

be going in another direction. And it’s going to a place where 

many of us had hoped we would not go in the 21st century, and 

that’s to put up barriers for people to participate in voting and 

doing it in a way that, as I said the other day, seems to have a 

bit of a code to it or a secret language to it. Or it’s speaking to 

certain groups in society who now have power and want to keep 

that power, and they’re not willing to let many people on the 

edges of our community enhance their role in democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s wrong. That’s why the people on 

this side of the House will be challenging this legislation every 

step of the way. Because when you bring in, as this legislation 

does, an ability to scare people away from the polls around 

whether they have proper identification, to scare people once 

they’ve gotten to the polls so that they actually leave without 

voting, to make it difficult for community leaders and others in 

the local community to assist others to exercise the right of the 

vote, this is just wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I once again urge the Minister of Justice to 

listen carefully to the voices that have come from many 

different places and ask him to take this legislation back out of 

this legislature and allow for more public discussion because, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not what we’re about. We’re not here, 

elected . . . Now that we’re here, we’re not in a situation where 

we’re going to change the rules to make sure that others can’t 

participate and select the people who are going to be in this 

legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation has a number of 

aspects that relates to that. 

 

Now Bill 162 is a companion piece to Bill 161 that my friend 

from Regina Elphinstone just spoke about. And it goes through 

The Local Government Election Act, and it makes some 

changes that I think are probably ones that were suggested in 

consultation with municipalities — SUMA, the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association, and probably with SARM, 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities — but 

I’m very certain that the whole section that’s in here about the 

ability to scare people away from the polls was not something 

that was suggested by those groups. 

 

Because I know that even more so than we as legislators in this 

place, those people who are elected in their local communities, 

they appreciate every effort that’s made to encourage as many 

people as possible to vote in their elections because they know 

that many times the participation levels at a municipal level are 

substantially less than what happens at a provincial or a 

national level. And so fine with some of these suggestions that I 

think maybe have come from SUMA and SARM, but this 

suggestion around restricting the members is something that 

should be dropped. 

 

Now I know that the Minister of Justice has listened carefully to 

a number of the comments that we’ve made about this. And it 

would be possible with some discussion with members on this 

side to remove those parts which cause difficulty and allow for 

the rest of the legislation to go forward, but, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve had no indication that there is any interest in doing that. 

But I’ll make this offer on the public record: that we’d be happy 

to sit down and look at those things that are here which assist 

and encourage people to be part of the voting public, and then 

we’ll drop those parts or have further discussion on those parts 

which have the effect of restricting the ability of people to vote. 

 

Now how does this restrict people to vote? Well if one goes to 

some of the movies that we’ve seen over the last 10 years, if 

one reads a number of the books that have been written, if one 

listens to a number of the radio documentaries or watches some 

of the documentaries on television, there are quite a number of 

stories that relate to the voting rights disputes in the southern 

part of the United States about 50 years, 60 to 50 years ago. 

And much of that discussion related to the fact that many of the 

people of other parts of the United States went down into the 

South to assist people in registering so that they could vote 

under the US [United States] system. And so there became 

quite a number of disputes when the ability of those who were 

marginalized under their voting system substantially increased 

and started affecting the elections of those people who were in 

power. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a number of the aspects of this particular 

legislation are parallel to some of the offensive parts of the 

legislation which was there in the southern United States of 

America. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not totally certain whether 

some of these parts in this legislation will also not be offensive 

to our constitution in Canada in the same way that many of 

those pieces of legislation in the United States were offensive to 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6601 

their constitution as was ultimately decided by the US Supreme 

Court. And, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at our constitution, it 

doesn’t set up all of these barriers to voting. It says that there 

will be an ability for people to participate in our democracy and 

that we’ll have the rules set up. 

 

And so I guess what I would once again say to the Minister of 

Justice, if he has legal opinions that have looked at this issue in 

that light, maybe he should reveal them to us so that we can 

have those as part of the discussion. If he has not thought about 

some of these things, then I would ask him to consider that. 

 

[14:45] 

 

We do know, and he said this in his second reading speech 

when he presented this legislation, that he was basing it on 

other pieces of legislation that had gone forward I think in 

British Columbia and a couple of other provinces. We also 

know that in British Columbia there already has been a legal 

challenge filed on a constitutional question that this type of 

legislation is unconstitutional. And it may be appropriate to 

wait to see what the results of some of these kinds of things are 

before we do this in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I think on a more fundamental basis, here in Saskatchewan, 

we are very much members of our community. We come from 

our communities, and we want the people in our communities 

to have the ability to vote. 

 

And I think that just one example of one of the restrictions in 

this legislation is quite interesting. Say on polling day you end 

up with people who come to vote, and they don’t have all of the 

ID that fits some of the kind of technical explanations that are 

going to be set out in this legislation. Well there’s an ability for 

another member of the community to vouch for that particular 

person, and it could be that it’s a local priest or pastor. It could 

be a teacher. It could be somebody else who’s there. This 

legislation sets it up so that kind of community person, who 

might know lots of people in the local community, is only able 

to vouch for one person. And once they’ve done that, well then 

they’re going to have to find somebody else to vouch for the 

next person. 

 

Now how logical is that in our communities? As many people 

who know, when they vote in Saskatchewan, it’s often a bit of a 

chance for a community visit, if I can put it that way. And 

everybody knows who’s coming into the polls. It’s true in the 

city, in the neighbourhoods. It’s true in the small towns and 

other places across the province where, on voting day, 

everybody knows a lot about each other. If there’s somebody 

that’s kind of unknown to everybody else, there’ll be some 

questions raised, but it doesn’t take long to figure out how they 

fit and how they would be involved in the voting. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this kind of legislation goes contrary to much 

of how we operate in this province. And for that reason alone, I 

ask the Minister of Justice to seriously consider withdrawing 

the legislation and allowing for more work to be done. 

 

But even on another level, and especially as it relates to this 

particular Bill 162 which is The Local Government Election 

Act, when we’re having votes in city elections or our town or 

village elections or rural municipality elections, it’s even more 

accurate to say that people know who lives in the particular 

area, who’s going to participate in the votes. And to put up 

restrictions which seem to be designed in a way to exclude 

certain groups from voting, I think is fundamentally against the 

Saskatchewan character. 

 

And part of the job we have in this legislature is to identify 

foolish Bills, identify Bills that are wrong-headed, identify Bills 

that shouldn’t make it into law. And, Mr. Speaker, I think those 

parts of this particular Bill that go contrary to who we are in 

Saskatchewan should be removed or at least should have much 

more discussion in the community before they’re done. 

 

Now the line that’s sometimes used reflects once again to code 

words like the integrity of the electoral system. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I haven’t heard of any examples that have been 

brought forward in the last number of years where that’s 

become an issue. What we do know is that the number of times 

where one or two or three votes will make a difference in 

election are very slim. 

 

Now I know that back prior to the advent of the province of 

Saskatchewan, there was an election that was decided by the 

returning officer casting a ballot. But there aren’t very many 

examples in the history of this province where 1 or 2 or 5 or 

even 25 votes will make a difference. And so I’m not quite sure 

what the meaning of discussion about trying to preserve the 

integrity of the electoral system . . . comes when basically the 

integrity of an electoral system is one that will reflect the 

wishes of the public in electing the people that need to be 

elected. 

 

And now one of the difficulties that we’ve been having in the 

last couple of decades in every part of Canada and in 

Saskatchewan is that the participation rate in elections has been 

going down. And some of it can be related to maybe some of 

the things that the public is interested in, things going relatively 

well. They stay away from getting involved. But some of it 

does relate to the kinds of frustrations that people have around 

going through the election process. And so I do not think we 

should be in a situation where we will add further barriers to 

what’s happening. 

 

Now in the legislation itself, there are a number of areas where 

the whole Bill looks at the steps and the procedures that are to 

be taken. And I guess it’s probably important for me to look at 

those things which are amendments that probably don’t cause a 

huge amount of difficulty. 

 

So if we go and we start at the top of this Bill and look at which 

sections are amended, well, the first amendment relates to 

what’s the definition of a business day. Well that’s kind of an 

obvious thing which is needed here. It also clarifies that 

nomination papers also include other documents, that if they’re 

required to be attached to the documents . . . And here I think 

they’re specifically referring to criminal record checks. But 

once again, this is another . . . [inaudible] . . . on forcing 

qualification for people in how they would be elected. 

 

Now one of the other parts that’s in this particular legislation 

relates to moving the election cycle for municipalities from 

three years to four years. And this is something that’s had a fair 

bit of discussion throughout the community and communities 



6602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

across the province. And there’s been, I would say, sufficient 

discussion about the value of a four-year term which allows 

people to learn in their job and actually be able to go from 

being completely new to a city council or a town council in the 

first year to, by the time they’ve been there a few years, being 

able to be quite capable of providing the leadership that’s 

needed. 

 

This is something that has been requested and has come 

through a number of places, and so it’s not something that I 

think has any major issues with it. And so it’s the kind of thing 

that we could probably work together on seeing how we could 

get that part of the process included. 

 

And so there are a number of other changes that relate to the 

actual procedure of the election that we have now, but 

practically those ones are ones that I think we would not have a 

great deal of difficulty with because we know that there has 

been a fair amount of discussion. 

 

But when it gets to the questions around the restrictions on who 

can vote and how those restrictions are enforced, this is an area 

where I think there are some real problems. And when the 

matter was brought forward, as I said earlier, in British 

Columbia they ended up looking at this in a number of different 

ways as to how it would end up causing some difficulty for 

people to participate in the election. And it went everywhere, 

from new residents in a community who would have some 

difficulty . . . They obviously would meet the residency 

requirements for voting in that particular election, but they may 

not end up having the types of ID that would allow for election. 

 

Also the types of identification that are acceptable are quite 

restricted, as being suggested here. If one has a passport, that’s 

not sufficient to vote according to this because the passport 

doesn’t have your address in it. So then you’d have to 

supplement it with something else. 

 

Now we also know that they’re trying to get at this question of 

where does a person reside so that they’ll end up with 

information about that. But when we have rising rents like we 

have in many parts of Saskatchewan, there’d be a number of 

people that might not have full 12 months residency in a 

particular place because they’ve been forced to move. So 

they’ll create problems there. 

 

But I think the area where it’s most troubling does relate to 

First Nations people where status cards — you know, one of the 

cards that First Nations people have — would not be accepted 

on their own as a document that would be usable for 

identification to vote. And so you end up also, as it relates to 

those cards, that in many of the First Nations in Saskatchewan 

because of strange operations of the federal bureaucracy they’re 

only able to issue 50 status cards a year for each First Nation or 

some limited number. And so there are many First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan now whose status cards are not up to 

date. And would those be acceptable if they’re being used 

because that’s the only one they’ve got, and they can’t get a 

new one? I don’t know if that kind of question can be answered 

by this type of legislation. 

 

I think what it does is it creates barriers way beyond what’s 

necessary. So, Mr. Speaker, I think people are asking why 

would the Minister of Justice, why would this government 

come forward with these kinds of changes at this time. Well my 

own sense, after looking at this and listening to the rationale 

that we’ve heard around this, is that the government is 

concerned that many people who are left out of our economy, 

those people on the edges are not that anxious to vote to 

reinstate this government, and that it’s those people that would 

not be supportive of the government who are going to be the 

most affected by this particular legislation. 

 

If that’s not the case, there would be no difficulty in the 

government’s pulling this particular part of the legislation and 

allowing it to be further discussed across the province and 

basically have it be re-introduced by a new government after 

the next election. If the will of the people across the province is 

that this is the kind of restrictions that we want on our electoral 

process, I’m sure that a new NDP government would look at 

that in the same way as this government has. 

 

But I think that the practical effect of this is that this 

government wants to get this legislation passed this spring so 

that it will restrict the ability of many, especially First Nations 

people and other people who are marginalized, from voting. 

And I think that’s fundamentally wrong. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that there are a number of areas 

where we’re not given the full story about why something 

happens. It’s possible that we will get answers to some of these 

kinds of questions when the matter goes to committee, but I’m 

not certain that we will get those answers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are other of my colleagues 

who want to speak about this particular legislation, especially 

as it relates to their own constituencies, and so I would ask that 

we move to adjourn this debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to rise and speak to this Bill 144, The Litter 

Control Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Litter Control Act was first passed in 1973. 

The then premier was Al Blakeney. And what the concerns 

were in 1973 were predominantly . . . Pollution had become 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6603 

part of our everyday vocabulary in those days. Today we have 

concerns that extend beyond pollution into global warming for 

example and degradation of the environment. But in 1973 it 

was literally litter control, and it was to beautify our province 

and our highways and our streets by taking beverage containers 

out of the ditches and have them appropriately handled, that is, 

pop bottles — and it was bottles in those days — pop bottles 

and alcohol bottles to be recycled. But that was part of the 

original Act in 1973. It’s kind of interesting as you reflect back 

what for many of us is an entire lifetime to the origins of this 

Act that we are dealing with today. 

 

Today the iteration of The Litter Control Act is dealing with, in 

some ways, a more sophisticated problem than simply getting 

containers out of the ditch and off of the streets and 

appropriately handled. Today we’re dealing with a litter control 

Act that introduces something that most people would think 

they’d never get out of a right-wing government, that would 

never see introduced by a right-wing government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I am talking about is the retroactivity in this 

proposal. It proposes to reach back in terms of taking some 

rights of individuals to pursue recourse through the courts. This 

Act will take that recourse away, all the way back 13 years ago 

to 1998, all the way back there. That’s what this piece of 

legislation is doing, introduces retroactivity.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in my time as a legislator, I have seen 

conservative governments right across this province make their 

bread-and-butter issue property rights, the rights of individuals, 

the right to pursue justice through the courts, the right to be 

heard and the right not to have big government impose upon 

you its will, not to have big government say not only are we 

changing the law in March of 2011, but we’re changing the law 

all the way back to 1998, some 13 years ago. We’re going to 

reach back, and we’re going to retroactively change this 

legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party government can do that 

with The Litter Control Act, my question is what prevents them 

to do it, make some other retroactive changes in other areas? 

You start down this slippery slope. And my question is, is the 

government selling its soul to get The Litter Control Act 

passed? And it’s an interesting question . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . We’re not talking huge money here. We’re not 

talking huge money here at all. By the minister’s admission, 

we’re talking . . . There’s $350,000 a year at risk. That’s what 

he said in his second reading speech. 

 

So for $350,000 what I have, what we have, we’re witnessing, 

is the government going back with retroactive legislation over a 

relatively miserly amount of money. An amount of money, 

interestingly, when revenues have never been . . . In anybody’s 

wildest dreams nobody’s ever dreamt that the provincial 

government would have an excess of $11 billion in 2010-2011 

in revenues. Never did anyone believe that. Never did anyone 

believe that. 

 

Never, never in the last general election platform, Mr. Speaker, 

did the Sask Party say, we’re going to grow government 

expenditures by more than 10 per cent a year, by 30 per cent in 

three years and still growing. No end in sight to the government 

expenditure growth. Never was that said. 

At a time of absolutely unprecedented economic growth, boom, 

revenue for the provincial government . . . State it however you 

want, but at a time when the provincial government’s got more 

cash at its disposal than ever, what’s it going to do? It’s going 

to introduce legislation to save . . . to take somebody’s right to 

sue, right to recourse away, and make it retroactive 13 years for 

$350,000 a year. 

 

And the question is — and I know that the member for 

Rosemont asked it in his part of this debate — he said the real 

question is, is that fundamentally fair? Is that the world we 

want to live in in Saskatchewan? Do we believe that any 

government is justified in reaching back 13 years, taking away 

an individual’s right to court action or recourse for what they 

believe is wrong? 

 

I’m not trying to say that there is $350,000 necessarily going to 

disappear from the provincial treasury in a year, but to me 

that’s for the courts to decide. I’m not trying to say yea, nay, 

yes, no. It’s irrelevant. What is relevant is an individual’s right 

to pursue justice, and that’s being stripped in this case. And if it 

can be stripped here, I argue, Mr. Speaker, that it can be 

stripped anywhere else. 

 

Isn’t it interesting that we live in a time of absolutely 

unprecedented revenue for the provincial government, the 

provincial government of Saskatchewan. The Sask Party 

government has absolutely unprecedented revenue. And yet 

earlier today I got a phone call from a constituent who had been 

training for a job that the expectation was that she would be 

making $75,000 a year with potential to . . . Frankly you can get 

almost double that in the field that she was training for, but 

$75,000 a year would be a comfortable living. And she was so 

looking forward to that, Mr. Speaker. And then as she put it to 

me earlier today, this morning she put it to me, she said, and 

then life happened. Through no fault of her own, she is now 

wheelchair bound, could not pursue that career, and is now a 

recipient of social services. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this constituent of mine told me that they’ve 

not had a decent increase in what she can get for many years 

now. She told me that she’s living on $8,000 a year. She told 

me, in tears, that food prices are going up at an alarming rate 

and she’s not sure that the food is going to last to the end of this 

month. Too much month at the end of the food. And she’s 

frugal, and I could tell that just by talking to her. And she felt 

bad to be complaining to me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But how many people are like my constituent, struggling to 

make ends meet, desperately struggling, looking for a bit of 

help? And what do we have? A callous government that, in the 

midst of absolutely unprecedented record revenue, their answer 

is, oh well, not only are we not going to help those that really 

need a hand up, not only are we not going to help those 

individuals, but we’re going to take individual rights away. 

We’re going to take away the right to . . . In The Litter Control 

Act, we’re going to take away the right to pursue justice and 

we’ll take it away retroactively 13 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a shame. The Litter Control Act, over the 

years, has done a pretty remarkable thing, you know, right from 

its inception in 1973 when it started having Saskatchewan 

residents address the whole issue of bottle disposal and garbage 



6604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

and that sort of thing. And how do we keep our highways 

respectable? How do we try and minimize the pollution, 

garbage pollution on our streets and highways? And how do we 

make our province a more welcoming province for the future? 

How do we make it a place that we want to live in, that we want 

our children and our grandchildren and their children to live in? 

How do we make it good for the present and for the future? 

 

And since that early start in 1973, Mr. Speaker, The Litter 

Control Act has had a number of changes over the years, one of 

which was introduced that brought about Sarcan and the 

beverage collection regime that we have now. We still have the 

beer bottle exchange, but then there’s also the Sarcan for 

virtually every other container. And what was introduced at the 

time of course was a system that brought many jobs in a part of 

our society that needed jobs and that is doing the jobs, by and 

large, very, very well. 

 

This change, Mr. Speaker, was in the ’80s and it was the Grant 

Devine Conservative government that brought the Sarcan into 

being. And it turned out, with hindsight, turned out to be a 

pretty decent thing to have done. And the proof of the pudding 

is that Sarcan continues to operate well. 

 

The environmental fees that are levied by The Litter Control 

Act were set up to pay the expenses of Sarcan because you 

couldn’t have, for example, a consumer — in this case I’ll point 

at myself — a consumer pay 10 cents for a can of Coke as the 

handling fee, and there I have the can and then I take it to 

Sarcan and they give me 10 cents back. Well it’s a no-brainer. 

They’re not making any money off of that. They can’t pay their 

expenses, so there’s an environmental levy that enables Sarcan 

to be the collector. 

 

And of course when I buy my can of Coke in the store or 

wherever I buy it, out of a pop machine or however I get it, I 

pay my 10 cents for it. And then when I take it to Sarcan, they 

give me a dime, the 10 cents, and it goes into my pockets and I 

can presumably go out and buy another . . . something else . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I thank the Minister of Justice who 

says that I should leave that dime as a tip. That’s a very, very 

interesting contribution to this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

10 cent tip for Sarcan or a nickel tip from the potash industry. 

It’s all relative, and we’ve had that discussion. I don’t want to 

get too far down the potash debate, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

interesting to have the situation that we’re in right now in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now I related that story about my constituent because I know 

it’s budget time and I know that the government is working on 

its budget. And my plea is that, for gosh sakes, please, please 

pay attention to people with disabilities and please, those who 

are receiving benefits . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the 

member to watch his language as he’s going across the floor. I 

would remind the conversation of . . . Order. I would remind 

the members not to be engaging across when there’s a member 

on his feet that has the floor speaking. 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I just want some clarification. The 

member you’re referring to with language is not me. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would not ask the member to rule 

on speaking, but he’s right. I mentioned the members talking 

across the floor. So I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much. Though occasionally I 

may slip in what I say, I appreciate the ruling and I just wanted 

it clear that I wasn’t misspeaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Litter Control Act amendment that we have is 

a very interesting piece of legislation. It deals with a new 

definition that defines the purchaser of a container. And I know 

that part of the legislation is trying to say that for example a 

restaurateur or a hotelier are not the purchaser, but rather the 

end user is the purchaser of the container. And that’s for 

purposes of how this Act is going to be administered and for 

clarity to make sure that the environmental levy is legally 

collected and those sorts of issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel, no quarrel with the amendments 

to the Act. I do question the one far-reaching amendment, and 

that’s the amendment that reaches back 13 years, the 

amendment that introduces the concept of retroactivity — a 

concept I never thought I’d see, not from anything that the 

government said they would do either in opposition or in its 

election platform. I never thought I would see a Sask Party 

government introduce a retroactive piece of legislation that 

disabled an individual’s right to pursue a court action. I never 

thought I would actually see that. 

 

And you just have to wonder about the wisdom of us standing 

here and even debating this reach back with the minimal 

explanation. And I know I read the then minister’s explanation 

and the minister’s explanation in second reading, and I still 

have to question the wisdom of reaching back. Because if there 

was a problem with the law, it really is a question then of, well 

what is the fairest thing for the people of Saskatchewan? And it 

seems to me that it’s not always the fairest thing — in fact 

usually not — to have a government say, well you know, we 

made a mistake at some previous point in time and we’re going 

to fix that mistake by introducing retroactive legislation. It just 

astounded me that that piece of legislation would come from 

this government. 

 

So you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s another piece that happened 

in this and it’s where some things that were previously done in 

regulation are now moved, and they will have to be done in the 

future with a change of the Act. And I want to say that, on the 

surface, that really does look like a step forward because some 

of the changes that are removed from regulations include things 

like: 

 

(a) an environmental handling charge of: 

 

(i) with respect to a designated container that is a metal 

can, 5¢; 

 

(ii) with respect to a designated container that is a 

plastic bottle, 6¢; 

 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6605 

(iii) with respect to a designated container that is a 

non-refillable glass bottle, 7¢; 

 

(iv) with respect to a designated container that is a 

multi-material, shelf stable container, 3¢; or 

 

(v) with respect to a designated container that is a 

paper-based polycoat gable topped container, 3¢; and 

 

(b) a refundable deposit of 5¢. 

 

(2) The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by 

regulation, increase or decrease the amount payable 

pursuant to clause (1)(b) respecting any designated 

container or any class or classes of designated containers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, removing that list from regulations appears to be a 

positive step forward because it means that to change that 

environmental fee would mean that we have to come back 

before the legislature and justify that change. You’d have a 

government, presumably a government proposing the change in 

the environmental handling fee, and an opposition whose job it 

would be to question the need, the requirement for that change 

in the environmental handling fee. 

 

One of the things that struck me as I just read this out loud, Mr. 

Speaker, was section (a)(v) that says removing from regulations 

“with respect to a designated container that is paper-based 

polycoat gable top container.” And I’m wondering if that means 

we’re going to need a paper-based polycoat gable top container 

police force to make sure that we get the 3 cents collected on 

that. It’s quite a mouthful, but I think the cup that they’re 

talking about is also more familiar as a Tim Hortons 

roll-up-to-win cup. I think that’s what was described as a 3 cent 

environmental fee required on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation, again I think it is necessary that 

the legislation be changed. That’s not the argument at all. And 

I’m pleased to see the environmental charges being removed 

from regulation and going into the Act so that to change that 

requires a change in the Act. And by definition what that means 

is the Act would have to be brought before the legislature and 

dealt with in the public light, so to speak. 

 

What I really don’t like about this Act, what I really don’t like 

about the changes in The Litter Control Act are the denigration 

of an individual’s right to pursue action in the court, the right 

for an individual to hire a lawyer and see that the arguments are 

taken to their logical conclusion, win or lose. Justice demands 

that there has to be a referee somewhere, and the referee 

shouldn’t ought to be the minister responsible for the Act 

solely. The referee in our system of democracy and governance 

often means the court, often means the court. 

 

Our job is to pass legislation. Our collective job as members of 

the Legislative Assembly is to pass legislation. We hope most 

of it’s good. We hope all of it is necessary. But at the end of the 

day, part of the job of the judiciary is to pass judgment on the 

effectiveness and the legality, the legality of that legislation. 

And here we’re removing that one step for individuals or 

companies, and that step being their right to pursue justice 

through the courts. And that’s just not a proper thing to have 

happen. 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Act is 20-some pages, 22 pages including 

the coming into force. It’s a fairly detailed Bill, a fairly detailed 

Act, and it introduces some questions around cost recovery that 

quite frankly have been always on the backburner before. But 

the cost recovery I’m speaking of is with the environmental 

assessment fee. That, as I understood it, was set up to help fund 

Sarcan. 

 

So if Sarcan . . . This has no basis of reality to what Sarcan’s 

budget really is. I’m just doing this by way of example, by way 

of explanation. If Sarcan operated for, its total budget was $1 

million a year, that was their expenditures, then Sarcan needs 

— out of either the environmental revenue fee or gift straight 

from the provincial treasury or some other source of revenue — 

they need to bring in at least $1 million to offset that one 

million expenditure I used in my example. My understanding 

was that the environmental assessment fee was to pay that $1 

million. 

 

And I see the Minister of Finance paying attention. I want to 

say the $1 million, the $1 million was not in any way to reflect 

what Sarcan’s real costs are. It was by way of example. You 

have to say it’s a number, and so I’m using 1 million as the cost 

there, and then the environmental assessment fee would bring 

in 1 million to offset Sarcan’s operating costs. 

 

Of course included in Sarcan’s equation is when they purchase 

my tin can, my Coke can in my example earlier in my speech, 

they bundle it together and bale it. We’ve all seen the big bales 

of aluminium cans and the bales of plastic and the bales of 

paper and the bales and the bales and the bales of all sorts of 

things that they recycle. They then sell that. They sell that 

aluminium, presumably to the highest bidder. I can’t imagine 

there being too many options of places to sell it, but I’m sure 

there is more than one place they could sell the aluminium cans. 

And whatever price they get for that, they’d use to offset their 

expenses. 

 

You know, if you sold a bale of aluminium cans for $1,000, 

well then in my example of $1 million operating expenses, 

they’d use that $1,000 to take it away from the $1 million 

operating expense. And they’d only need nine hundred and 

ninety-nine thousand, nine hundred and . . . nine hundred and 

ninety-nine thousand, ninety-nine . . . 1,000 less than 1 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I regret having started that math because I know 

how silly it sounds. But they would use that $1,000 to offset 

their expenses. That’s the point I’m making here. 

 

So the environmental handling fee should be something 

responsibly about equal to what is spent on environmental 

handling fees for Sarcan and any other related collection 

agency. In principle, you would think that if you’re collecting 3 

cents for a roll-up-the-rim cup, you should be spending roughly 

3 cents to clean up those cups and take care of them and see 

that they’re properly disposed of. If you’re doing 5 cents on a 

can, well then 5 cents should go towards handling the cans. And 

I know that it is very difficult to be that definitive in terms of 

how the costs work, but in broad strokes it should be something 

generally in that range. 

 

So why is it we’ve not heard any explanation about why this 

government would choose, why that government there would 



6606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

choose to go retroactive with its legislation. Why would it 

choose to go retroactive 13 years? Why would they go that far 

back to take somebody’s right to a proper recourse? Why would 

they do that? And why, with the litter Act, why is it that the 

government is so determined to save $350,000 a year from 

people who purchase beverage containers? 

 

[15:30] 

 

And we all, literally everyone does at one time or another, some 

of us purchase more beverage containers than others. But every 

Saskatchewan resident at some point purchases beverage 

containers — could be a container of water, could be pop. It 

could be any other, you know, juice, almost any other beverage. 

And so we pay the fee, the environmental levy. 

 

Many of the containers also have a recycling fee, a deposit, that 

we can pay when we purchase the drink. And then when we 

take the container in, we get that deposit refunded to us. Why is 

it that the government is so determined, so dug in, in for 

$350,000 a year shared amongst all of the province, all million 

people of Saskatchewan? And yet they won’t change the nickel 

fund that the potash revenue is paying, potash royalties of five 

cents on the dollar. And they’re hidebound, the minister saying 

repeatedly they’re not going to change that. 

 

Well if you made a minute change to the potash royalty rate, it 

would be — even a small one, minute, or even a small change 

— it would be make a huge difference, a huge difference on the 

revenue. And it wouldn’t have to go into this retroactively 

taking away an individual or a company’s right to recourse 

through the laws. We wouldn’t have to be taking that part away. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m nearing the end of my remarks and I just 

sort of . . . I mean we’re being met with much silence, and 

there’s that one real thorny issue. And I just can’t believe that at 

a time of, otherwise a time of plenty that the government is so 

determined to retroactively change and take away people’s 

ability to seek justice. 

 

And just before I’m closing I wanted to again make a plea on 

behalf of my constituent and others that there be something 

done in terms of revenue, in terms of helping people that have 

no means to help themselves, people that need a hand up, some 

increase in their cost of living that be included in the budget. 

Mr. Speaker, this is necessary. 

 

I thank you very much for your time as we’ve discussed the 

liquor control Act, this Bill No. 144. I think I’ve outlined my 

concerns to the best of my ability today and I urge the 

government to reconsider the retroactive part of this legislation. 

The question is, is that the slope they want to get on? Is that 

what they consider a fair thing to do? Is it fair to take away, to 

strip a citizen’s right retroactively 13 years? Or is the fair thing 

to do, let the courts take its course and then let us do what we 

can? Like the rest of this legislation, if I were proposing it, I 

might make some twists and turns, minor changes, but 

essentially not bad legislation. The retroactive part is the real 

offensive part, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I thank you for your time. At this point I’m going to move that 

we adjourn debate on Bill 144. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Glad to be 

able to rise this afternoon and make a few comments, make a 

few remarks on Bill No. 55, The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, 2010. 

 

Before I begin my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a 

comment as to why there’s some trepidation and perhaps even 

concern over the issue of natural resources and our wildlife 

habitat. And that is going back a few years to where . . . And 

just to quote something from The StarPhoenix, an editorial in 

The StarPhoenix on October 28th regarding . . . and they were 

talking about reference . . . creation of measures designed to 

protect the Sand Hills. And the editorial says, and this was in 

reference to: 

 

However, it only serves as a pre-election reminder of this 

government’s utterly boneheaded move last year to 

remove nearly 3 million acres of Crown land from the 

protective umbrella of the wildlife protection Act. 

 

This from of course the unbiased editorial board of the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it was with that sort of a preamble that I wish to make some 

comments here in terms of this very important Act which on the 

surface, when you first look at a number of the changes, would 

seem to be acceptable. But that’s the track record. 

 

And there’s track records on everything that this government 

has done, particularly consultations, on that whole issue where 

we have, on a number of now instances, found that where in 

fact even ministers have said that they have consulted and after 

checking with the groups, we find that in fact that it’s not to be 

true. It’s an unfortunate situation but it gives, on this side, 

makes our . . . I guess it makes our work that much more 

difficult, though we would be vigilant anyways in going 

through the various legislation that is brought before us. 

 

But that is, I think, an explanation of why when we talk to our 

constituents or people across the province who ask us how are 

things going, well it’s hard to say that it’s a transparent 

government. It’s hard to say that it’s a government you can 

trust. Because there are real issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, real 

issues that are brought up in and around legislation that we’ve 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6607 

had, be it from lack of consultation, be it to withdrawing 

legislation, resubmitting legislation. And this is a three-year 

record that has been established. 

 

In amongst that, as we’ve had different people discuss, in 

amongst that, in particular the potash debate that’s now ongoing 

where the government has said, well it was the NDP that 

brought in those changes. And then now of course we’re asking 

for a review of those royalty rates, and they’re saying, well no, 

we don’t want that; we don’t want those reviews because you 

don’t know what you’re doing. And yet it is exactly those 

changes that the NDP government made that has found that 

government itself with their treasury full and money to spend. 

And again it’s unfortunate that even in the midst of that sort of 

atmosphere or that sort of financial situation in this province 

that the government is still finding itself mismanaging on a 

number of files. 

 

Now the changes in The Natural Resources Act that I wish to 

speak on or make some comment on . . . And I first want to say 

that I want to commend the work done by the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation with folks like Ducks Unlimited, Outfitters 

Association, natural conservatory for the work that they do, for 

the work that they do day in and day out. 

 

I know many times I had the opportunity to meet with the 

Ducks Unlimited for one for example, folks who are very 

committed to the work that they do for Saskatchewan, for the 

time they’ve taken, and for all the dedication they put in with 

the different times that they have come forward and given us 

explanations on the amount of water, bodies of water, that have 

disappeared in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

amounts are almost . . . well it’s shocking I guess is the word I 

would probably say as to the amount of land that’s disappeared 

that used to be there. 

 

And one of the things that I didn’t, I have to say, didn’t know, 

and it’s an invaluable kind of resource for information that 

these groups provide . . . Or for example, if you build a trench 

through and then it drains all the other lakes or the runoff goes 

into the trenches and then goes further down, then you loose all 

the small bodies of water which are sort of the natural habitat of 

our wildlife. So it is very important, this work that they do, and 

has . . . that they do for the province. And they should be 

commended for this along with all the other groups that are 

doing this work. It is important work. 

 

And so when there are changes and when they are asked to, as 

in this legislation where there is an establishment of an advisory 

council where they are one of the groups that would be asked 

for appointments to that advisory council, is in some ways 

heartening for me to know that these people will be on there. 

 

However the point still is here, is that they are an advisory 

council. And they are an advisory council, and we’re not certain 

here that the minister has to take that advice. And we have seen 

that time and time again on the other side, how the ministers 

have not taken the advice of the advisory council of the 

constituents of any issue, or in fact even consulted them, and 

have said they’ve consulted. So the concern here would be 

would they actually listen to the advisory councils and do what 

they would have done. 

 

Now the establishment of the council, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they say there’ll be seven members appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor and “The minister may request organizations that 

represent hunting, fishing and trapping interests to provide the 

minister with a list of nominees . . .” And again then “No 

member of the public service is eligible to be appointed as a 

member.” 

 

That in itself is an interesting point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of not having the civil service involved or as some sort of 

member. And I’m not certain whether they would have perhaps 

the deputy minister or somebody sitting on that advisory 

council so that they could assist, provide certain assistance, 

certain professional assistance that the group might need. So a 

little uncertain as to how that might work. And that is in no way 

taking away from the work that this advisory council would do. 

 

There is still some concern as to how the people would be 

appointed, and again it’s for three years but at the pleasure of 

the minister. So there is a very strong control here by the 

minister, I think.  

 

Again as I started out, it would be very easy for us to simply 

accept this had we not had the track record here that we have of 

ministers, particularly in this former minister, particularly in 

this file, that found themselves now not — I suppose for lack of 

anything better to say — not there any longer and being 

replaced by new ministers. And we wonder whether that’s just a 

revolving chair and that there isn’t really some other agenda at 

play here simply to . . . in the government’s pursuit to 

establishing or taking away protected lands in dealing with 

what is a treasure for all of us here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now again the section 21 and 22 form, what I would say, the 

majority of changes here that . . . and I suppose the changes in 

the fund, but for me that I look at and make my comments to.  

 

The advisory council, again we would hope that in setting it up, 

we can’t see any fault in terms of the people that would be 

appointed from them, and particularly if the organizations 

themselves provide the minister with a list of those nominees 

which the minister could pick. Now again there is some concern 

that could the minister then just simply decide not to pick 

certain people because of views perhaps that they’ve expressed 

that run counter. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Because at the heart of this is again the ability to consult, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the ability to consult. And that seems to have 

clearly . . . It’s not an area that this government has scored well 

on, has scored well on in order to endear itself not only to this 

side but to the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so we have great, great concerns that in fact the advisory 

council would not be listened to or that perhaps some of the 

nominees might be looked over basically because they didn’t 

agree. As has been stated by the minister, now the Minister of 

Finance, the Deputy Leader, that if you don’t agree with the 

direction of the government, perhaps you wouldn’t be 

employed. 

 

So I guess the same as these groups that put forward nominees 



6608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

who they feel, people who have risen within their ranks, who 

understand the issues, that the government if they find them . . . 

I’m not certain. It’s on the record, the Deputy Premier saying 

that he would not . . . that people who did not agree with the 

government would be fired. So I guess in this case, I guess that 

would mean that they would not simply choose the nominees 

who disagreed with the government direction. 

 

So I’m not certain whether that means that they would not have 

anybody who was opposed to transferring land, wildlife habitat 

land, from under protection or Crown land that perhaps is 

protected, transferring that land and not having it protected. 

That’s the question when we don’t know whether, you know, 

what . . . 

 

Well I guess I shouldn’t say we don’t know. Because it was 

very clearly stated that we know the agenda of that and have 

seen that agenda for the last three years on any number of 

fronts, and where, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a very right wing 

agenda and at times a very destructive agenda. And it’s 

ideologically, with blinders on and moving forward without . . . 

But again that sort of thing, they will feel the effects of that 

come the election in November. 

 

So this is very important to all of us here in Saskatchewan — 

wildlife habitat, the funds. Again as I spoke previously and said 

that the fund is . . . Previously I would think that the fund was 

basically used to purchase, perhaps purchase lands. And there 

will be now a section where the minister will be allowed to 

appoint . . . a minister will be allowed to contract-in services, 

other services, to put forward or to carry out the department’s 

directions. And that is . . . that in itself raises some issues just 

because they’re not really clearly identified who those services 

would be contracted from. 

 

In that is under 11, section 20, 11(1) is amended: 

 

by repealing clause (b) and substituting the following: 

 

“ the acquisition, by purchase, lease or otherwise, of 

any equipment or materials or the retention of any 

services that the minister considers necessary to restore 

degraded fish or wildlife populations for fish or wildlife 

habitat, to create new fishing, hunting or trapping 

opportunities or to manage fish . . . [and] habitat, 

wildlife or wildlife habitat.” 

 

Now again, what services would that be? Would it be from the 

groups who mention . . . Would it be from Ducks Unlimited? 

Would it be from the Sask Wildlife Federation? Who in fact 

would that be from? These are very important questions for us. 

And again here we find that perhaps not very clear in what the 

intent of the legislation is. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I trust that you understand the . . . or at 

least our reluctance here to simply have this Bill go through 

until we have contacted any number of people with these 

organizations. And in some ways . . . Well I wouldn’t say 

unfortunate because I think it’s our job to contact the various 

groups, but that when we do it, we’re certainly not sure. What is 

somewhat causing us some concern is that we have to ask: have 

you been contacted? Have you been spoken to? What exactly 

was the discussion, and what are your thoughts on the 

legislation? In fact in some cases, did you know about the 

legislation coming because in fact that was not done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the minister himself talking about the 

wildlife fund, the minister talked about: 

 

The . . . Fund was established in the mid-1970s when 

resident hunters, anglers, and trappers asked the 

government to place an impost on hunting and fishing 

licences and to use the revenue to purchase and improve 

wildlife habitat. [And then] currently, 30 per cent of the 

revenue generated from the sale of hunting, angling, and 

trapping licences is directed into the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund. This amounts to approximately 3.5 

million annually. 

 

[He went on] the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

provides the money necessary to secure habitat to support 

a diversity of fish and wildlife species. To date the fund 

has acquired, through purchase or donation, approximately 

212,000 acres of land for wildlife habitat purposes, with 

many acres under joint title with various partners. Aside 

from the obvious benefits to hunters, anglers, and outdoor 

enthusiasts, it is important to note that much of the land 

continues to be made available to local communities for 

haying and grazing. 

 

[Now again] the largest piece of this funding goes to the 

on-the-ground preservation and securement of natural 

habitats. Over recent years much of this funding has gone 

to the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the Nature 

Conservancy of Canada, Ducks Unlimited Canada, and 

Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation under cost-sharing 

arrangements. In [most] . . . instances, a dollar that has 

gone into the fund from licence sales has leveraged 

significantly more dollars from the federal government 

and the private sector through fundraising efforts of 

non-governmental organizations. 

 

[And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker] as a result of the 

amendments contained in The Natural Resources . . . the 

current Fish and Wildlife Development Fund steering 

committee will evolve into the fish and wildlife 

development advisory council. The council will play a 

greater role in directing how and where the FWDF 

resources are spent so as to maximize the value of 

ecological diversity that those expenditures generate. The 

council will play a major role in reviewing, evaluating, 

and making recommendations on agreements proposed or 

already funded under the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund. 

 

Now it would be things like that that we would have said that 

should have been followed on each. These are certainly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, common sense approaches to an issue such as 

natural resources and management of those natural resources. 

 

That they now talk about these, when in fact we wish they 

would have been talking about that when they allowed 3 

million acres of land, protected land go from under the 

protection in the province . . . so now we have this minister 

talking about this and having a committee set up that would 

help advise on this. 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6609 

And it would seem, it does appear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

they would now be venturing into further issues where the 

committee would be allowed to contact or to give advice to the 

minister. However, of course, the concern is that whether or not 

the minister will in fact take that advice. 

 

Again here as I mentioned previously, the minister has the 

ability to contract out. We are not certain what that exactly will 

mean. So I think all in all, with some more consultation with 

these groups, with some more work in . . . providing we can 

have a minister that would in fact listen to the advisory council, 

we might see some positive results here. However as I started 

out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier, it is with concern and more 

than just a slight concern that we have regarding actions of this 

government when comes to these very sensitive areas and 

things that are very important to the people of this province. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that a good 

number of my colleagues also wish to enter into the debate on 

this and other issues and other Bills proposed by this 

government. And with that, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 155, The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join in the debate and certainly talking about the 

Human Rights Code amendment Act, Bill 160, and to maybe 

inject a bit of a comment that I would have from my 

perspective in terms of the intent of the Bill. 

 

I understood that the minister gave a fairly lengthy introduction 

of the Bill in terms of the intent and certainly the information 

attached as to what he intends to do with the Bill in the process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from my understanding, reading through the 

document, I can surmise that what the minister wishes to do — 

when you are talking about human rights complaints — is do 

one simple thing which is the primary focus of the intent of this 

Bill, is to simply replace a tribunal that typically hears some of 

the complaints and makes a decision and to take the tribunal 

process and have that tribunal process taken to the court system. 

And that’s where the courts themselves would hear some of the 

complaints around human rights cases. 

 

As many people that are listening may or may not know, what 

happens typically if there’s a human rights complaint based on 

a number of issues, whether it’s age, race, any kind of 

discriminatory practice in the workplace or even in the public in 

general . . . that anybody can launch a human rights complaint. 

And typically what happens is the Human Rights Commission 

prepares all the documentation. They have people that will help 

in that regard, and then the person that would be making the 

complaint, the complainant, along with the help of the 

commission, would then approach — in the past — a tribunal. 

Lawyers, a bunch of lawyers sit there and hear your case as to 

why you feel that you were offended. 

 

Now what the minister wants to do is he wants to replace that 

tribunal of lawyers to actually take it to the Court of Queen’s 

Bench, so it goes back to the court system. Because there are 

some changes there that some groups would like and some 

people certainly like to also ask questions about, and that’s one 

of the reasons why today we’re certainly taking a lot of interest 

on any kind of activity relating to the Human Rights 

Commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I point out that there is a still a lot of 

information forthcoming in relation to this Bill. And some of 

the points that the minister makes and other folks certainly 

support — I think a number of commission members may 

support — they made reference to Judge Arnot who is well 

known and certainly has a high degree of admiration from a 

number of different groups throughout the province. He noted 

that — Judge Arnot did — that some of these changes may be 

of value to the province overall. And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly 

want to take the time to understand the file completely, but in 

these opening comments I want to point out, to explain to 

people as best I can the way I understand it, the changes that are 

being proposed. 

 

And the challenges with the tribunal, in terms of the minister’s 

comments and notes, is that many times the lawyers that make 

up the tribunal, they have their own practices. Certainly they 

don’t have tenure. They don’t have administrative support or 

financial support to do the job as best they can, and that in itself 

may be a weakness, or it may be a flaw within the system, and 

that’s something that ought to be recognized and certainly 

something that ought to be addressed. 

 

And his logic in terms of trying to replace that tribunal, the 

group of lawyers that hear these concerns and take it to the 

court system, well perhaps there is some discussion and some 

merit to what is trying to be accomplished in that regard 

because of the challenges identified with the tribunal members 

who are primarily lawyers that, again as I mentioned, they may 

have their own practices. They certainly have their own lives. 

They don’t have the administrative support, and so on and so 

forth. So that may not necessarily weaken but it may certainly 

at some point create some problems for the process that we’re 

speaking of today. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The other issue I would raise is that in terms of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench, as noted by the minister himself and a number 

of other different groups, they have the capacity to certainly 

address a lot of the human rights complaints because I see some 

of the numbers. There may have been 10 cases last year in 

which some of these complaints actually went to a court 



6610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

proceeding. And that’s something that ought to be taken into 

consideration as well. 

 

Obviously the courts have lawyers that have many, many years 

of experience. They have experience with charter issues. So 

there is a lot of merit in the court system that the minister 

makes reference to in terms of how they would be not 

necessarily better equipped but perhaps better positioned than 

the band of lawyers that form the commission’s hearing stage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the factors out there, what the 

minister’s trying to do, the simple fact is trying to move the 

process of determining some of these cases from a tribunal of 

lawyers into the court system for a variety of reasons. Those are 

some of the things that we want to certainly pay attention to. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are having other meetings and other 

groups that are coming forward to talk about some of the 

changes that are being proposed. And we obviously want to 

respect the process, and we certainly want to respect their 

opportunity to present to us as the official opposition what they 

see as some of the challenges attached to this Bill, some of the 

shortcomings, and some of the other great ideas they may have 

that can actually improve the process. As an opposition, we’re 

all certainly supportive of any process that is streamlined, 

becomes more efficient and becomes more effective. 

 

And certainly the Human Rights Code and the Human Rights 

Commission themselves, their work is valued and very 

valuable. And we certainly want to continue seeing that work 

help many, many people throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

The final point I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that while the 

intent of the Bill is to look at the structure and how we deal 

with human rights violations and how we treat potential 

complainants, the process itself is straightforward. And one of 

the things I think we ought to do is to try and make sure we 

focus on the intent of the Human Rights Code to make sure that 

it is there to help people and to make sure that the process is 

always tweaked and always adjusted to make it more efficient, 

more responsive, and certainly more effective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset when I was asked to speak on the 

Human Rights Code amendment Act, I was going to bring in 

the whole notion of the ID Bill that was going to be presented 

and passed by the Sask Party government, in which the 

Aboriginal people would be dramatically affected and so would 

the immigration community and, I think, the elderly people as 

well. And that’s the whole notion of The Election Act. 

 

I think that the election Bill that’s being brought forward — 

where there is photo ID required for voting in elections — I 

think that’s another violation. I think in total fairness to the 

people that are out there and that are not being heard, this whole 

notion of photo ID to cast a ballot is absolutely ludicrous. It’s 

very silly. And perhaps the Human Rights Commission could 

certainly engage themselves and make the connection as to how 

this diminishes and certainly alters the intent of many people on 

how they want to develop democracy throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of things and issues to talk about. 

There’s a lot of notes that have to be incorporated in this 

process. And as much as we get an explanation of the minister 

himself in terms of what’s being intended here, we still want to 

hold forums with a number of other groups to ask for more 

advice, to ask for more input, and to see if there’s any ways and 

means, if there’s ways and means that we can improve the Bill. 

And on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill 160. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to be able to speak to Bill 149, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

implements a five-year tax holiday for mining corporations 

making investments of at least $125 million and maintaining at 

least 75 full-time employees. 

 

On . . . [inaudible] . . . of it, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is 

supportive of this measure and of any measure that would bring 

new corporate head offices to Saskatchewan. But as we’ve all 

learned in the debate about the future of the Potash Corporation 

in Saskatchewan, the devil lies clearly in the details. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at for instance what’s happened 

recently with the BH Billiton situation, where the Premier was 

quite adamant about the fact that it’s a strategic resource and 

that the sale of . . . to BH Billiton, I should say, should not be 

approved by the Government of Canada. And in doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier cited a number of promises that were 

made by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to the people 

of Saskatchewan in terms of some of the changes that it would 

implement going forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just interesting to see what’s happened 

so far out of those promises. We were told that corporate head 

office would be expanded and that there would be people from 

the executive that would be moving to Saskatchewan, 

transferred to Saskatchewan, and that we would see of course 

new purchases of homes in Saskatoon where the branch office 

is located, Mr. Speaker. And from that deal we saw Mr. Doyle 

himself say that he was going to purchase a home in Saskatoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I found it very interesting that The Globe 

and Mail reported that Mr. Doyle previously had a residence in 

Saskatoon along the riverbank, I understand, that was worth 

approximately $6 million or so. And in this new pledge to 

Saskatchewan from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6611 

because our Premier stood up for the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan and didn’t allow the sale of BH Billiton to go 

through, Mr. Speaker, we saw a phenomenal commitment by 

Bill Doyle himself of purchasing a condo that’s 1,000 square 

feet and worth $300,000, Mr. Speaker. That’s quite the 

investment in Saskatchewan real estate, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know, we’re quite pleased to see that he’s purchased some real 

estate in Saskatchewan, not quite equalling the $6 million home 

that he once held in Saskatoon, but nonetheless it is a piece of 

property in Saskatchewan. And I guess Mr. Doyle feels that 

he’s fulfilled his promise to the people of Saskatchewan in 

terms of that relocation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re interested to see how many other 

promises are going to come to fruition and in what way, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said. The devil is clearly in the details on this one, 

Mr. Speaker, as to how this is all going to come out in the 

wash. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting about this is that we are 

seeing the government yet again make some sort of a 

concession for industry in terms of spurring on the economy. 

And that’s something obviously that the opposition is not 

opposed to in terms of wanting to ensure that we see good, 

positive economic growth in this province, Mr. Speaker. But we 

also need to see that the resource that the Premier referred to as 

a strategic resource — which is potash, Mr. Speaker — that this 

strategic resource also sees the return that it should for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, given that it is a 

strategic resource that is owned by the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And currently, Mr. Speaker, what are the people of 

Saskatchewan seeing for a return on that strategic resource? 

They’re currently seeing 5 cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s right, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan gets to keep 

95 cents on every dollar that is earned and 5 cents, 5 cents is 

returned to the people of this province. 

 

Now the member for Moose Jaw Northeast, I believe, believes 

that there is something quite different. And I’d be interested in 

hearing what the member from Moose Jaw has to say about 

that. Because, Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting about that is 

we’ve not heard anything different from the Sask Party 

government when this has come up in discussion in the 

legislature over the last three days. But apparently the member 

from Moose Jaw feels he knows more than the Minister of 

Energy and Resources. Perhaps he knows more than the 

Minister of Finance. Perhaps he knows more the Premier 

himself, Mr. Speaker, because the member from Moose Jaw 

feels that that’s inaccurate. But you know, Mr. Speaker, the 

truth of the matter is 5 cents on the dollars. Five cents on the 

dollar is the return that Saskatchewan people are seeing from 

their ownership, from their strategic resource called potash, in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  

 

Now it’s interesting that of course obviously the member from 

Moose Jaw and the member from Energy and Resources feel 

that that seems to be a fair return, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s very interesting because that policy was put in 

place many, many, many years ago, Mr. Speaker, I dare to say 

over 20 years ago, in order to spur on the economy in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And that was done by the NDP 

administration in the early ’90s to spur on the economy, Mr. 

Speaker, and the industry of potash in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what’s happened since then? It’s gone from $130 a tonne, 

Mr. Speaker, to the rate that it’s currently at and climbing, Mr. 

Speaker. Now why is that? That is simply because the world 

needs potash. The world needs potash, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

not going to change any time soon. The corn belt in the United 

States needs potash. China needs potash. There are a number of 

different areas around the world that need that strategic 

resource, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that high need that’s currently in place, Mr. Speaker, 

around the world, does anyone really and honestly think that we 

aren’t going to see growth in the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan just because we think that there should be a 

review of the royalty structure in this province, Mr. Speaker? 

It’s absolutely ludicrous. 

 

And what’s even more ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 

we currently have a Sask Party government who is pledging not 

to look at reviewing that royalty structure for 16 years. They 

love to throw around the figure of 16 years. They’re saying that 

they’re not going to review the royalty structure for four terms. 

Four terms, Mr. Speaker, that’s 16 years in total. Now how 

irresponsible can any government be to be able to say 

something like that? That’s so far out in terms of having no idea 

what the future holds for potash in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

Sixteen years is when they’re saying that they’re going to do a 

review of the royalty rates in potash, Mr. Speaker. It is 

absolutely unconscionable that they are going to allow the 

Saskatchewan people to not have a fair return on a strategic 

resource that the Premier touted so greatly across the country, 

Mr. Speaker, and presented himself as Captain Canada on the 

issue, Mr. Speaker, for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

unconscionable. 

 

Now what’s more interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

amount of projects that this government, the Sask Party 

government, has not been able to go forward with because they 

don’t have the money. Why? Because they’re spending it in 

various other ways that . . . We know I could get into a long 

debate about their priorities versus the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. But nonetheless that’s how 

the Sask Party government has decided to spend the money and 

the revenue, the record revenue that has been coming into this 

province since 2005, Mr. Speaker. And since 2007, the revenue 

that has increased has been so dramatic that it’s hard to believe 

that they’re still looking at a shortfall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you look at it in terms of Bill 149, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

interesting that the Sask Party government is not considering a 

royalty review. Because a royalty review, Mr. Speaker, would 

bring more money into the province of Saskatchewan. More 

money for what, Mr. Speaker? More money to move ahead 

with some of the projects that even the Sask Party government 

isn’t able to move ahead on and can’t even keep their promises 

on, Mr. Speaker. More money, Mr. Speaker, for education 

purposes, Mr. Speaker. More money for health, Mr. Speaker. 

More money for the environment to do better initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker, on moving forward with protecting the environment of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or even mitigating the 



6612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, by speaking to Alberta about the 

fact that we’re receiving 70 per cent of the pollution that’s 

coming from the oil sands. 

 

But this government doesn’t care about that. They don’t care 

about talking to Alberta and ensuring that Saskatchewan is 

being compensated for the fact that it’s Saskatchewan that’s 

absorbing 70 per cent of those emissions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the royalty review, Mr. Speaker, is something that is 

absolutely required. It’s being touted by a number of third party 

validators, Mr. Speaker, who are clearly people who have 

expertise in the field, Mr. Speaker. And yet the Sask Party 

government says, you know what? We’re comfortable with the 

fact that Saskatchewan people are getting five cents on the 

dollar, and we’re not going to look at doing a royalty review for 

16 years. Sixteen years, Saskatchewan people can suffer the 

fact that they don’t have the amount of money that they need to 

be able to do the things that they want to do with the programs 

that they want to see happen in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

unconscionable. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So when you look at Bill 149, Mr. Speaker, again we see that, 

you know, the Sask Party government is ensuring that it looks 

after the industry in terms of spurring on growth. But it does 

nothing, the Sask Party government is doing nothing to look 

after the interests of the people of Saskatchewan in terms of the 

return that they’re seeing on those strategic resources, Mr. 

Speaker, those strategic resources being potash and uranium in 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Five cents on the 

dollar is what Saskatchewan people are currently seeing from 

the strategic resource of potash in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m curious to hear what the Sask Party member from 

Moose Jaw has to offer to his caucus tomorrow by way of 

providing more information. I know that our critic of Finance is 

curious as well to hear what the member from Moose Jaw has 

to say about that. I’m sure that the Sask Party caucus is 

interested to hear what the member from Moose Jaw has to say 

about that because clearly so far there hasn’t been any 

contention on the fact that Saskatchewan people are seeing five 

cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker, five cents on the dollar from a 

strategic resource. It’s unconscionable. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be interesting to see what commitments 

mining companies have made in exchange for this tax holiday 

and how successful this government is at making sure they keep 

their commitments because given their recent record it’s hard to 

be optimistic. Mr. Speaker, this government, this Sask Party 

government has a very poor record of keeping the promises that 

it’s made to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I refer to a number of them, Mr. Speaker. How about the 

surgical care centre, Mr. Speaker? How about the fact that 

instead of pumping millions and millions of dollars into private 

health care delivery in this province, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 

go ahead with the surgical care centre that was promised for 

Regina, Mr. Speaker? Now that surgical care centre would have 

addressed a lot of the backlog that it’s currently seeing, Mr. 

Speaker. It would have addressed a lot of the orthopedic 

surgeries that need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. 

But instead of putting the millions of dollars into making that 

promise come to fruition, instead of doing that, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re pumping millions of dollars into private health care 

delivery in this province, Mr. Speaker. And why the Premier 

thinks that that is something that the people of Saskatchewan 

would like to see move ahead, that instead of enhancing the 

public health care system, Mr. Speaker, they are putting more 

money into private health care delivery, Mr. Speaker, again is 

not something that the opposition can understand, given the 

amount of feedback that we’ve been getting on the issue and the 

amount of concerns that we’ve been getting on the issue about 

the privatization agenda of the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

And that’s what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker. It’s all about a 

privatization agenda, whether it’s to do with the Crown 

corporations and cutting off bits and pieces of various Crown 

corporations like SaskTel and SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] and SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, or SaskPower. 

Regardless of whether it’s that, regardless of whether it’s 

private health care delivery, it’s all about a privatization 

agenda.  

 

Now the Sask Party knows well enough to know that the people 

of Saskatchewan are not very excited about a privatization 

agenda. Matter of fact, it was very clear in the 2003 election 

that the people of this province do not want to see a large 

privatization agenda in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the Sask Party 

government heard loud and clear in the 2003 election that 

people do not want to see a privatization agenda in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, what did they do in the 2007 election? 

2007 election, Sask Party government — the Sask Party at that 

time, I should say — promised the people of Saskatchewan that 

it doesn’t have a privatization agenda. It doesn’t want to 

privatize the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. But what happened after the Sask Party won the 2007 

election? They couldn’t wait to get their hands on the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. They couldn’t wait to start sawing 

off bits and pieces of certain Crowns like SGI, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, SaskPower. 

 

And they look stunned right now at me, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

know. Maybe they haven’t been following what’s been 

happening, but I’d be glad to send over the list of Crowns that 

have seen a privatization agenda chipping away at those certain 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker. I’d be glad to send that over to the office 

. . . to the Sask Party government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, so we wonder again, are the terms of Bill 149 

true and clear, Mr. Speaker? Is it really as innocuous as it 

currently seems, Mr. Speaker, because we’re seeing quite the 

different story on a number of other fronts. 

 

Let’s also talk about other promises they made, like for instance 

they said they wouldn’t introduce most . . . essential services 

legislation. Well, it wasn’t within . . . It was within, what? Less 

than seven days, Mr. Speaker. Why, I believe it was the 

Minister of Health that said that actually, and there were other 

as well. But Minister of Health himself was quoted numerous 

times as saying that they have no agenda, no agenda to 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6613 

introduce essential services legislation. Within seven days of 

being elected, what happened, Mr. Speaker? There was an 

announcement made that they are going to move forward with 

essential services legislation. There you go, Mr. Speaker. They 

say one thing and yet they do quite another, despite the fact that 

they heard loud and clear that people were worried about them 

introducing essential services legislation. 

 

And you know, one of my colleagues just said, it’s a trust 

factor. And you know what? He is right. He is absolutely right. 

The member from Cumberland is correct when he says it’s a 

trust issue, Mr. Speaker. Because right now the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying we have less and less trust in the Sask 

Party government because they always say one thing and they 

do another They promise a surgical care centre and then they 

announce they’re not going to do it. They promise a carbon 

sequestration project and then they announce that they can’t do 

it. It’s constant broken promises from this Sask Party 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s constant broken promises the other way. 

They promise they’re not going to introduce essential services 

legislation, but what do they do shortly after they’re elected? 

They announce that that’s exactly what they’re going to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they do so in a way without public 

consultation. And that’s what’s the most offensive issue, Mr. 

Speaker, is that when they go against the will of the public, they 

don’t hold public consultations because they know what the 

outcome is going to be and they don’t want to hear the outcome 

and they don’t care about the outcome. They have their agenda 

and that’s what they’re sticking to. No different than the 

privatization agenda that’s happening with the Crown 

corporations in this province currently under the Sask Party 

government. 

 

And you know, they think they’re pretty cute, Mr. Speaker, 

because they think, gee, people don’t know about this. Matter 

of fact, I’m surprised. I think some of the members opposite 

don’t even know about it, Mr. Speaker. But the fact is, people 

are paying attention and there’s a list being made, Mr. Speaker. 

And people are growing concerned. There is a list being made. 

And you know, the minister, I still don’t know what portfolio 

unfortunately he’s responsible for, but anyways the minster for, 

I think it’s Immigration still . . . Is it Immigration? Yes. So the 

Minister for Immigration, he doesn’t know there’s a list, Mr. 

Speaker. But again, like I said, we’ll be glad to send that 

information over. 

 

And no, it’s no longer Status of Women because I know that the 

minister found out at some point that he was responsible for the 

Status of Women. But I know that the minister’s no longer 

responsible for the Status of Women because it was a surprise 

to him at the time, so I know that having the Status of Women 

given to another minister is not a surprise to him. So I know 

that that point is clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the issue around royalties is 

something that’s very sensitive to the members opposite. 

Because they’re hearing from Saskatchewan people that people 

don’t feel that that is something that is prudent at the time, 

given the changes in the world market with potash in terms of 

the prices that are changing and the need that is taking place, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the Sask Party government 

doesn’t want to hear this NDP opposition talking about wanting 

to have a royalty review in this province on the strategic 

resources of uranium and potash, Mr. Speaker, comes as no 

surprise to us since they’re so far out there, they’re so far out 

there on the fact that they have already said publicly many 

times that they are not interested in a royalty review for four 

terms. That’s 16 years, Mr. Speaker. That is pretty hard to reel 

that hook back into the rod, Mr. Speaker. So it’s no surprise 

that they don’t want to talk about the royalty review because 

they’re so far out there that they can’t really change their 

position on that. 

 

But we in the NDP opposition understand that there is always 

changes going on in the global market, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

always changes going on, and it’s very important for a 

government to be flexible and to be able to react to those 

changes in a timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. And with those 

global market changes, Mr. Speaker, comes the understanding 

under the NDP opposition that what was once a good policy to 

stimulate the industry in the province of Saskatchewan is no 

longer a fair policy to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When you see the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan earning $500 million when the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan aren’t even earning 

close to that, that’s no longer a fair system of royalties, Mr. 

Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan deserve to see more than 

five cents on the dollar. The Premier himself has called potash a 

strategic resource. The Premier himself has gone to bat for the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan on that strategic 

resource in terms of ensuring that there isn’t some jeopardy of 

that strategic resource, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier himself should be someone who is wanting to see more 

than five cents on the dollar from that strategic resource. 

 

And you know, we can understand why the CEO of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan doesn’t want to see that formula 

change because that’s his responsibility. His responsibility is to 

the shareholders of the Potash Corporation to ensure that they 

can get the maximum amount of return from the industry that 

they are pursuing in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan is in effect the 

CEO for the people of Saskatchewan, and his primary concern 

is supposed to be the good and welfare and what the people of 

Saskatchewan should be able to see as a return from their 

strategic resource. So the Premier of Saskatchewan shouldn’t be 

so concerned with protecting the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan or anyone else that’s going to be looking at 

mining, the strategic resources that we have in this province — 

being potash and uranium — and should be more concerned 

about what Saskatchewan people get to see from the return on 

that strategic resource. 

 

He’s supposed to be looking out for the good and welfare and 

for the return for the people of Saskatchewan from those 

strategic resources, Mr. Speaker. So with Bill 49, Mr. Speaker, 

when this Bill looks at implementing a five-year tax holiday for 

mining corporations making investments in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that the gains 



6614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

for the people of Saskatchewan are still being met and that 

there’s a fair and equitable balance in terms of what the people 

of Saskatchewan should be seeing from their ownership of 

those strategic resources, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not 

something that the Sask Party government is currently proving 

themselves to be responsible for. 

 

Currently the Sask Party government seems to be more 

concerned about protecting the industry, making excuses for the 

industry versus looking out for the best interest of 

Saskatchewan people. And when Saskatchewan people are 

having difficulty meeting their rents, Mr. Speaker, when 

Saskatchewan people are using food banks dramatically in 

terms of . . . a dramatic increase in using food banks in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, especially over the last year, and when 

Saskatchewan people can’t afford their utilities because the 

Sask Party government has decided to cut the lowest cost utility 

bundle despite the fact that the province, the Sask Party 

government is seeing record revenue in the province of 

Saskatchewan since 2007 when they were elected, Mr. Speaker, 

despite all these reasons, the Sask Party government sees no 

reason to do a royalty review in the province of Saskatchewan 

to ensure that there is more money coming to the people of 

Saskatchewan to be able to offset some of those higher costs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And those costs, Mr. Speaker, are especially hard on the people 

who have the least amount of means to pay for those increases 

in costs, Mr. Speaker. And it’s unconscionable that we have a 

Sask Party government that will cut the lowest cost utility 

bundle, that won’t see more return on the return it gets from the 

potash in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They won’t fight for equalization with the Harper Tories, 

despite the fact that the Harper Tories promised the government 

. . . the province of Saskatchewan, promised the people of 

Saskatchewan that if the people of Saskatchewan elected the 

Harper Tories to government that they would see an $800 

million return on their non-renewable resources, Mr. Speaker. 

So an $800 million per year promise was broken by the Harper 

Tories. And what did we see from the Sask Party government? 

Well I recall that we saw from them the withdrawal of a court 

challenge on that issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former NDP government said that that was 

unfair; it was a broken promise, and that the Government of 

Canada — being the Harper Tories or the Harper government 

as how he likes to refer to himself now — should be held 

accountable. But what did the Sask Party government do under 

our Premier, Mr. Speaker? It decided that it was going to 

remove that court challenge, that it was going to drop that court 

challenge, that apparently, according to the Sask Party 

government, it was okay that we weren’t going to see an 

additional $800 million per year coming into the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what that amounts to per 

capita — well we consider we had one million, a population of 

slightly over one million, Mr. Speaker — it is a dramatic 

increase in the coffers, the revenue of this province of 

Saskatchewan that would have been able . . . could have been 

put to good use, not the least of which their own broken 

promises on a surgical care centre and a carbon sequestration 

project, Mr. Speaker. So it’s quite surprising that once again we 

see that they have no interest in properly representing the 

people of Saskatchewan when it comes to discussions with the 

Harper Conservatives. 

 

So let’s recap, Mr. Speaker. We see a court challenge that has 

been dropped with the Harper Conservatives amounting to the 

tune of $800 million a year. We see no discussions with the 

Government of Alberta with respect to mitigating the fact that 

70 per cent of the air emissions of the pollution from the oil 

sands in Alberta is directly affecting the economy of 

Saskatchewan and the health of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. We see no representation from the Sask Party 

government in terms of seeing a better return on potash royalty, 

Mr. Speaker, and they’re quite content with Saskatchewan 

people only receiving 5 cents on the dollar from their strategic 

resource that the people of Saskatchewan own, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder when exactly the Sask 

Party government is going to kick it into gear and start 

representing the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Because 

right now we’re not seeing much of that. We’re seeing a whole 

bunch of protectionism of their friends in Alberta, their friends 

at the Harper government, and their friends in the industry, but 

we’re not seeing them protecting the people of Saskatchewan 

and looking out for the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s absolutely unconscionable that these people can sit 

there smugly, Mr. Speaker, and not think that this is something 

that they should be looking into, Mr. Speaker. Because clearly 

there is a lot of money that is owed to the province of 

Saskatchewan, that the province of Saskatchewan should be 

able to see from that, Mr. Speaker, and it’s surprising that the 

Sask Party government doesn’t feel it’s their responsibility to 

make those changes happen by speaking up and speaking out 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s also questions about the origins of 

this specific piece of legislation. And again, who benefits from 

it? Right, Mr. Speaker? With respect to Bill 149 specifically, 

who benefits from this legislation? And as I said, Mr. Speaker, 

the only ones that we can see benefiting from, right now, are 

industry. 

 

Now if it’s, like I said, if there is positive spinoffs from the 

legislation in terms of ensuring that there’s growth in industry, 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition can understand that. Because 

clearly the NDP opposition, the NDP government at the time, 

put a lot of policies into place — especially in the years from 

1991 until 1999 and moving forward as well, but especially in 

those very lean years, Mr. Speaker, those very lean years when 

in 1991 the NDP government came into office and found out 

that the Devine Tories, prior to 1991, had accrued in a $15 

billion deficit on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now again we see these similarities, Mr. Speaker. We see the 

similarities between the former Devine Tories who accrued a 

$15 billion debt on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and 

we see the current Sask Party government who clearly wants to 

distance themselves from the former Conservative government, 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6615 

who is not looking out for the financial best interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And isn’t it funny that it’s always the conservative governments 

of this province, Mr. Speaker, who are very good at spending 

and are not very good at accruing the money that the people of 

Saskatchewan so desperately need to move forward with 

respect to the programs that they want to see move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So like I said, who benefits? And are the benefits likely to result 

in significant new greenfield investment, or is this something 

intended to benefit only one or two players, Mr. Speaker? Who 

does Bill 149 benefit? I repeat: are the benefits likely to result 

in significant new greenfield investment, or is this something 

intended to benefit simply one or two players, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear lots of questions from the Sask Party 

government. Maybe these are things that they didn’t think about 

before they brought forward Bill 149, which of course wouldn’t 

be a big surprise to the NDP opposition because we’ve already 

seen a number of Bills come forward from the Sask Party 

government that have been ill-conceived and not well thought 

out and quite frankly, for the most part, Mr. Speaker, haven’t 

undergone proper consultation. And when Bills aren’t properly 

thought through, when Bills don’t receive the proper 

consultation that they should and that they deserve, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party government ends up putting forward 

Bills that are problematic and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that 

are just absolutely to the detriment of Saskatchewan people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other question is, who asked for this Bill 

specifically? Who asked for the changes to Bill 149? And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s interesting that when we talk about other Bills that 

sometimes they’ll put forward the names of organizations that 

they claim are the stakeholders that they’ve consulted and that 

they claim are the stakeholders that are in favour of their Bills. 

Well when I read through the notes on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

more specifically I guess the second reading comments by the 

minister, I have difficulty finding anything that refers to who 

the minister is wanting to refer to as being proponents of this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to have more knowledge, Mr. 

Speaker, on who was consulted — and not the obvious industry 

players that would reap the benefits of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

but also others that would have some say, some other 

stakeholders that would have some more expertise and 

knowledge on the issues, Mr. Speaker, and who would want to 

have some input on Bill 149, Mr. Speaker. So we’d like to 

know, who asked for this? Who was consulted? And what 

exactly were the comments that the government received, if 

those consultations were properly constituted and if those 

consultations actually took place, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, just to recap, we want to know — 

from the NDP opposition — is this Bill simply there to provide 

another tax holiday for industry, Mr. Speaker? Is there going to 

be meaningful growth in the industry because of this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, which, you know . . . The opposition will be curious to 

see what happens in terms of when this Bill ends up being 

passed by the Sask Party government and what happens from 

that, Mr. Speaker. Or is this something that is just a quick idea 

that was brought forward that the Sask Party government 

wanted to do to help out a friend of theirs, Mr. Speaker, or one 

or two players in the industry, Mr. Speaker, because again as I 

said, we see them moving quickly on Bills like this that we 

haven’t heard of a lot of consultation on. But what we also hear 

from the Sask Party government is complete inaction on 

something like a royalty review for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s a promise that they’ve already made — four terms, 16 

years. They’re not going to do a royalty review for 16 years. 

 

Despite the fact of changes in the global market, despite the fact 

that there is a higher need for the strategic resource that the 

world has now talked about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

someone else is chirping about getting the facts. And like I’ve 

said, I’d be more than willing to provide the facts regarding Bill 

149 and some of the other things I’ve talked about today 

because clearly they’re still needing some more information. 

 

And it’s very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t have 

these discussions in caucus obviously because, you know, when 

we were in government . . . and they loved the number 16, Mr. 

Speaker. So I’ll put this out there. When we were a government 

for 16 years, when the NDP was in government for 16 years, 

we did discuss extensively Bills in the caucus first, Mr. 

Speaker, and then at various other committees, Mr. Speaker. 

And then it would come back to caucus and then also go to 

cabinet for approval. 

 

So it’s interesting that some of the members in the Sask Party 

government don’t have the details and the facts on Bills such as 

this and the information that I’ve provided today because 

they’re asking for those facts to be sent over. And like I said, if 

those individual members want to make themselves known to 

me, I’d be glad to do so, Mr. Speaker. It’s just hard to decipher 

who exactly has been chirping from their seats because there’s 

many people in the House obviously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s many questions that I’ve already 

presented, and there’s a lot of information that the NDP 

opposition is still looking for. We’re looking for some 

clarification. I’m hoping that the Sask Party government will be 

reciprocal. As I said, I’m glad to provide any facts and 

information on anything I’ve spoken about today or any other 

time, for that matter. And it would be very nice if the Sask 

Party government would be wanting to be reciprocal in that 

offer, Mr. Speaker, and provide some answers to the questions 

that I’ve posed today in my comments and the questions I’m 

sure that will be posed and have been posed by some of my 

colleagues with respect to Bill 149 as well. 

 

So as I said, there’s many questions that are yet to be, need to 

be explored in committee. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to adjourn debate and allow others to weigh in on their 

comments as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 149. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



6616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

Bill. No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it truly 

is a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to enter into this 

particular debate in this fine Assembly of ours and to have the 

opportunity to share a few of my thoughts on Bill No. 150, An 

Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Act. 

 

And I will certainly like to let the member opposite know that it 

will eventually get to committee, but we will need to have the 

opportunity for the opposition to scrutinize this Bill because, 

like many Bills, it needs to be carefully looked at before it can 

be sent on the committee so that the good people of 

Saskatchewan can be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well it 

takes time to do good work, you know, to the member from 

Pelly. It takes a little time to do good work, and that’s what this 

opposition does. It does good work. And we’re very, very 

efficient and very effective and very thorough on our 

examination of the government Bills. And we have to because 

the government does challenge us on a regular basis by 

providing the Bills that need to be looked at very, very closely. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill is short in stature, I guess 

you would say. It only has six clauses including the coming into 

force clause, but that doesn’t mean, Mr. Speaker, that it’s short 

in the requirement of the opposition to do a thorough job and to 

make sure that this Bill does address the issues and the 

intentions, I guess you would say, of the government. And I 

think in some ways, in some aspects there are good points in 

this Bill, and I think the government has recognized that. 

 

And I would say that this Bill basically, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve 

glanced at it, it basically has two main provisions. The first one 

is to — and I think this is a very good thing — this is to clarify 

how spousal survival benefits are to be calculated in the case of 

a person who may have been married more than once and is 

now a superannuate and is now collecting the pension, and how 

that needs to be properly balanced, properly calculated in those 

cases where there is more than one marriage involved and who 

may have both current and former spouses who would have 

claimed the right, I guess you would say, to qualify to receive 

some type of survivors benefit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that that be addressed 

because we have a duty to ensure that the superannuates are 

treated properly because, at some point in time, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re all going to be there. And to ensure that in a case where 

there are spouses and in some cases multiple spouses, then we 

have to ensure that the legislation here covers and certainly 

balances those situations so that there’s fairness and equality in 

the treatment of spouses in those situations. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that’s fair to say because at some point in time we’re all 

going to find ourselves as a superannuate. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And it’s I suppose a situation where, in my opinion at least, 

superannuates actually lose power or lose their ability to 

negotiate on their behalf, whereas we enjoy that very much so 

here today, as those of us who are elected officials within this 

Assembly, we have the power and the ability to make those 

changes. This is why it is necessary, when we approach issues 

such as this is, that we can ensure that there has been a 

thorough discussion with the people who are affected. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, it’s the superannuates and their spouses 

who are the people who are on the front lines of this particular 

issue. And this is why it’s essential to have their thoughts, their 

ideas, their experiences added to this mix. So our role as 

legislators here — the role of government members, the role of 

opposition members — is to ensure that when we produce a 

piece of legislation, when it does go through committee, when 

it does gets its final approval in the third reading here in the 

Assembly, that it reflects properly and adequately the needs of 

those who are the front line troops here, in this case 

superannuates and their spouses. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is, I think, incumbent upon all members of 

the legislature to ensure that we have a proper consultation 

process and a proper discussion with the stakeholders on any 

piece of legislation, but particularly on this one because 

superannuates are the people who have dedicated their lives to 

this province. They are the people who have provided us, the 

elected people and the people of this great province of 

Saskatchewan, the services that we have so much enjoyed and 

in many cases benefited from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it is I think incumbent upon us to ensure that when these 

folks become superannuates, when they retire, that they do so 

with a system and a support mechanism through the legislation 

that supports their needs as adequately as it is possible for this 

province to do so. And in order to do that, we have to have the 

feedback and we have to have the input from those front-line 

groups, the superannuates who are ongoing and for those who 

have gone before us, as some of us are getting closer to that, 

Mr. Speaker, than others but we’ll all eventually get to that 

stage.  

 

And I think we want to ensure that those people who have 

served us well through this province, served us well as civil 

servants in this great province of ours, receive due attention, the 

attention that they have earned, and to ensure that the 

legislation that supports superannuation is legislation that is 

adequate to meet the needs of those who are superannuating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose the other part of this Bill, the other 

provision of this Bill is of concern. I think, Mr. Speaker, and it 

goes on to state, it goes on to state that the second provision of 

the Bill continues the same pattern as we’ve seen from this 

government before, is not necessarily being forthright with 

everything. And in this particular case, the government’s 

proposing that to remove from public record or from the public 

recording the amount of money and the benefits being paid out 

to individual superannuates. Mr. Speaker, I believe it even goes 

on further to say that they wouldn’t even require the names of 

superannuates in the documentation of government. 

 



March 9, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6617 

Now in the past, Mr. Speaker, that information was available 

because the name of the individual and the amount the 

individual was receiving as a superannuate was made available 

through the public accounting system, and the public was 

available to that through public . . . That information was 

available to the public through public accounts. As I understand 

it, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation, once passed, would 

change that process. 

 

And that then, Mr. Speaker, makes it more difficult for the 

opposition certainly, but for the people of Saskatchewan to be 

able to recognize whether or not individuals may be using their 

ability to double-dip. And that is, they could be drawing . . . 

They could be superannuate. They could be drawing their 

superannuation as well as doing work for the government, 

contract work for the government, and it wouldn’t be available 

for the public to know because it wouldn’t be, that information 

would no longer be available through public accounts. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that of course raises an issue and a concern 

with the opposition. And that, Mr. Speaker, I suppose opens the 

door then to the ability for a government to favour its friends by 

allowing an early superannuate to withdraw their 

superannuation early and then go back and doing basically the 

same job they were doing, but only now doing it under contract. 

So really being paid twice for the same work from the 

provincial government. 

 

But that, Mr. Speaker, certainly raises a concern, and that’s why 

the opposition would term that as the ability to double-dip. And 

the opposition believes that this could result in a former 

employee having the ability to collect pension benefits while 

working for the government on a contract basis. And that would 

otherwise be a double-dipping process and that would not, that 

information would not be available to the public, would 

certainly not be available to the opposition. So you know, that 

is certainly a concern about this legislation, certainly the second 

portion of this legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I had said earlier, there are some aspects 

of this legislation that are I think positive, and that is the ability 

for this legislation to set forward a calculation system that 

would allow for fair and adequate calculating of a 

superannuate’s survivor’s rights to those who might have found 

themselves to have certainly a spouse or multiple spouses that 

would qualify for some type of survivor’s benefits. And that 

calculation of course would allow for an equity, I guess you 

would say, within the process of ensuring that these survivors 

do receive equal and fair treatment. 

 

The opposition, I would think, wants to have a better 

understanding of the potential impact of this provision and 

particularly on the vulnerable people and however it may affect 

them and how the government certainly would set up a system 

to ensure that the vulnerable people are protected within the 

process of doing the calculation for the benefits. 

 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s absolutely essential on any 

piece of legislation — not just this one, but any piece of 

legislation — that the government certainly has an obligation to 

consult with those people who are the stakeholders, who are the 

front-line troops, who are being and will be affected by any 

changes to this legislation. It’s been my experience, Mr. 

Speaker, in this House for a few years here now, that what one 

might think is a simply black and white issue is really not. It’s 

always a bit of shade of grey, and that is because of the role that 

government plays within our society and our economy. 

 

And how it is governed and regulated through our legislation 

and regulations is that when you make a change to a piece of 

legislation, it can very well have a domino effect . . . [inaudible] 

. . . one little piece here it may affect something well down the 

road. So to ensure that those effects are positive effects and not 

negative and that no one is hurt or left out in this, it’s the role of 

government to do a very thorough job of researching what 

effects may happen when a piece of legislation is changed. 

 

In order to do that, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s essential that 

government carries out a meaningful consultation process, not 

only with the immediate stakeholders, but I think it’s the role 

for government and the responsibility for government to look at 

carrying out a consultation process with the general public. 

Because there are those of us, as the older we get, the more 

concerned we become perhaps over the rules and regulations 

around superannuation. 

 

But I think it’s fair to say that there are many of our people in 

our great society in this province of ours who recognize that 

we’re all going to get old, and we’re going to fall into that 

system where we will eventually become retired and in some 

cases a superannuate. And they want to ensure that those rules 

and regulations that are being amended today, the amendments 

will have a positive effect on not only in the immediate future 

here and those people who are now superannuates or soon will 

be, but they will be in place in a meaningful way into the future, 

so some of the younger folks who are superannuates today, 

when they become seniors and certainly be in a position to 

superannuate, that the system in place and the regulations in 

place and the legislation in place will reflect in a meaningful 

way their needs at that time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again I think this is incumbent upon the 

government to make sure it has carried out meaningful dialogue 

with not only the immediate stakeholders but I think with the 

population of Saskatchewan as a whole. So that then raises the 

question with me, Mr. Speaker, of why does the government 

feel the need to make these amendments? Why does the 

government feel these amendments are required at this time? 

What was caused the government to say this is a very important 

issue and this is something that needs to be done and we need to 

do it now, and we need to have the okay of the Legislative 

Assembly and the people of this great province to make these 

changes? What was it, what was it, the issue? What was the 

circumstances that caused the government to think that this was 

an immediate issue and had to be addressed within short order 

here, and therefore brought in Bill 150, the Act to amend the 

superannuation. 

 

And it’s really a short Bill, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier. It only 

has six clauses, and it raises concern that the government 

brought in such a short Bill that really focuses in on two fronts. 

 

And as I said earlier, I think that the clarifying the spousal 

survival benefit calculation is a very good thing. I think that’s 

something that needs to be done. We don’t want to have a 

situation out there where a spousal calculation is not being done 



6618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2011 

on a proper basis. In this case, the example being used is an 

example where a superannuate may have been married on more 

than one occasions and therefore has two surviving spouses 

who both have claim, or believe they have rightful claim, to the 

superannuate’s survivor benefits. 

 

So that, Mr. Speaker, I think we can all agree is certainly a step 

in the right direction and something that needs to be clarified so 

that there is no misunderstanding, so that there is a clear 

understanding of what needs to be done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of work to do on this Bill yet, 

and the opposition will need certainly more time to further the 

review of this Bill. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude 

my remarks by moving adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Being near the hour of adjournment, 

this Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 

a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6589 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6589 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6589 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6589 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6589 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6590 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6590 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6590 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6590 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6590 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Pharmacist Awareness Week 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6591 

 Supported Employment Month 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 

 Saskatoon Café Recognized 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6591 

 2011 Farm Family of the Year Award  

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6592 

 Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6592 

 Resource Taxation 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6592 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Mental Health Facilities 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6593 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6593 

 Issues in Health Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6594 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6594 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6596 

 Land Purchase 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6596 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6596 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6597 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6597 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6600 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6602 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6606 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6609 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6610 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6616 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


