




















































Hansard: December 12, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 5A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 121 

 December 12, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — If I may start . . . Oh, the Premier wants to do 

an introduction. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I would be happy to defer, Mr. 

Speaker, but I appreciate the chance to introduce some very 

special guests who have joined us in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to all members of this Assembly, 

it is an honour to introduce and welcome Her Excellency 

Dienne Moehario who’s the ambassador for the Republic of 

Indonesia. She is joined by the minister councillor and the trade 

attaché. 

 

I had a chance to meet with the delegation from Indonesia, led 

by Her Excellency, earlier this morning, and I just want to say it 

was an excellent meeting, Mr. Speaker. We have a very special 

and growing relationship, does the province of Saskatchewan, 

with the people of Indonesia. 

 

First and foremost, they’re very, very good friends. Secondly, 

they’re an important source of investment capital, an 

opportunity for our province, and we’re increasingly the same 

for the people of Indonesia. Over the last several months, our 

exports to Indonesia have hit an all-time high of 650 million, 

potash sales up 84 per cent, non-durum wheat sales up 75 per 

cent. 

 

And members will know an Indonesian company called Sinar 

Mas, which is increasingly important to our forestry sector with 

two operations, including most recently the reopening of PA 

[Prince Albert] pulp mill, Mr. Speaker. These are very, very 

important developments for our forestry sector and made Sinar 

Mas, an Indonesian company, the most important and largest 

corporate — well I should say the largest corporate — 

participant in our forestry sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you will know, our government is engaged in 

that region of the world and the fastest growing economies of 

the world in terms of Saskatchewan’s story, with missions to 

China, to India, to Bangladesh. We talked this morning about 

the opportunity for a trade mission to Indonesia, and I think 

that’s something we ought to be looking forward to in the near 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to on behalf of a grateful province thank 

the ambassador and the people of Indonesia for the warm 

relationship we have and hope that we can work together for its 

furtherance and its improvement. And we welcome her today to 

our capital city and the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 

welcome Her Excellency and the delegation to Saskatchewan 

on behalf of the official opposition. Many years ago, my parents 

travelled to Jakarta and spent time in Indonesia, and we got 

back many fine reports of the country. But I have not yet had a 

chance to come but I will, based on my parents’ reports and of 

many Indonesian friends here in Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the important questions in Trivial Pursuit about 

Indonesia is the fact that it is the country in the world with the 

largest number of people of the Islamic faith, and many people 

forget that. But very important for me as a Lutheran and many 

other Lutherans in this particular Assembly, there also are more 

than 10 million Lutherans who live in Indonesia who are part of 

the Lutheran World Federation, and I’ve made many contacts 

with Indonesian people through that context as well. So here in 

Saskatchewan you have many friends, and it looks like we’ll 

have more opportunities over the years. And we’re very happy 

to welcome you here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you to the rest of the members of the Assembly a group 

of 18 grade 12 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate in the 

constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They are here today 

with their teacher, Mr. Scott McKillop. 

 

Winston Knoll is a wonderful school with great students and 

staff. I will be meeting with the students later this afternoon to 

discuss some of the exciting items that were in the recent 

Throne Speech such as Saskatchewan advantage scholarship, 

the increase in age to the active family benefit and to the 

children’s insulin pump program. Also I will be able to answer 

any questions they may have. I hope they enjoy observing 

question period and that they will be enlightened by the 

proceeds that go on today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

stand today and introduce to you two individuals seated in your 

gallery straight across, Mr. Speaker: Mr. Amandeep Sidhu and 

Inderjeet Litt. These two individuals are residents of Hampton 

Village in my constituency and part of the growing Sikh 

community in Saskatoon and in Hampton Village itself, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Aman is a friend. And he’s married; his wife’s name is Raman. 

And they have a beautiful little girl named Shub who’s about 

the same age as our daughter. And his nephew Inderjeet is a 

grade 12 student at Mount Royal. Aman has a trucking business 

in Saskatoon and operates about five trucks and employs a 

number of workers. And so he’s already contributing very well 

to our province, and I know he will continue to do so for many 

years. 

 

I’d also like to say a thank you to them because they were a big 

help during the recent election campaign in the constituency, 

and I would like to say thank you for their assistance in that as 

well, Mr. Speaker. So I’d ask all members to join me in 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

welcoming these two individuals to the gallery. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to welcome a group of about 30 grade 12 

students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate here in Regina in my 

constituency. Their chaperones today are two of Regina 

public’s finest. 

 

Just a quick straw poll: when I met them as they entered, a vast 

majority of those future — well current and future — leaders 

are going to be going to a post-secondary institution here in 

Saskatchewan, so that’s good stuff. Get a chance to talk to them 

after question period, but please welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce my CA [constituency 

assistant] sitting in your gallery, Matt Donlevy. Also sitting 

with Matt is his brother Chris. Matt ran a fantastic campaign for 

one of our Saskatoon Eastview constituencies, and I’m looking 

forward to having him take care of our constituency in 

Saskatoon Meewasin. So I’d like the Legislative Assembly to 

welcome Matt and Chris to their Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today, Mr. Speaker, to present a petition on behalf of my 

constituents who live in the neighbourhood of Hampton Village 

as well as Dundonald, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency. The 

petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my constituents, it’s a pleasure to 

present this petition for a new school in Hampton Village. 

Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

A Community of Support 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in this House today to share with all members 

my experience. I recently attended at Sherbrooke Community 

Centre, a long-term care facility in Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Sherbrooke is home to 270 residents, 100 day program 

participants, and over 500 staff. There are also a great number 

of volunteers, family members, and friends visiting the centre 

on a regular basis. Sherbrooke first opened its doors as a 

nursing home in 1966, and over the past 35 years the centre has 

expanded and has won a number of awards for excellence in 

health care. Sherbrooke’s vision is to, and I quote, “create a 

community that supports people to live full and abundant lives.” 

Mr. Speaker, I have visited Sherbrooke several times now and 

seen this mission in action. 

 

Most recently I visited Sherbrooke on November 28th. I 

participated in a spiritual ceremony hosted by Chaplain Ray and 

several Sherbrooke residents. The smudging ceremony included 

about 25 residents from both Sherbrooke and Parkridge. This 

was the second ceremony between the two facilities. It was very 

exciting to participate within this ceremony and to see how all 

faiths can get together to celebrate as one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that members to join me in recognizing the 

amazing work that is done by the staff at Sherbrooke for their 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Recognizing a Community Leader 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

honour to recognize a 2011 Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism 

Volunteer Award recipient. These awards recognize the 

invaluable contributions of seniors in Saskatchewan. 

 

I am truly proud of one of my constituents and good friends, 

Mr. Kurt Holstein, who was honoured with a Community 

Leadership Award. I can personally attest to Kurt’s tireless 

community work and zest for life. Kurt pours himself into 

organization that addresses the needs of the most vulnerable. 

These organizations include Food for Learning, Sofia House, 

Marian Centre, Regina Rescue Mission, and Carmichael 

Outreach. 

 

Kurt is incredibly committed to bettering the lives of fellow 

seniors. He serves on the Regina Housing Authority board, 

delivers meals daily for Meals on Wheels, and volunteers at 

Pioneer Village and Regina Village. I regularly observe Kurt in 

action in our community. 

 

Whether it’s rebuilding planters at Regina Village, delivering 

lunches, dancing polka, advocating for seniors in my office, 

caring for his wife, Ruby, or his leadership to our local NDP 

[New Democratic Party] team, Kurt’s life puts to action the 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

motto of the Canada Post Heritage Club for whom he served as 

president: people helping people. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

recognizing and thanking Mr. Kurt Holstein for his leadership 

to our community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Human Rights Day 

 

Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the 10th of 

December, the people of Saskatchewan, along with 

governments across Canada and the world, observed 

international Human Rights Day. This important day 

commemorates the United Nations General Assembly’s 

adoption and proclamation on December 10th, 1948, of the 

Universal Declaration of Human Rights — the first global 

enunciation of human rights and one of the first major 

achievements of the new United Nations. 

 

The declaration sets out a broad range of fundamental human 

rights and freedoms to which all men and women everywhere in 

the world are entitled, without any distinction. 

 

The theme for this year’s observance chosen by the United 

Nations is the recognition of the significance of social media 

and technology in assisting human rights defenders in new 

ways. The 2011 theme resonates in today’s world, as social 

media has played an important role in many countries 

struggling for democratic representation and governance within 

their country. In the words of United Nations Secretary-General 

Ban Ki-moon, and I quote: 

 

Human rights belong to every one of us without exception. 

But unless we know them, unless we demand they be 

respected, and unless we defend our right — and the right 

of others — to exercise them, they will be just words in a 

decades-old document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like this Assembly to join me in recognizing 

this very important day and the message that it represents. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Request for School in Hampton Village 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hampton Village is a 

rapidly growing neighbourhood in my constituency that is home 

to hundreds of young families and hundreds of children. But 

Hampton Village does not have a school, so the children of this 

neighbourhood have to go to other schools such as Dundonald 

School or St. Peter School, both of which are already bursting at 

the seams. 

 

I know from my repeated door knocking in this neighbourhood 

that a new school is a top priority for Hampton Village families. 

They want their children to be able to go to school in their own 

community rather than having to cross very busy roads in order 

to attend overcrowded schools elsewhere. 

As all of the veteran MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] will know, I’ve been on my feet repeatedly in this 

Legislative Assembly to urge the government to devote the 

necessary resources for the construction of an elementary 

school in Hampton Village. I will continue to stand up for what 

matters to the families of Hampton Village, Mr. Speaker, 

because that is what they elected me to do. And as the Sask 

Party government prepares the next year’s budget, I urge them 

to include funding for a much needed Hampton Village school. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

New Neonatal Ambulance for Regina and Area 

 

Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

December the 6th, the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and 

the Hospitals of Regina Foundation had the pleasure of 

unveiling its newest tool, a state-of-the-art neonatal ambulance. 

This new generation of neonatal ambulance is the first of its 

kind in Canada and will not only increase the city of Regina’s 

capacity to transport sick infants but will also allow for this 

specialized care to be provided in neighbouring rural 

communities. 

 

The new ambulance is larger and safer than its predecessor, 

with the ability to transport two patients at once while also 

housing an entire medical team. It replaces the previous 

neonatal unit that was in service for over 17 years. Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region was able to purchase the ambulance 

with a generous donation by PotashCorp at a cost of $350,000. 

 

I believe all members of this Assembly can share in the 

excitement with the local medical community of the amazing 

possibilities that this newly acquired piece of equipment brings. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like this Assembly to join me in recognizing 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and its partners for their 

commitment to improving the quality of health care that’s 

provided to the people of this city and surrounding area. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Provincial Economy on the Right Track 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning RBC 

Economics released their Provincial Outlook special report. 

This new report states that “recent data and economic 

developments continue to support our view that Saskatchewan 

will lead the country in economic growth throughout 2013.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this report also points out residential investment as 

one area of notable strength. This sector is performing so well 

that RBC Economics revised their housing starts forecast to 

7,400 units for 2011, 7,600 for 2012. RBC [Royal Bank of 

Canada] also highlighted the fact that the third quarter housing 

starts have risen “to their highest level since the recession.” 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, this province’s strong economy is attracting 

new residents, and we are pleased to see the strong growth in 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

our housing sector. 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy is also seeing strong growth in both 

manufacturing and wholesale trade. Manufacturing sales rose 

20 per cent in the third quarter over last year, and wholesale 

trade rose by 24 per cent over the same period of time. Overall, 

Mr. Speaker, the convergence of a strong energy and a resource 

sector along with vigorous business and residential investment 

contribute to a strong provincial economy. These high 

performing business sectors give RBC Economics cause to 

believe that our province economy will grow by 4.5 per cent in 

2011. According to the same report, Saskatchewan’s economy 

is expected to grow by 4.2 per cent in 2012. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s economy is on the right track. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

river valley. 

 

Saskatchewan Business Contributes to Bluenose II 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

province now has a special connection with Canada’s most 

famous sailing ship, the Bluenose II. This is a beautiful boat 

pictured on the Canadian dime. Wood from across the country 

is being used to refurbish the vessel in Nova Scotia. 

Saskatchewan’s contribution comes from Halland Farms of the 

village of Love in my beautiful constituency of Saskatchewan 

Rivers. This part of my constituency encompasses the boreal 

forest. The Halland family contributed a piece of birch to be 

used in the construction of the ship’s mess table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Halland family through their business, Halland 

Farms, has been manufacturing quality lumber and log homes 

for more than 70 years. They benefit from the fruits of our 

province’s renewable resources, namely locally grown species 

of Jack pine, white spruce, and birch, our province’s official 

tree since 1988. Their products have been sold and delivered 

throughout Saskatchewan to several different provinces and 

throughout the United States. 

 

Once its construction is completed, the Bluenose II, a replica of 

the original Bluenose ship which sank in the ’40s, will serve as 

Canada’s sailing ambassador and will tour in promotion of our 

country. Mr. Speaker, let us join together in acknowledging 

Halland Farms of Love, Saskatchewan for their contribution 

towards a Canadian icon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Conflict of Interest Guidelines for Health Regions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the head of 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s surgery department and 

recently appointed director at Surgical Centres Inc. resigned. 

Mr. Speaker, this resignation came after serious allegations 

were raised about a conflict of interest that the individual was 

in, based on the situation created by the minister. 

 

When I asked the minister, Mr. Speaker, if he believed there 

was a conflict of interest, he said no. But today, Mr. Speaker, 

we learn that he’s actually calling for a review of the conflict of 

interest rules for the health region. 

 

My question to the minister: why has his story changed once 

again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, at the outset I want to 

talk about Dr. Ogrady as a well-respected, long-serving member 

in the medical community in Saskatchewan, in Regina, has been 

instrumental on our surgical care initiative, Mr. Speaker. He 

was to take a position with the surgery centre, decided not to. 

He had never started his work, Mr. Speaker. No decisions were 

made. No payment was made. But he thought because of a 

perception of a conflict, Mr. Speaker, he would step down. 

 

As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I have decided through the 

ministry to call on all health regions to look at their conflict of 

interest guidelines, to send them into the ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

Because as we move down the third party delivery of health 

care, Mr. Speaker, in the province, which has been well 

received, Mr. Speaker, we’re asking all health regions to review 

their conflict of interests, send them into the ministry, and we 

want to make sure that they meet with the times as we move 

forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these questions aren’t about a 

specific position. They’re about a situation created by the 

minister in his approach. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, last week when I raised this issue of 

a conflict of interest and the situation that had been created by 

the minister, he was very clear. He was very clear there was no 

conflict. In fact he was offended that I would have the audacity 

to ask such a question. When I asked him about it, he replied, 

“Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not quite sure what the member 

is alluding to as far as a conflict of interest.” He goes on to say, 

“I don’t know if that’s the conflict that he’s trying to allude to, 

Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly there was no conflict. It was 

an RFP, an open process.” 

 

Yet today, Mr. Speaker, through the media and in the House, 

we hear that well maybe there is a conflict of interest, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m concerned enough, the minister suggests, that 

there’s a review of the conflict of interest rules for the health 

region. So my question to the minister: does he choose to stand 

today and correct earlier statements he made in the House about 

there being a conflict of interest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to 

the member opposite, at least this week I could understand what 

his question was. Mr. Speaker, it didn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker, to me last week. I understand what he’s asking this 

week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the surgery centre and the person 

that was going to be heading up the surgery centre, that person 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

decided that there could be a perceived conflict. He has stepped 

down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last week when I answered the questions regarding whether 

that was a conflict outside the Chamber — because that was not 

the question asked inside the Chamber — when I stood, Mr. 

Speaker, and answered that question with the information that I 

was given at the time, Mr. Speaker, I was told that there was no 

conflict, that this particular person was not in charge of allotting 

time. 

 

After further review, Mr. Speaker, through the health region, 

I’ve been informed that that was not correct and as a result, Mr. 

Speaker, the surgeon involved had decided to back away. That’s 

why we’re asking too, Mr. Speaker, that we review all conflict 

of interest guidelines from all health regions through the 

Ministry of Health. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, increasingly we are having more 

and more reasons why we can’t trust the words and the answers 

from the minister, Mr. Speaker. We all remember, Mr. Speaker, 

last session when the minister had to apologize for statements 

he made around health privacy issues. For the past year, Mr. 

Speaker, we have heard the minister defend the process with 

Amicus, that is a transparence and due diligence occurred, Mr. 

Speaker. We learned last week in the auditor’s report, Mr. 

Speaker, that many of the concerns and questions we have had 

on this side are indeed legitimate. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we have the minister saying that, 

suggesting that his approach with for-profit clinics are not 

presenting a drain on the public system despite the fact that 

there is a huge shortage of O.R. [operating room] nurses in the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

So my question to the minister: given that he has changed his 

tune to so many stories, what other changes can we expect this 

week with respect to a change in story? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

would like to know what changes are coming. Mr. Speaker, 

what I will tell you is that in four years there has been a change 

from setting a target for nurses and following through with a 

target for nurses. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you there has been a 

change, there has been a change from the longest waiting lists 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker, to a province that’s doing much better 

than it ever did under the NDP. We will never go back to those 

days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a change. There’s a change in trusting 

private delivery within the public system, Mr. Speaker, no 

queue-jumping, no paying out of pocket. That is a change, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan voted 65 per cent in 

favour of in the last provincial election leaving those members 

with only nine members, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those are 

changes in the province that the province does like. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

SaskTel Staffing 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 

own Crown corporation, SaskTel recently decided to fire nine 

managers and a chief technical officer. 

 

In the Premier’s own words, the issues at SaskTel are top of 

mind and understandably so. The people of Saskatchewan 

deserve answers, and they want to know where are the Crown 

corporations going to go under this government? And do any of 

these recent dismissals is a indication of what their long-term 

plan is for our Crown corporations including SaskTel? 

 

To the Minister responsible for SaskTel: why were these 

employees fired? Why? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to SaskTel, 

where SaskTel is going, SaskTel will continue to serve the 

needs of Saskatchewan people. They will continue to invest 

record amounts of money into the infrastructure that is 

necessary to meet the ongoing needs of Saskatchewan people, 

whether it’s in cellular or data downloading, all of those 

services that SaskTel is providing on a daily basis to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The changes that the member references were changes that the 

senior management team had been looking at for some period 

of time and decided to move forward with. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

Wednesday November 23rd, the Premier tweeted the people of 

Saskatchewan that the minister in charge would be meeting 

with the president of SaskTel, and two short days later on 

Friday the 25th these 10 employees were fired. 

 

To the Minister: is it simply a coincidence that these nine 

managers and a technical officer were fired approximately 48 

hours after the Premier’s comments and following a meeting 

with SaskTel and the member from Kindersley? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — During the time frame that the member 

references, there was no meeting between the Minister and 

SaskTel officials that you’re talking about. The meeting that 

took place was following any kind of direction that SaskTel 

provided in terms of employment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

SaskTel Revenues 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

really watching what this government does to our Crown 

corporations. They’re watching very carefully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And 4G smart phones, as you know, are in high demand. And 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

I’m sure people out there get really frustrated when these smart 

phone products don’t work. Saskatchewan people want and 

deserve the very best from their telecommunications company. 

If the government continues to underfund and overextend 

SaskTel, it’ll die the death of a thousand cuts. This government 

is restricting SaskTel’s opportunity for growth in 

Saskatchewan. This government should be cautious in their 

approach to what they assume are the solutions. We have 

already seen the dismantling of several Crown assets within the 

company, such as Ag Dealer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if the Crown continues to sell off 

Crown assets . . . If this government continues to sell off Crown 

assets, how can the people of Saskatchewan expect to have a 

successful telecommunications company? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel is experiencing a 

very, very high demand for services here in Saskatchewan. 

They are seeing a remarkable increase in the amount of data 

that’s being downloaded, for example, a tremendous growth, a 

volume of growth in terms of cellular use in our province as 

well. 

 

What we will continue to do through SaskTel, we’ll provide 

Saskatchewan people with the best possible services that we can 

at a very affordable price. 

 

SaskTel, since 2008, has invested $707 million in infrastructure 

to meet the growing needs of the people of Saskatchewan. And 

in the most recent Throne Speech, the Government of 

Saskatchewan has indicated that they will continue to invest 

record amounts to meet the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve answers from this government as to what they’ve got 

planned for SaskTel. Recently Murray Mandryk pointed out, 

quote: 

 

. . . the Saskatchewan Party government found itself in a 

self-induced budget crunch in 2009 caused by 

overestimating potash revenues by $2 billion, it poached 

100 per cent of the dividends from all Crown corporations 

except SaskPower in 2010. 

 

The Throne Speech announcement of 75 million in the next 

three years to include SaskTel’s 4G network doesn’t even cover 

the dividends withdrawn from this Crown company. 

 

To the minister and this government: how do you rationalize 

stripping 100 per cent of SaskTel profits in 2010 with the 

expectations of providing optimum service, especially as the 

province needs this service? Mr. Speaker, the government needs 

to come clean on the future of our Crown corporations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll go over it once again for 

the member. SaskTel, since 2008, has invested $707 million in 

Saskatchewan’s network that includes the 4G network. We have 

continued to say, through the Throne Speech, that we will 

continue to invest additional amounts of monies — another 

$100 million going forward in the upcoming years. We 

continue to realize that there is a need for infrastructure 

upgrades and SaskTel will be providing them. Throughout that 

process, we will continue to provide the necessary resources for 

SaskTel moving forward. 

 

And I would ask the member opposite, when we’re talking 

about dividends, perhaps you would care to explain why in 

2001 there was 181 per cent of the dividend of SaskTel that was 

stripped by the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Workplace Safety 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It was 

disappointing that worker safety wasn’t discussed at all in the 

Throne Speech. In fact it was also even more disappointing that 

the Minister of Labour chose not to enter into the debate on the 

Throne Speech so we could hear more about his thoughts on the 

crucial issue of worker safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know there’s been many good things 

happen with regard to occupational health and safety. We also 

know there’s a long way to go. 

 

To the minister: why are the improvements of worker safety not 

on this government’s agenda? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last few 

years, we’ve seen a 30 per cent drop in injuries in our province. 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, we still have a lot of work left to do. The 

injury rate is dropping in all jurisdictions; in our province it is 

dropping among the fastest. Unfortunately we are still the 

second highest in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more work to do. We are going to 

continue to do that, both through the Workers’ Compensation 

Board and through the ministry of occupational health and 

safety. Mr. Speaker, even one injury is one injury too many, and 

it is the goal of this government to try and eliminate or reduce 

wherever possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

said in my first question, we know some good things have 

happened with regard to occupational health and safety. And in 

fact, and in fact, the Provincial Auditor’s report released last 

week notes that the decline in injuries is consistent with 

strategies introduced back in 2003 under the previous NDP 

government. 

 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

But we can’t lose sight of the significant amount of work left to 

do, as the minister has said. The Provincial Auditor said that the 

Minister of Labour needs a documented, comprehensive, 

risk-based approach to address non-compliance. The minister 

needs to do a better job of understanding why — underline why 

— non-compliance occurs and needs to better follow up on 

non-compliant workplaces. 

 

To the minister: will he listen to the Provincial Auditor and 

follow her recommendations to improve our workplace safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

thank the member for the question. I would also like to at this 

time take this opportunity to thank the auditor for her good 

work and thorough analysis of the various ministries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor made several recommendations for 

better documentation, monitoring, and evaluation of OHS 

[occupational health and safety] inspections and orders. She 

made recommendations regarding more usage of stop work 

orders where there’s an immediate risk. 

 

The ministry is working to comply with all of the 

recommendations. I’m advised by the ministry officials that 

they accept each and every recommendation made by the 

Provincial Auditor and are working to implement those. Some 

of them are as straightforward as service agreements regarding 

payroll services, but some of them will make the workplace 

more effective and more safe by having a somewhat more 

aggressive approach in the use of stop work orders. Mr. 

Speaker, if that makes a safer workplace, we’ll all support that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well we’re glad to hear that because this is 

simply something that needs to be done particularly around, we 

understand, the top 50 companies that have more offences in 

terms of non-compliance. And we need to see that. 

 

But it’s not only the Provincial Auditor who’s saying that a lot 

more work needs to be done in the area of occupational health 

and safety. The Workers’ Compensation Act committee of 

review released their report last Friday, and they made several 

important recommendations to improve occupational health and 

safety in our province. 

 

To the minister: with both the Provincial Auditor and The 

Workers’ Compensation Act committee of review calling for 

improvements to how occupational health and safety is handled 

here in Saskatchewan, will the government take this issue 

seriously and follow both the committee of review’s 

recommendations and the auditor’s recommendations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, once again I would like to 

use this as an opportunity to thank the committee of review for 

their thorough work and detailed analysis of our workers’ 

compensation legislation. They made a large number of 

recommendations, nearly 60 recommendations. We will have an 

analysis of the recommendations, including costing done and 

the most effective ways of dealing with those. We intend to 

release that analysis in late January, and we’ll continue and use 

that as a tool to continue to reduce workplace injuries. 

 

As I’d indicated before, Mr. Speaker, even one injury is one 

injury too many. They’ve a Mission: Zero program at Workers’ 

Compensation Board. We’re very supportive of that. The goal 

of that is to work with employers, work with employees to try 

and ensure that workplaces in our province are made as safe as 

possible. We will continue to do that. And, Mr. Speaker, I thank 

the member for his question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Provincial Auditor recognizes the importance of workplace 

safety. In fact in a report, she said, and I quote: “It is difficult to 

overstate the importance of healthy and safe workplaces.” So 

this issue is of vital importance. It’s long overdue. We need to 

do so much more work. 

 

But now we’ve had two reports in a matter of days which 

brought to the government’s attention the need for significant 

improvements and financial support. So to the minister: can we 

expect to see, in the next year’s budget, financial support to 

support his department in enforcing occupational health and 

safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is the goal of our 

government to be responsible with the taxpayers’ dollars. We 

will ensure that we use them in the most effective possible way 

and that we get the maximum benefit in dealing with issues of 

workplace safety. We will work our way through the budget in 

the next while, and we will ensure that we put the dollars to 

good use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can also advise the members opposite that 

Workers’ Compensation Board is an agency that is entirely 

self-funding and, Mr. Speaker, rates are set so that they ensure 

that they maintain appropriate reserves. Mr. Speaker, those 

reserves will continue to be maintained, and the viability of the 

Workers’ Compensation Board and its mission of both 

providing compensation for workers that have been injured and 

to promote and continue with its mission to reduce workplace 

injuries will continue unabated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Funding for Post-Secondary Institutions 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Advanced Education has a track record of showing favouritism 

to some institutions in the province while neglecting the needs 

of others. A clear example of this, Mr. Speaker, was with the 

minister’s failed merger project where he funnelled over 

$60,000 per student at St. Peter’s College while giving only 

$1,300 per student to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

Applied Science and Technology]. And now, Mr. Speaker, 

other concerns about disparities and funding are being raised. 

 

My question to the minister: why does he continually fail to 

treat post-secondary institutions in Saskatchewan fairly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to report that in 

our first four years, we invested more than $2.8 billion across 

all our post-secondary educational institutions. It’s an 

investment in students, in their families, and scholars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite should know, Stats 

Canada has just come out with a report entitled Financial 

Information of Universities and Colleges and when considering 

the percentage of total revenue coming from the provincial 

government among comprehensive universities, what we see is 

the University of Regina actually received 61 per cent. 

Regarding the University of Saskatchewan, which is ranked 

fourth for medical doctoral universities, the number is 59 per 

cent. 

 

I think it’s safe to say, Mr. Speaker, both institutions have fared 

very well under this government because we’re investing in 

students. We’re investing not simply in their studies but, Mr. 

Speaker, investing in opportunities so that they can succeed and 

stay right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister’s answer is correct, 

it’s puzzling why leaders in post-secondary education would 

have a different view about how different institutions have been 

treated by this minister. The University of Regina President, 

Vianne Timmons, has expressed concerns about a significant 

disparity in funding between the University of Saskatchewan 

and the University of Regina. A recent report shows that the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] gets close to $4,000 more 

per student than the University of Regina. 

 

To the minister: could he please explain this discrepancy in the 

amount of funding going to the two universities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that 

both institutions within their respective categories are ranked at 

no. 4 regarding funding by Maclean’s. Mr. Speaker, that is, the 

University of Regina ranked no. 4 out of 15 comprehensive 

universities across the country, and the University of 

Saskatchewan has ranked fourth out of 15 medical-doctoral 

universities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of . . . There is a key distinction, and certainly 

the University of Saskatchewan has received some additional 

dollars. And, Mr. Speaker, in large part we can look at some 

specific initiatives. In large part, Mr. Speaker, it’s on the 

medical doctoral side with an emphasis on the medical side 

because, Mr. Speaker, under the members opposite, the College 

of Medicine was put on probation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were more than 140 recommendations that were put in 

place. About 130 have been met, and one of the key ones was to 

actually move forward on the Academic Health Sciences 

building so we can have more doctors and more nurses 

providing more services to the people of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, are we investing more in post-secondary education? 

Yes we are. In part the reason is because the members opposite 

ignored it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’d love to see the minister go to 

the campus at the U of R [University of Regina] and explain to 

researchers and faculty that their course of research is not as 

important as the research being conducted at the U of S, or the 

students, Mr. Speaker, at the U of R who are concerned the 

levels of funding to their institution are not at the same level as 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s fine for the minister to love the University of 

Saskatchewan. That’s a good thing. U of S is a wonderful place. 

We know the minister worked there. I know the minister loves 

going there and being feted. It’s okay to have a place, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have an attachment to, but it can’t cloud our 

judgment, Mr. Speaker. It ought not cloud the minister’s 

judgment in delivering funding to the institutions in the 

province. 

 

One such project, Mr. Speaker, of concern is the construction at 

the University of Regina of a 600-bed residence along with 

close to a 200 child care centre. This is one project the U of R 

needs. It’s not about research. It’s about families; it’s about 

students. My question to the Minister: will he support this 

project for the University of Regina? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. As far 

as visiting the University of Regina, Mr. Speaker, I was very 

pleased to be on campus for three different events last week 

alone including, Mr. Speaker, a tour by federal senators that 

were very specifically interested, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, senators that were interested in the 

environment and on energy. And they were touring, Mr. 

Speaker, the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see is that President Vianne Timmons 

has recently offered a book, and she says that in the laboratory, 

in the library, in the classroom, and in communities our scholars 

are engaged in research that is relevant to the academy and 

responsive to the needs of society. She then goes on to talk 

about the value of research at the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I’m happy to do is say we share the same 

value, Mr. Speaker, in post-secondary education research, hence 

our record investments in all the institutions. 

 

[14:15] 

 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 

sur les fonctionnaires de justice 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, 

The Court Officials Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

first reading of Bill No. 11, The Court Officials Act, 2011. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 12, The Court Officials Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2011 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General first reading of Bill No. 12, The Court 

Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 

2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 13, 

The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, Bill No. 13, The Constitutional 

Questions Act, 2011 be read for the first time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, 

The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, Bill No. 14, The Securities Amendment 

Act, 2011 be read for a first time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and 

Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing], Bill No. 15, The Uniform Building and Accessibility 

Standards Amendment Act be read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CPSP. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

16, the correctional services amendment Act, 2011 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for CPSP, Bill No. 16, The Correctional Services 

Act, 2011 be read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, 

The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education, Bill No. 17, The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

be read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, The Degree Authorization Act 

be now introduced and read for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and 

Immigration, Bill No. 18, the degree granting authorization Act, 

be read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next sitting of 

the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, it 

is my pleasure to submit supplementary estimates, accompanied 

by a message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would you please rise for a message from the 

Lieutenant Governor. Order. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 

estimates December of certain sums required for the 

service of the province for the 12 months ending March 

31, 2012, and recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly. Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant 

Governor, Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011/ 

Loi de 2011 modifant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du 

Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 1, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2011. This Bill amends The Queen’s Bench 

Act, 1998 to facilitate the appointment of the Associate Chief 

Justice for the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

The total number of judges on the court will be maintained at 

32, including the Chief Justice, the Associate Chief Justice, and 

30 other judges. The Chief Justice of the court is responsible for 

the court’s administrative functions, including scheduling 

matters that come before the court, and participation on the 

Canadian and Saskatchewan judicial councils. These 

administrative responsibilities are important for the efficient 

operation of the court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Chief Justice currently spends the majority of 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

his time on administrative matters and a small portion of his 

time hearing and deciding the important legal issues that come 

before the court. Sharing administrative responsibilities with an 

Associate Chief Justice will provide the Chief Justice a greater 

opportunity to hear matters and act as the judicial leader in the 

court. The amendments also allow the Associate Chief Justice 

to take on all the duties and responsibilities of the Chief Justice 

if the Chief Justice is absent or unable to act. This ensures 

seamless operation of the court, if the Chief Justice were to 

become ill or be away for an extended period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one of those provisions that the government 

hopes it never needs but it is best to have in place, just in case. 

The chief justices of the Court of Queen’s Bench in most other 

provinces have the ability to assign some of these 

administrative duties to an associate chief justice. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is one of four provinces that does not currently 

have an associate chief justice. 

 

In addition to Saskatchewan, the only provinces that do not 

have an associate chief justice in their trial court are 

Newfoundland, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island. 

Ontario, Alberta, and British Columbia each have one associate 

chief justice. Quebec has two associate chief justices — one in 

Montreal, and one in Quebec City. Mr. Speaker, the Nova 

Scotia and Manitoba courts are the same size as Saskatchewan’s 

court, and each has two associate chief justices — one for the 

general division and one for the family law division. 

 

In light of this, it seems appropriate to amend The Queen’s 

Bench Act, 1998 to facilitate the appointment of an Associate 

Chief Justice. Saskatchewan shares the legislative authority in 

this area with the Parliament of Canada. A corresponding 

amendment is required to the federal Judges Act before the 

amendments to the Saskatchewan legislation can be proclaimed. 

Our government has requested the federal Minister of Justice to 

table the federal amendments when the Judges Act is next 

before the House of Commons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

1, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General, second reading of Bill No. 1, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

quite pleased to stand up and respond on behalf of the official 

opposition on Bill No. 1, An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench 

Act, 1998 respecting an Associate Chief Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we pay very close attention to what the 

Saskatchewan Party government present on any front. And this 

is certainly one of the issues that we want to make sure that our 

stakeholders and people that are involved in any kind of action 

by the Justice department, that they have full and prior 

knowledge of exactly what is being proposed here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

At the outset, it looks like this Bill is straightforward. But, Mr. 

Speaker, as the opposition, we know that we have to make sure 

that we vet it through our own people that are knowledgeable 

about the justice system and certainly the different stakeholders 

that are out there, Mr. Speaker. Obviously, as the minister 

explained, this is all about making sure that the Associate Chief 

Justice does have the place, or a role to play in the event that the 

Chief Justice may take ill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously as you look at the process here 

there is mention of the federal government, and certainly their 

role in ensuring that this is also . . . they have a process in place 

that they can easily have this thing done if they have the correct 

schedule and they also have their co-operation. And that’s 

certainly one of the things that I think that people out there 

should know, is that whenever there’s amendments at the outset 

to any Act, that there is a fairly rigorous process in place. And 

as an opposition, we want to make sure we look at all avenues 

of what is being proposed here and to make sure that people out 

there understand exactly what approach that this government 

has to go through when it’s certainly trying to put through Bills 

of this nature through this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the outset, as I mentioned, if you look at what is being 

proposed, it doesn’t seem to be anything dramatic in the sense 

of trying to fill a void in the event that the Chief Justice does 

take ill as mentioned. But as we know, it’s important that we 

educate people as to the process, what the Bill’s intended to do. 

And you just never know, Mr. Speaker, when there could be 

some, some group or some stakeholder out there that may have 

some perspective that we think should be added to the Bill or 

certainly a challenge to the Bill that the minister or the officials 

may not be aware of. 

 

And that’s the whole process of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, is to make sure that people out there have access to the 

information being presented by the minister, they have access to 

the Bill, and they also know that the opposition is certainly 

paying attention to this Bill and that we are, obviously we’ll 

need the time, you know, to go through it. 

 

So I guess the message to the groups that are out there that are 

listening to the Assembly and the people that want to add to this 

process, that certainly that option and opportunity is available. 

And Bill No. 1, which is An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench 

Act, 1998 respecting an Associate Chief Justice, is something 

that certainly is important to the structure of our justice system 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think there ought to be a lot of work being 

done to educate the community in general, especially the 

Aboriginal community from where I’m from, in terms of how 

the system works overall. I think if the minister would 

undertake an opportunity to try and explain to the people the 

role, as he did very briefly here, the role of the Chief Justice, 

and certainly the fact that there’s 32 lawyers that are involved in 

the top structure of the justice system, that he explain how 

they’re appointed, who does the appointment, and just the 

whole structure in general so a lot of people out there in 

Saskatchewan that may have an interest in understanding this 

— whether you’re a law student or whether you’re a lawyer or 

whether you’re just an advocate for people — and the more 

people that understand what the system’s all about and the 

changes that are being proposed in Bill No. 1, I think it’s 

important that we afford that opportunity. And when you have 

more people understanding what this Bill is about and the 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

implications and the connection to the federal government and 

on and on and on, you can then understand the importance of it. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So I think education on how the process works to the public, to 

the general public, to certain sectors that have an interest, 

whether it’s lawyers or to the Aboriginal community that has a 

lot of exposure to the justice system, to explain how all this is 

connected and how all this works, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now obviously, I think the minister indicated that the House of 

Commons was also involved, that there is some overlapping or 

overarching role that they play. And certainly they do have the 

agenda in terms of the federal government’s wish to pass laws 

and so on and so forth. And does this have any impact on the 

crime Bill that the federal government is trying to put in place? 

Does this complement it? Does it challenge it? Does it impede 

it? Does it interfere with it somehow? 

 

And these are some of the questions that we have to ask, Mr. 

Speaker, is that, how does this connect overall? And even 

though it may at the outset seem to be a minor issue, we know 

from experience that this government likes to tend to try and put 

minor issues on the forefront but there are much more devious 

plans in the background. And that’s one of the reasons why we 

tell people to make sure that they take the time to understand 

Bills of this sort and that they do their very best to try and 

understand how the system works overall. 

 

A lot of the Aboriginal communities I mentioned are taking a 

greater interest in law, and that’s something that I think is also 

very important. And we would encourage them either through 

the Internet or direct contact to the official opposition or the 

minister’s office himself to check on some of these Bills that 

are being proposed so that they may add value to what’s being 

done here today. And that’s what’s really important when you 

look at the legislative agenda per se, Mr. Speaker, that you give 

people the opportunity to participate in the design or the 

challenge or to make sure that the integrity of the Bill is sound. 

And that’s kind of one of the things that we want to make sure 

in the official opposition that we certainly tell people that 

option is there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I mentioned at the outset that we take 

the minister’s word that all this is, is a process to simply appoint 

an Associate Chief Justice, and it’s nothing that we should be 

worried about. But obviously the timetable that we have in the 

Assembly gives us the opportunity to research this Bill more to 

make sure that there isn’t any kind of wording change that 

compromises what we think is the intent of the Bill. And at the 

expense of sounding like a lawyer here, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, it’s important that the intent follow the written 

documentation and otherwise that there’s a compromise of 

values here, and that’s something that I think every lawyer 

understands. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to again point out that as an official 

opposition, we take a great interest in particular what this 

minister does when it comes to tinkering with the justice system 

as we’ve seen evidence of that during the last election when 

there was hundreds of people that were not allowed to vote 

because they never had an ID [identification]. 

And that was certainly proposed by this minister that came 

along and said, look, there were some problems with the voter 

ID. And that goes to the credibility of the proponent of this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, when he said if you don’t have proper ID you 

can’t vote. And I found it very awkward, Mr. Speaker, because 

this minister put those rules in there because his leader 

indicated at the time that there was “some discrepancies.” And, 

Mr. Speaker, we need to know what those discrepancies were 

again. There are some discrepancy that the Premier said there 

were out there in terms of electoral process so the minister put 

this new Bill in place, and we need to know. The new Bill was 

put in place based on the Premier’s assertion that there was 

some discrepancy and, Mr. Speaker, there was none. There was 

none. It was just another rule, another process they put in place 

to make sure certain sectors of our province and certain people 

of our province never got the opportunity to cast their vote as 

. . . [inaudible] . . . and certainly as best as they could. 

 

So it all goes on down to the credibility of the minister. And 

whenever you have a Bill being proposed by him we are always 

extra careful to make sure that again the intent of what he is 

saying in this Assembly is followed through as pure as possible 

when it comes to his plan for, as in this case, appointing an 

Associate Chief Justice, that this is all that this is about. And 

I’m very sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, we don’t simply buy that 

when he gets up and says things of that sort that we on this side 

of the Assembly certainly have the experience of how he has 

turned that on us on many occasions and most recently with The 

Election Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I kind of found it awkward and funny when 

the minister had the last Bill of this sort which was, as he 

mentioned, intended to deal with the discrepancies in terms of 

the election. When I walked into the polling station to vote, the 

ladies that were working at the polling station would not allow 

me to vote unless I produced my ID, and, Mr. Speaker, we have 

known these people all our lives and they’ve known me and 

they know me as the candidate. They know who I am but they 

wouldn’t give me a ballot unless and until I showed my ID. 

Now that is very, very silly, Mr. Speaker, that that process put 

in by that minister and by that government because there were 

some discrepancies in the last election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m saying that circumventing the intent of 

this particular House by putting in some politically 

advantageous legislation in place to certainly detract, to make 

sure that certain sectors and certain people didn’t vote in this 

province. And history will certainly be the judge of that action, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s still a lot of hard feelings and certainly a 

lot of people out there that are not pleased with what was done 

last time. 

 

And that’s why today a simple Bill, as he indicated, to appoint a 

Associate Chief Justice is all that this is about, well we want to 

pay extra careful attention to what this minister proposes and 

how the Bill is prepared. What’s the intent behind putting this 

Bill into place? Is all the information that he has presented, is it 

fair, is it reasonable? And certainly I guess the biggest thing is, 

what is the motivation behind that Bill? 

 

And as we’ve seen evidence in the past, Mr. Speaker, 

motivation by some of that minister’s Bills is not very fair to 

the people of Saskatchewan because obviously there’s a lot of 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

issues at hand with some of the previous Bills that he’s put in 

place and that continues to make . . . I continue to make 

reference to The Election Act Bill that that minister proposed. 

 

So in that regard, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 1, we’re going to 

invite other people to participate, other stakeholders to bring 

forward their issues and their concerns and to make sure that 

they have the opportunity to bring us information or put their 

position down firmly and fairly and that we have the 

opportunity to fight against this Bill if there is some kind of 

ulterior method or some ulterior plan that that minister may 

have in regards to something, as he indicates, as simple as 

appointing an Associate Chief Justice. So on that point, Mr. 

Speaker, I adjourn the debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Athabasca that there be adjournment of debate on Bill No. 1. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011/ 

Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 3, the miscellaneous statutes 

amendment collaborative law Act, 2011. This Act will amend 

three family statutes: The Family Maintenance Act, 1997 and 

The Children’s Law, 1997 and The Family Property Act. 

 

We all know that disputes within families can be very difficult 

and stressful for everyone involved. Applications to court can 

be quite costly both financially and emotionally for the parties 

involved. These amendments aim to encourage the resolution of 

family law matters without resorting to the courts. 

 

Over the past 50 years, there has been a significant shift in 

thinking about the best way to resolve family matters. The 

courts were once thought to be the best and only way to resolve 

these disputes. Gradually mediation and negotiation were 

introduced as methods to resolve these matters in a less 

adversarial way. Mr. Speaker, this trend received formal 

recognition and encouragement in legislation when The Family 

Maintenance Act, 1997 and The Children’s Law Act, 1997 were 

passed. Although mediation and negotiation were considered 

new and cutting edge in 1997, they are now part of the standard 

tool kit for professionals that assist families to resolve disputes. 

Over the last 15 years, family law practice has further evolved 

to add collaborative law to its tool kit. 

 

In many ways, collaborative law is similar to mediation and 

negotiation. Like mediators, lawyers who practice collaborative 

law require special training and certification. Collaborative law 

facilitates resolution of family law issues without going to court 

through discussion, compromise, and agreement. The parties 

and their lawyers commit to work together in a non-adversarial, 

respectful way to find solutions that work for everyone involved 

in the conflict. 

 

The Family Maintenance Act and children’s law Act currently 

require lawyers to discuss with their clients the advisability of 

negotiating the resolution of their matters and also require 

lawyers to provide their clients with information about the 

mediation facilities available to assist them. With these 

amendments, lawyers will be required to discuss with their 

clients the advisability of using alternative methods including 

mediation, negotiation, and collaborative law. Lawyers will also 

be required to advise their clients of any mediation services and 

collaborative law services that are known to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the other family law Acts, The Family 

Property Act does not currently require lawyers to advise their 

family law clients about negotiation or mediation. This Bill will 

bring the responsibility of lawyers under The Family Property 

Act in line with their responsibilities under the other family law 

statutes. 

 

Across Canada and the United States, the trend is to encourage 

use of alternative methods to resolve family disputes. It is 

recognized that these methods often lead to solutions that are 

more acceptable to the parties at a lower cost that result in better 

long-term compliance. In view of this trend, lawyers that 

practice family law in the province requested these 

amendments. 

 

During the preparation of this Bill, the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan, the family law sections of the Canadian Bar 

Association, Saskatchewan branch, Collaborative Lawyers of 

Saskatchewan, and the provincial dispute resolution office were 

consulted and they support these amendments. 

 

I am pleased to move second reading of Bill 3, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 

2011. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m pleased to rise on behalf of the official opposition to offer 

our insight and certainly our position on Bill No. 2. And this of 

course is An Act to amend certain Statutes with respect to 

matters concerning Collaborative Law. 

 

And I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, as per the minister’s 

comments in relation to family matters, that this is certainly 

something that, again at the outset, that I believe lawyers may 

or may not have practised that in their own kind of way of 

dealing with the tough act of a family breakup and so on and so 

forth, that some may have and some may not have given this 

advice or information as to how they could proceed with this 

divorce or separation, if you will. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think discussing with the applicants or the 

people that are going through this process the advice of 

negotiating the matters that are subject to the application as 

indicated, that there is some mediation opportunities for the 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

families that are going through this terrible time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had an assessment from any of the 

judges or the lawyers, sorry, the lawyers out there as to how 

many lawyers do advise their clients of the mediation process. 

Is there opportunity for . . . Has this been discussed? I’m 

assuming that when you’re going through a separation, whether 

it’s assets or whether it’s children or whether just the marriage 

in general, that every lawyer will tell you that there are 

mediation services, there are processes that you can go to, to try 

and find some successful conclusion to this, well, marriage or 

common law relationship or, you know, whatever the case may 

be. 

 

So I think one of the points that we want to make on this 

particular Bill is that we don’t have an assessment of how many 

judges may or lawyers may actually offer that advice or how 

many lawyers don’t even give the clients or their clients 

information about this mediation services. So it’s hard for us to 

determine, you know, exactly how big of a problem that this 

particular Bill wants to address, and that’s kind of where we are 

sitting right now in terms of trying to assess that information as 

it comes in. 

 

So I don’t know if the minister had any discussions with any 

lawyer groups or any of his legal friends as to how pressing this 

matter is. Obviously when you’re going through a separation 

between, you know, with the family, there’s a lot of hard 

feelings in many cases, but there’s a lot of challenges in many 

cases. And as you have more assets and certainly more children, 

it becomes more confusing. 

 

So again what consultation took place with any of the legal 

associations that are all throughout Saskatchewan? Is there 

going to be any opportunity for them to do a survey or to 

respond or to present a survey that they may have done amongst 

their members? It’s difficult to assess all that. And some of that 

information is not readily available in the explanatory notes that 

the minister has presented here today. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So again from the perspective of the opposition, we simply 

want to point out that, again as in the previous Bill, there 

doesn’t seem to be a lot of issue with what the minister is trying 

to do here. But, given his history, we obviously want to make 

sure that we vet this information through a lot of different 

groups and different associations to make sure that what is 

being presented here is in its pure intent and that there is no 

alternative plan that he may have on behalf of his government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take the time to invite any legal teams 

that are out there, or lawyers that are out there, that could give 

us their sage advice as to whether they think that this is a good 

plan. Because the Bill at the outset from my look at it, and again 

I’m not a lawyer by any stretch of the imagination — I’m a 

hockey player, Mr. Speaker — but not being a lawyer I would 

say where is their . . . What is the demand for this? Was there a 

huge, huge cry for this particular Act? Were some lawyers 

being honest or dishonest with the parties they’re sitting with in 

terms of not giving them all of the relevant information? Is that 

what the minister is suggesting as a result of putting this Act in 

place? 

Because I would assume that the lawyers would give their 

clients all the available information, and mediation being one of 

them. You would assume that that would be the case. And so 

you have to ask yourself, forcing lawyers to present to their 

clients and in case of a separation or divorce that they have to 

offer them, or let the clients know about, all the mediation 

services that are available out there. 

 

And again not having that information about the survey or how 

the legal profession out there is responding to these kinds of 

things, it’s difficult for us as an official opposition to give our 

perspective in full, in fairness to what the minister is trying to 

propose here, give it our full support without that qualifying 

comment from the different groups that are out there. 

 

So again as we look at this, I would suggest people . . . As the 

minister explained, is just making sure that every lawyer out 

there that’s representing families that are going through a 

separation, that this Bill proposes that they have a duty to 

advise those parties that the mediation services are available. 

And there are two or three other Bills or two or three other Acts 

that may be implicated as a result of this particular measure. 

And that’s one of the reasons why he’s brought forward this 

Bill with a few additions to the intent of the Bill itself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the opposition, as 

indicated by the legislative agenda here, that during the 

Christmas or the spring or winter sitting that this government 

present the Bill and we’d be given the opportunity to take the 

Bill, no matter how innocuous it may seem at the outset, but to 

take the Bill and send it out to various groups to ask for their 

advice and to seek what they may want to add to it in terms of 

their input. 

 

And again I go back to the comment about the lawyers and the 

associations that are out there. Exactly how many associations 

were consulted on this Bill? It’d be nice to know that. Have you 

done a survey of what lawyers may have given their clients this 

information or this option? Why is it being proposed at this 

time? Is there a major problem here? Is there a cost to the 

government, or is there a savings to the government? I’m 

assuming that there’d be savings to the government because it 

would appear at the outset that the provisions are simply there 

to allow less court time, therefore less court costs. And is that 

option going to be undertaken by the clients that are even 

advised of this option by their lawyers? 

 

So it’s something that has to be thoroughly vetted, as I 

mentioned, to different associations, legal associations, to the 

contacts that we have with our own lawyer friends, to some of 

our caucus members that may have concerns, to some of the 

families that we’re dealing with, Mr. Speaker. These are all the 

things that we want to find out over the next several months on 

this particular Bill, and that’s why, one of the reasons why, 

when we hear some of the proposals by this particular minister, 

we want to pay very close attention and we want to take the 

time to look thoroughly at any of his Bills that he proposes and 

to ask different groups and associations. 

 

Not that they’ll be heard by those guys across the way, Mr. 

Speaker, because on The Election Act, that’s much the same 

thing that there was a lot of people that were very concerned 

about The Election Act. That minister proposed it anyway and 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

proceeded with it anyway, in spite of all the protests and 

different groups saying no to it, that it was counter-productive. 

And I even think that there’s many officers, Independent 

Officers of this Assembly that didn’t like that particular Bill. 

 

So any time that this minister has his particular stamp or his 

name attached to Bills that seem to be innocuous in terms of its 

legal implications, we in the opposition want to pay very, very 

close attention to any Bills that that minister proposes because 

we’ve seen his act before. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of times the 

intent of some of his Bills do have some very, very alternative 

plans and some sometimes devious ways of dealing with the 

people that he’s supposed to be representing. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d like to remind the member he 

should not be trying to impugn the honour of any member 

through their actions in the House. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But I go back and I 

rephrase. The intent of The Election Act in terms of trying to 

stifle the democracy that many of the people that were impacted 

by, that that was not fair. And that’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would remind the member to make 

his remarks relevant to the Bills in question. This is not The 

Election Act. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would again point 

out that, as I mentioned at the outset, the first Bill that’s being 

proposed, we talked about the intent of the Bill as we’re talking 

about the intent of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. And the 

intent of the Bill certainly needs to be . . . I think the conduct of 

the minister in terms of some of his other Bills also need to be 

incorporated in any Bills he brings forward. And I go back to 

The Election Act, Mr. Speaker, to make reference to that point. 

 

So again I would point out on this Bill No. 2, we will take our 

time. We will take our time to thoroughly assess this Bill. 

We’re going to ask for some legal counsel from a number of 

different people that are out there that are involved with family 

court. And we’re going to take the time necessary, and we’re 

going to ask the question as to why is it being proposed at this 

time. What’s the implication? What’s your plan? What’s your 

objective? There’s always an objective, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

trying to find what’s attached to Bill No. 2. And that’s why I 

wish to adjourn the debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the member for Athabasca 

that this debate be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 3, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2011. These amendments are aimed 

primarily at improving and building greater efficiencies into our 

summary offence procedure in Saskatchewan. In addition, this 

Bill contains amendments that will provide a greater incentive 

for individuals with outstanding fines to pay those fines and 

avoid further time in court. 

 

The cases of individuals charged with provincial summary 

offences proceed to either an offence notice ticket or a 

summons ticket. These tickets apply to a wide range of 

provincial offences from minor traffic offences to more serious 

ones such as poaching, environmental pollution, and the unsafe 

transport of goods on our highways. Summary offence tickets 

are currently issued through a standard form that requires 

officers to fill in numerous categories of information by hand. 

This is often time-consuming and impractical for officers. 

Therefore these amendments will provide the use of tickets in 

electronic format. 

 

Law enforcement personnel, including the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] and the Saskatchewan Association 

of Chiefs of Police, have indicated a strong preference for a 

method of handling tickets in an electronic format. Regina 

Police Service has agreed to a pilot project where a small 

number of police vehicles would be equipped with the 

necessary devices to test the program before full 

implementation. 

 

These amendments will also allow for the application for an 

issuance of warrants by telephone. It is often not practical for a 

peace officer to appear in person before a justice to obtain a 

warrant. This is especially true in rural and northern areas 

where the distance between communities presents a challenge. 

In those communities, the advantage of using a telephone 

process are significant. Additionally the application for certain 

warrants is often time-sensitive as a crime may be in progress or 

very recently committed. So if warrants were available through 

a telephone application, Mr. Speaker, the investigation would 

be able to proceed quickly and police would have a better 

chance of obtaining fresh evidence. 

 

This Bill also grants judges the discretion to enter a default 

conviction when a defendant fails to appear for their trial, 

regardless of whether the defendant indicated earlier they’d 

planned to appear. Currently when individuals charged through 

an offence notice ticket fail to notify the court that they are 

contesting the charge and subsequently fail to appear on the 

court date, the court has the option of entering a conviction by 

default. In contrast when an individual does alert the court of 

their intention to appear but subsequently fails to appear, the 

court is obligated to run a trial in the defendant’s absence. The 

vast majority of these trials result in a conviction since without 

a defendant present, the court cannot hear his or her evidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these trials place a burden upon the time and 

resources of the court, law enforcement officials, and witnesses. 

If a defendant fails to appear at their trial for reasons beyond 

their control, the Act still allows him or her to appear before the 

court and explain the situation within 15 days. 

 

These amendments will also raise the maximum number of days 

for which an offender who defaults on payment of fines may be 

imprisoned. Currently the Act provides for a 90-day limit on the 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

amount of jail time that may be imposed on an offender who is 

in default of fine payment. The 90-day cap on imprisonment is 

insufficient to deal with those offenders who accumulate a large 

number of fines or an extremely high fine. In those cases, the 

higher maximum term of imprisonment will act as a deterrent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments also provide discretion to the 

Provincial Court to order that sentences of imprisonment for 

fines in default be served consecutively rather than 

concurrently. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, it is important to realize that individuals 

who are charged with summary offences and cannot pay their 

fines do have other options. And if an offender is having 

financial difficulty, the fine option program allows them to 

reduce or pay off their fines or have a sentence reduced through 

the completion of unpaid community service. In addition, Mr. 

Speaker, other methods of fine collection are usually employed 

before pursuing a term of imprisonment. These include 

garnishment, repossession of property, and the suspension of 

drivers’ licences. 

 

Ultimately in the rare case where an offender is sentenced to a 

jail term, this legislation requires that the person be served with 

a final notice 15 days in advance of issuing a warrant for 

committal for imprisonment. In that 15-day period, the offender 

would have a final opportunity to appear before a judge to 

explain his or her failure to pay, or attend court and arrange for 

some alternative penalty if possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move the second reading of Bill 

No. 3, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

The Speaker: — Second reading has been moved by the 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General for Bill No. 3, The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I’m pleased to stand up today to certainly present the official 

opposition’s perspective on the Bill No. 3, An Act to amend The 

Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there is a number of flags that I see at the outset of this 

particular Bill. And one of the things that people ought to know 

is that at this stage of the system that there are many out there in 

Saskatchewan that may have a lot of good reason or a lot of 

good logic as to why they can’t make certain court dates, and 

there could be a number of different avenues and certainly ways 

that the justice system can contact these individuals. 

 

It’s not as if you want to see people put on the most wanted list 

if they have a traffic ticket, Mr. Speaker, but there are ways and 

means that they could contact people. And what is alarming, 

Mr. Speaker, is some of the proposals in this Bill. Does it 

actually compromise justice in any way, shape, or form? And I 

would suggest to you that, Mr. Speaker, that it does. It does. 

 

If you look at the fairness of a trial, if you look at the fact that 

we’re trying to streamline the court system, we’re trying to 

make sure that the system itself is affordable and that you’re not 

going through all these processes and all this other work that is 

necessary to prosecute a person — and, Mr. Speaker, in many 

ways, even if the government speaks of saving time and money, 

that does compromise justice in many, many ways. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And that’s one of the important points that I want to make sure, 

is that we’re not here to make sure that the guilty go free. The 

guilty should be prosecuted, and certainly the guilty should be 

in prison for some of the crimes that they may do against 

themselves or society in general. And so I think it’s very clear 

we want to make sure that the integrity of the court system 

itself, the justice system is not compromised under the guise of 

saving money. 

 

Now when you see some of the things that are being proposed 

here, you know, you look at some of the points on page no. 2: 

 

on application by the prosecutor, allow the defects, if they 

are minor, to be corrected, and: 

 

(A) conduct a trial in the defendant’s absence . . . 

 

And I’m assuming that the defects are some of the notes on the 

tickets or the fines, you know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there is a lot of times, in some of the officers’ haste, they 

may have a wrong address. They may have a totally different 

person with the same name at the wrong address or even date of 

birth. Now is that considered minor? You know, these are some 

of the questions we have to ask. 

 

And as we know that there are many people that share the same 

name, and throughout Saskatchewan there are many, many 

people that get caught up in this particular process. Now are 

they going to be, are they going to be subjected to all of these 

particular challenges and problems of them being at work and 

all of a sudden they find out they’re being prosecuted and were 

found guilty without them not even being, without them being 

advised that there may have been a mistake in identity or person 

with the same name that was actually put down on the ticket? 

 

And that’s one of the things that’s really important is that again 

we look at the . . . That’s the purpose of the lawyers, is they 

would have the opportunity to negotiate some of these things 

and to certainly, and certainly present fairness to the person that 

may be wrongly convicted. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, whereas the other thing that is really, really 

worrisome is some of the notes that the minister has presented 

here in terms of having the defendant tried when the defendant 

may not be in court at the same date or same time. Now is that 

in any way, shape, or form fair? 

 

Well perhaps the system itself is not responding to the problem 

in the right way. There’s always a balancing act, you know, 

when it comes to that particular point. But are we tipping the 

balancing act too far to a point where again you’re not giving 

the people the legal due process when it comes to making sure 

that they have the opportunity to defend themselves? 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the tickets as an example. 

Explanation that “This provision is added for clarification so 

that a defendant has fair warning on the ticket form that they 

may be convicted if they fail to appear for trial.” 

 

Now I don’t know if the minister . . . how big of a problem that 

is. Is it all about, again, saving money? That all of a sudden if 

I’m speeding and I get a ticket and on the ticket it says, well if 

you’re not here by this certain date, then we’re going to issue a 

guilty plea. You’re guilty. Now is that what the minister is 

proposing? Because there’s a lot of different circumstances 

under which a ticket is presented. It may not just be for 

speeding. It may be for a myriad of other charges. And is that a 

fair process? And the answer to that minister, to that 

government, the answer is no. The answer is absolutely no. We 

believe on this side of the Assembly that those that have been 

charged with an offence ought to have the fair proceedings 

presented to them. And if they’re guilty, then they ought to pay 

with that particular fine or the sentence. 

 

Now what happens here is what the minister is proposing is to 

totally circumvent that process. And again where does this 

come from? Is it savings of the government? Is it to make sure 

that the court system runs as smoothly and as cleanly and as 

quickly as possible? Or is it just the whole process of making 

sure people are found guilty of these offences, is that the 

intended plan here? And again, Mr. Speaker, I always talk about 

the intention of this particular minister when it comes to 

proposing Acts that sometimes I question. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Bill itself, we are going to, again as I 

pointed out in previous Bills, we are going to be asking a lot of 

people a lot of questions and a lot of advice on this particular 

Bill. Because at the face of it, as I mentioned, this is not fairness 

in any way, shape, or form. And if you’re not fair in your 

criminal justice system, then many times people get hurt, many 

times people get wrongly convicted, and many times it 

compromises the whole process of fairness and justice, and 

many times you may involve people that have been very 

innocent of this process and not knowing what’s going on and 

all of a sudden the heavy hand of government is saying, okay, 

John Doe, you were not at court at this day. We don’t care if 

you got the wrong address on this ticket. You’re the guy. 

You’re guilty. So now you’re either going to go to jail or we’re 

giving you 15 more days before you have to appeal this, and he 

doesn’t even get a notice of that. Like we need to define how 

that system can be strengthened so that people have the 

opportunity to defend themselves. 

 

And many times, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of these 

Bills, it doesn’t seem that . . . that opportunity doesn’t seem to 

afford itself to people. Now I don’t know where this particular 

minister is getting this idea from in terms of giving his 

background. Why and how should you compromise the process 

of justice by putting in some of these Acts? Like what is the 

intent behind that? What are you trying to achieve there? 

 

And I know that, Mr. Speaker, correct me if I’m wrong, but I’m 

assuming that the minister is a lawyer, and perhaps one of these 

days he’ll go back to his private practice. And then will he be in 

a situation where he’s actually arguing against his own Bill that 

he put in place when he was in government? And I would 

suggest, I would suggest that that may be the case, Mr. Speaker. 

So you don’t just put on your ministerial hat here today under 

the guise of trying to save money and compromise the justice 

system to a point where it starts to become more of an 

oppressor than a entity that is supposed to be handing out 

justice fairly, openly, and as transparent as possible. And I 

would suggest that that day may come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s why I think, under the guise of trying to appear to be 

streamlining the court system, saving money, being quick with 

justice, that in fact they may be actually hurting the process and 

allowing the guilty to go free if they don’t fix some of these 

problems that are being presented in this particular Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. At the same time, they may be incarcerating people 

that are innocent, and that’s all under the guise of saving money 

and saving time. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think that the minister needs to again 

tell the Assembly and tell the people of Saskatchewan, where is 

he getting all the pressure to present this Bill? Where is he 

getting all his information that this is a problem? And above all 

else, how’s he going to explain to the people the value of this 

particular Bill? Is it monetary in nature? Is it process in nature? 

Or is it justice overall? And that’s some of the questions that we 

have in this opposition, Mr. Speaker, is we want to know what 

intent does this minister have in relation to this particular Bill? 

And I would suggest that he himself, while he may not want to 

admit it, that he himself may in the long run be competing 

against his own Bill because it certainly compromises a lot in 

the justice system when it comes to defendants’ rights and 

certainly allowing the due process of law to proceed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again as we indicated at the outset in relation 

to the elections Act, that this minister’s actions on that Bill is 

going to get great scrutiny by this opposition because that Bill 

will live in infamy attached to this particular minister. And 

when he has Bills of this sort that begin to compromise the 

court system to a point where innocent people are being 

prosecuted and the guilty are allowing to be freed, then, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s another discredit to his particular file, and 

certainly history will prove it. In the future, we’ll certainly see 

where this goes. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, as a member of the official opposition, 

on these whole Bill No. 3, An Act to amend the Summary 

Offences Procedure Act, 1990, I want to adjourn the debate on 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly . . . okay, 

no. The member for Athabasca has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 4, The Pension Benefits Amendment 

Act, 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key purpose of this legislation is to provide the 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

Government of Saskatchewan with the legal authority to enter 

into a new national agreement with respect to 

multi-jurisdictional pension plans. Pension plans are for many 

working people a primary source of retirement savings. They 

are a key ingredient to an enjoyable and secure standard of 

living later in life. Therefore it is critical for governments to be 

effectively involved in the regulation and support of pension 

plans. This Bill will allow our government to fulfill this role, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Multi-jurisdictional pensions plans are plans that are registered 

or based in one province but include members from other 

provinces. Therefore these plans often fall within one . . . with 

more than one regulatory authority. In the absence of an 

intergovernmental agreement, multi-jurisdictional plans need to 

register in each jurisdiction in which they have members, which 

is a significant regulatory and administrative burden for these 

plans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these plans are an increasingly common 

retirement savings tool. According to Statistics Canada, as of 

January 1st, 2010, there were approximately 3,000 

multi-jurisdictional plans in Canada covering approximately 2.5 

million members. This encompasses 20 per cent of all pension 

plans and 41 per cent of all pension plan members. In 

Saskatchewan alone, over 50,000 people are members of these 

plans. 

 

The current regulatory framework for multi-jurisdictional plans 

is based on a 1968 agreement among the provinces. There are 

also similar bilateral agreements between most provinces and 

federal government. 

 

The 1968 agreement allows the supervisory authority of one 

jurisdiction to register a multi-jurisdictional plan and exercise 

powers on behalf of another jurisdiction. The effect is that 

multi-jurisdictional plans continue to be subject to all the laws 

of each jurisdiction in which they have plan members, while 

being registered in only one jurisdiction. However divergence 

in pension laws across Canada makes it impractical and often 

impossible to simultaneously apply the rules of several 

jurisdiction to matters affecting a plan as a whole. 

 

Over time a regulatory practice developed whereby the rules of 

the jurisdiction of registration are applied to matters that affect 

the plan as a whole, while the rules of the jurisdiction where a 

member is or was employed are applied to benefit entitlements. 

Aspects of this arrangement have been challenged in court, and 

these cases have demonstrated that the 1968 agreement does not 

provide clear legal authority for the current regulatory practice. 

Therefore a new framework is required to provide a sound legal 

basis for the regulation of multi-jurisdictional plans. 

 

These amendments will provide this government with the legal 

authority to enter into a new national agreement that will 

modernize the regulation of multi-jurisdictional pension plans. 

Specifically the agreement will better allow Saskatchewan to 

deal with pension plans that are based out of province but 

include employees working in Saskatchewan. Once entered 

into, the new agreement will establish rules for the 

determination and change of the jurisdiction of a plan’s 

registration. In addition the agreement will formally establish 

division between plan matters and entitlement matters and 

provide clear rules for the allocation of assets between 

jurisdiction in the event that a plan winds up or splits. The 

agreement will also anticipate potential legislative amendments 

that would permit jurisdictions to introduce additional funding 

requirements in order to protect member benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan officials were actively involved in 

the consultation process in the design of the agreement. 

Saskatchewan is a member of the Canadian Association of 

Pension Supervisory Authorities, also known as CAPSA, which 

undertook extensive public consultation on the agreement. 

CAPSA received feedback from consultation sessions with over 

300 stakeholders across Canada, as well as from 70 written 

stakeholder submissions. A total of 55 Saskatchewan 

organizations were provided with information on the agreement 

in this consultation process. 

 

Key stakeholders in the consultation include sponsors and 

administrators of multi-jurisdictional plan, labour unions, 

representatives of the pension industry and retiree association, 

professional associations, and trade media. During the public 

consultation, stakeholders indicated their strong support for the 

adoption of the agreement and suggested changes that have 

been incorporated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all provinces as well as the federal government 

intend to sign the agreement. Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, and 

New Brunswick have already passed legislative amendments to 

allow their respective governments to enter into the agreement, 

and all other jurisdictions have indicated they anticipate having 

similar amendments passed by the end of 2012. 

 

[15:15] 

 

This Bill also introduces two housekeeping amendments, Mr. 

Speaker. First, it will allow for the establishment of terms and 

conditions that will apply to plans or employees that are 

exempted from the application of the Act. Secondly, it will 

allow for the appointment of a deputy superintendent of 

pensions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 

4, The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 3, 

the summary . . . no, the pension one I believe, Bill No. 4, The 

Pension Benefits Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

am pleased to stand today and respond on the behalf of the 

official opposition in reference to Bill No. 4, which is An Act to 

amend The Pensions Benefit Act, 1992, in which the minister is 

suggesting that a multi-jurisdictional process be undertaken so 

that we can all sit down as one big, happy family in Canada to 

ensure that when we have overlapping pensions and people live 

in different provinces and so on and so forth, that we may have 

some kind of a discussion and certainly some kind of a strategy 

to go forward to deal with some of the issues. 

 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

And the minister at the outset certainly indicated that he had 

consulted with 55 groups that certainly maybe gave him some 

advice. We wouldn’t mind having a copy of that consultation 

and that report in relation to some of the points that they raised. 

And the reason why we need that report, Mr. Speaker, is it gives 

us a good perspective of some of the logic that he suggests that 

these groups would support a multi-jurisdictional process. And 

so some of that information would be very, very valuable to us 

as an opposition member, and I would ask the minister if he 

would forward a copy of those comments and that consultation 

discussion paper that he alluded to in his opening comments in 

relation to this particular Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I certainly would like to know, why is this 

Bill being proposed now? A multi-jurisdictional Bill dealing 

with The Pension Benefits Act, like what is the challenges 

attached to it? What is the benefits? Which groups are 

supportive of it? Which groups have caution about it? Which 

groups are really pushing forward and supporting it? These are 

some of the questions that are really, really important for us as 

an opposition and the people of Saskatchewan to certainly have 

access to. 

 

And as I pointed out amongst some of the other Bills that the 

minister has proposed, that the people have to know what 

exactly is the intent behind the Bill. And while again at the 

outset, like some of the similar other Bills, we want to look at a 

plan to bring the multi jurisdictions together to talk about a 

common theme of The Pension Benefits Act, then there is 

10,000 more questions that we have, and other groups may 

have, as to what the intent of this particular Bill is. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, some of those notes are important 

to us. I would imagine that the notes that the minister has as a 

result of his consultation with 55 groups, there must be a 

variance between what different people are saying. He 

mentioned the pension plan administrators. He mentioned the 

union sector. You know, that was some of the mention of a few 

groups that he had the so-called consultations with. 

 

Now how rigorous were these processes put in place to consult 

with these groups? Did they do a vote by consensus as to 

whether some of the proposals and this multi-jurisdictional plan 

is when it comes to pension benefits? And these are some of the 

questions that, you know, that we certainly have. So I think 

whether it’s pension plans or whether it’s circumventing what I 

think is the fair justice system, that there’s all these questions 

that we have as an opposition. And we need to know. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the opposition is certainly 

open to any of the groups that that minister may have consulted 

with. And if they have advice or information or direction that 

they would like to see, or they would like to certainly expose a 

weakness in this particular Bill, we would invite them to 

forward that information to the opposition so that we may in 

turn not only educate ourselves as to what the challenges may 

be, but to alert the public as well. And that’s what’s really 

important on all these Bills, Mr. Speaker, is that we have good 

consultation with the groups, but more so that the public knows 

exactly what is being planned with this particular government 

on a wide variety of topics, and in this case the pension plan 

Act, Mr. Speaker, The Pension Benefits Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the multi-jurisdictional strategy that the minister 

has in terms of trying to appoint an arbitrator, if you will, or a 

referee that would look at all the different jurisdictions, look at 

the different risks, again when you don’t know what the risks 

are with some of these Acts and some of these Bills are, what 

they may be, then a lot of questions certainly out there by the 

people of Saskatchewan. So they need to know what are the 

values of the multi-jurisdictional agreements we have when it 

comes to pension benefits? What are the challenges? Who are 

the players? Is there a jurisdiction that has greater autonomy or 

power over another jurisdiction? Is there a certain sector of 

employee that may have greater transferability in some of their 

pension plans from one jurisdiction to another? Like these are 

some of the questions that we have as an opposition, and I’m 

sure many other people have as well. 

 

So it’s nice to be able to in general share the vision of what is 

being planned with this particular Bill. But the questions and 

the advice and the notes and the information that that minister 

has, if he shares it with the rest of the people and the people of 

Saskatchewan, it gives us the same vantage point that he may 

have to do two things: to either agree with his assessment or, 

better yet, to challenge his assessment and to expose the 

weakness that he may have when he puts forward Bills of this 

sort that really compromises a number of people that may be 

impacted by the amendments to this pension benefits Act and as 

it relates to the multi-jurisdictional perspective. So Mr. Speaker, 

I would certainly ask the minister for that information, ask him 

for all the detail that is necessary. 

 

And I’d also publicly ask the groups out there that are impacted 

— the benefit plans administrators that he may have spoken 

with, the union sector — what’s their position? As we all know, 

there’s a number of pension plans out there, and they have had 

some great, intelligent people that have spearheaded some of 

their organization, PEPP being one of them. Like what is 

PEPP’s position on this particular Bill? Is it complementary of 

the Bill? Other union pension plans, is it complementary? The 

national unions that may work in, live in Saskatchewan, are 

they complementary to this Bill? These are some of the 

questions that we have to ask, Mr. Speaker, and none of that 

information is in the two pages of explanatory notes that the 

minister presented to the opposition. 

 

And that’s why we are glad to have this process in place where 

we have several months to ask the different stakeholders out 

there for their advice, for their guidance, for their input on Bills 

of this sort because you never know if these Bills have not been 

thoroughly thought of or thought through, and what the 

intended consequences may be of that government on these 

people impacted with their pension plan to The Pension Benefits 

Act. 

 

There’s all these questions that are out there, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s no way that we in any way, shape, or form as an 

opposition should take the face value comments of the minister 

that that’s what his intent is because we have to make sure that 

all the t’s have been crossed and the i’s dotted in terms of 

protecting our Saskatchewan people. And as innocuous as it 

may seem of somebody putting an administrator in place to 

look at the multi-jurisdictional coordination of all the pension 

plans throughout Saskatchewan, it doesn’t seem to be 

something that we should be worried about. 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

But again I go back to the point of making sure that we hold 

this minister to account on some of the Bills he’s bringing 

forward because on many, many occasions we have seen the 

effects of some of the Bills that he’s proposing was not what he 

proposed and intended in the Assembly. And that’s something 

that we ought to keep in the back of our minds on all occasions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I point out that The Pension Benefits Act, 

1992, that there’s other things that he wants to do. As I 

mentioned he wants to look at a superintendent, somebody that 

could look at . . . a deputy superintendent, somebody that could 

possibly give us better and more advice. Would that person be 

available to the Assembly to ask questions during committee? 

 

The other thing too is in terms of registration and examination 

of pension plans, enforcement of specified laws affecting these 

plans. These are some of the terminology and the language that 

the minister uses in terms of the Bill itself. And we need to 

know, we need to know a lot more detail. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I point out under subsection 10.1(3) which 

allows an agreement to address the following matters in regards 

to MJPs [multi-jurisdictional plan], and that of course is 

multi-jurisdictional pensions, now here’s what some of the 

points that the minister raised under his explanation notes — 

again to the following matters will be looked at under the MJPs: 

 

a mechanism to determine which jurisdiction has the 

authority to regulate a MJP [Does that hurt Saskatchewan? 

I don’t know.]; 

 

providing that all of, or a portion of, Saskatchewan’s Act 

and regulations do not apply to the MJP in certain 

circumstances [Well that’s a big question there as well.]; 

 

providing that a requirement of Saskatchewan’s Act or a 

regulation is deemed to be satisfied if a corresponding 

requirement of the principle regulatory jurisdiction is 

satisfied [Again many more questions from these 

statements, Mr. Speaker.]; 

 

plan . . . [number] and/or former members who have 

service in more than one jurisdiction; 

 

employer contributions [Big question mark on that one, 

Mr. Speaker.]; 

 

the allocation of assets of the plan between jurisdictions 

[Like what does that mean? Like how is that going to 

impact Saskatchewan in general?]; 

 

the administration and enforcement of Saskatchewan 

pension laws or the pension laws of another jurisdiction. 

 

And I look at the Ontario example where they have powerful 

pension plans. Are they in a position to dominate 

Saskatchewan’s perspective? We don’t know that, and we need 

to have that information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the list kind of goes on in terms of some of the other points 

that the minister has raised: “the delegation of supervisory 

and/or regulatory powers between participating jurisdictions.” 

Like these are huge decisions that are going to be made under 

the MJP process that the minister alluded to when he comes to 

this particular Bill, and we need to know those questions. 

 

We have a lot more questions than answers on this particular 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it gives me great pleasure on 

behalf of the official opposition to adjourn the debate on Bill 

No. 4, An Act to amend The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 4, The Pension Benefits 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

2011. 

 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 will facilitate 

SaskCentral’s plan to continue under the federal Co-operative 

Credit Associations Act Canada in 2012. As well it will allow 

SaskCentral to implement a request from the Credit Union 

Deposit Guarantee Corporation to update the qualifications for 

its board of directors. SaskCentral’s continuous continuance 

initiative has been under way for a number of years and resulted 

in an amendment to The Credit Union Act, 1997 and 2009. 

 

That amendment enabled an entity other than the Credit Union 

Central of Saskatchewan, which was established by a 

Saskatchewan private Act to fulfill the role of Credit Union 

Central for Saskatchewan. Since 2009, SaskCentral’s 

continuance plans have evolved and so have their request for 

legislative amendments. This Bill reflects this evolution. 

 

Continuance under the federal legislation will give SaskCentral 

the flexibility to grow and to provide central services in other 

provinces and to federal credit unions. This will help 

SaskCentral remain competitive in Canada’s ever-changing 

financial sector. 

 

Saskatchewan has a history of strong leadership within the 

credit union system. SaskCentral wishes to continue this 

leadership by moving to provide services nationally while 

maintaining its excellent service to Saskatchewan credit unions. 

This Bill contains a number of amendments that facilitate those 

plans while ensuring the needs of Saskatchewan’s credit union 

systems are met now and in the future. 

 

Currently SaskCentral is governed by a private statute, The 

Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan Act, 1999. SaskCentral 

is accountable to the government through this private Act which 

requires it to provide the government with access to its books. 

Ultimately the legislature may amend the Act if the need arises. 

Following its continuance, SaskCentral will no longer be 

governed by the private Act, and therefore the government 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

needs to create new methods to ensure that the government 

stays informed of SaskCentral’s financial status and its ability 

to provide key services to Saskatchewan’s credit union system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will now move on to the amendment requested 

by the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation. In 2009 

the Act was amended at the request of SaskCentral to update the 

qualification for directors and incorporators of credit unions. 

Following proclamation of these amendments earlier this year, 

the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation determined 

that many of the new qualifications for credit union board 

members and directors should also apply to members of its own 

board. As a result, this Bill will grant that request. 

 

[15:30] 

 

This Bill is indicative of the strong relationship between the 

credit union system and the government. It maintains balance 

between the flexibility needed for SaskCentral to grow and the 

government’s ability to oversee this vital sector of 

Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during several of the preceding second reading 

Bill motions that I have made, the member opposite has 

expressed concern about the ability of the government to have 

done consultation on it. What I would like to do is urge the 

members to allow these Bills all to proceed to committee where 

you’ll have full access to the government officials that worked 

on it, prepared the Bills, and will be able to ask questions in a 

meaningful manner and be able to satisfy his questions that 

appropriate consultations were conducted, and that we are 

acting in the best interests of the province. 

 

I take strong exceptions to some of the statements that the 

member opposite made and would like certainly to have these 

Bills all proceed to committee at the earliest possible matter so 

that we are able to deal with them in a professional and 

competent manner. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to move second reading 

of this Bill No. 5, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 5, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 

member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, at the outset of the 

minister’s comments where he spoke highly of the Credit Union 

Central in terms of its role in Saskatchewan, and there’s no 

question that not only has the credit union movement has been 

instrumental in making Saskatchewan a greater province, that 

they probably have been the single financial institution that has 

made a significant, a significant stride in going where no other 

banks have gone before. 

 

So I think that certainly from my perspective as an opposition, 

whenever you start talking about the Credit Union Central of 

Saskatchewan, that we want to make sure that we watch very 

carefully what is being proposed here by this government and 

certainly by this minister. 

And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, fair is fair. There’s no question 

that when the minister alluded to us having to go to committee 

so he can have the people ask some questions and certainly 

going from there, what the public I think certainly knows right 

now and what we know as an opposition is you’ve got to have 

time to be able to digest the information that is being presented 

by this minister in terms of the number of Bills that he’s 

proposed. 

 

Now what is wrong with taking the time to really understand 

some of the Bills? What is wrong with consulting with groups? 

What is wrong with having access to all the information that 

that minister may have on a number of Bills? Nothing wrong 

with that. And what those things need, Mr. Speaker, the 

prerequisite to making a good informed and solid decision for 

the people of Saskatchewan, is having access to information 

and having the time to digest that information so the other 

groups and other organizations and the official opposition have 

the tools necessary to completely understand what that minister 

is proposing on any of these Bills, including the Credit Union 

Central of Saskatchewan Act, 1999. 

 

So the offer by the minister to allow the Bill to proceed to 

committee, Mr. Speaker, that in itself is haste. And as we 

mentioned, when you’re trying to get through things too 

quickly, mistakes are being made, advice is not being 

understood, and certainly opinions are not being heard. And 

that’s one of the points that I think, the reason why the 

opposition is insisting on having the time necessary to 

understand all these Bills. We’ve got to take as much time as 

possible to afford as much insight on these Bills as possible, 

and that is the better justice that we in the opposition want to 

propose on this Bill and all the other Bills being proposed by 

that minister. And that, I think, Mr. Speaker, is the better 

process. It’s the better system. 

 

And that’s how the Legislative Assembly works. You have 

Bills being proposed by the government, by various ministers. 

The opposition adjourns the debates on these Bills because we 

want to make sure we have the time needed, the time necessary 

to go through a number of organizations, a number of people, a 

number of impacted shareholders that can give us the advice as 

to whether these Bills are good or not. And while the minister 

made the offer of going directly to committee, I’m going to 

decline the offer because that’s contrary to fairness, and 

contrary to consultation of these Bills to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s like anything else, Mr. Speaker. On this particular Bill, I am 

pleased that The Credit Union Amendment Act is being looked 

at to reflect what the credit union may like. And you look at the 

qualifications of the board of directors for their deposit 

insurance corporation should be the same as their board of 

directors. Well I’m assuming that they know, the Credit Union 

Central know what they’re doing. And all the other board of 

directors of all the credit unions, I’m pretty sure that they have a 

fair idea and a fair grasp of what is stalling them, what is 

hurting them, and what they need to do to improve their 

credibility which is absolutely fantastic out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would point out that advice from the Credit Union Central 

is very well, well-made on many, many fronts, and I don’t see 

them digressing or certainly moving away from that particular 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

standard when it comes to advice to this government about their 

future. So certainly from the Credit Union Central perspective, 

their advice is well, well heard and certainly respected by the 

official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to some of the amendments and 

some of the provisions in this Bill. And the opposition will not 

stand in the way. What we want to do is we want to make sure 

we have the system follow through, follow through with what is 

being intended here to make sure that this is what exactly today 

they need, and to respect the legislative schedule where we’re 

allowed to take the time to understand this Bill thoroughly. Like 

obviously when you have the board of directors, the 

qualifications of the board of directors being brought into this 

particular Bill, good to know that stuff but we need to find out 

where that’s coming from. We also need to know what are the 

impacts and the benefits of this particular Bill. 

 

And sometimes the Credit Union Central organization, they 

could certainly come along, the credit union movement, and 

explain some of the positive impacts of this Bill. Because as an 

opposition, if we’re well informed as to what the intent of their 

Bill is, and this is a Bill that they like and they want and they 

feel that this is necessary for their movement to continue 

building and getting stronger, well so be it. There’s no question 

that we would support that. But we need to have that audience. 

We need to have that information. We need to be told why this 

is good. We need to be given the opportunity to ask questions of 

this particular Bill. And sometimes the people that we’re 

intending to help, to build them and make them stronger, we 

just simply have to know what their intentions are to make sure 

that what they seek is what the government is proposing. 

 

And that’s how the system works. And the legislative agenda is 

very clear that you have a government that proposes things, an 

opposition that holds them to account and opposes things they 

do unless and until they have the collaboration of a particular 

middle party, that they have informed both sides that this is a 

great deal. And, Mr. Speaker, if it is a great deal, as the minister 

alluded to, and that’s what the credit union, the system wants to 

help build them better and stronger, then why would we as an 

opposition stand in their way? And all we ask in terms of the 

collaboration and the support that we would afford this 

particular Bill is the better the information, the presentation, an 

opportunity to ask questions, and the list goes on as to why we 

need to do this to fulfill our obligations as the official 

opposition for this government. So, Mr. Speaker, without any 

further notice I just want to point out that as official opposition, 

we’ve looked at the Bill. We plan on getting advice on the Bill. 

We’ll continue researching the Bill as best we can. We would 

ask for people to give us their advice on the Bill. 

 

So along that vein of thought, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

adjourn the debate on this Bill. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 5, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to speak about The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Amendment Act of 2011. 

 

The Community Initiatives Fund was created to ensure that 

Saskatchewan communities receive tangible benefits from 

casino profits. The fund receives a portion of profits from the 

Regina and Moose Jaw casinos. The mission of the CIF 

[Community Initiatives Fund] is to make knowledgeable and 

effective investments in community-based initiatives 

throughout Saskatchewan that strengthen the capacity of 

communities. 

 

Now the current program streams offered by the Community 

Initiatives Fund are: one, community grants for human 

development; two, youth leadership and Aboriginal inclusion, 

including the urban Aboriginal community grant program; 

three, physical activity, including Saskatchewan In Motion; 

four, problem gambling and mitigation payment; and five, 

community vitality program which include small capital 

investments and milestone community celebrations. 

 

The fund is managed by an arm’s-length, 

government-appointed board whose members all have extensive 

experience as community volunteers. The legislative 

amendments to part IV of this Act are intended to improve the 

efficient operation of the Community Initiatives Fund. 

 

Certain governance items in the amendment include: terms of 

appointment for the board of trustees, the establishment of 

quorum, the designation of Chair and Vice-Chair, remuneration 

and reimbursement of expenses, the ability to engage technical 

expertise, and the provision of appropriate pension and benefits 

for employees. 

 

In addition to those matters of governance, the legislative 

amendments to part IV of the Act address four main issues. 

First, the board of trustees currently has full authority to 

manage and operate the fund, but the legislation is silent on the 

ability to hire the employees necessary to manage this 

substantial fund. These legislative amendments will provide the 

CIF board of trustees the ability to hire employees and put in 

place the capacity they need to manage this fund. 

 

Second, we are clarifying the need for liability protection within 

the Act. The board of trustees and any future employees require 

liability protection from legal actions for good faith decisions 

carried out when managing the fund. Legislative immunity from 

liability can protect the board of trustees and any future 

employees and the Crown from baseless lawsuits. 

 

Currently liability protection for the board is extended to the 

fund through an indemnity letter provided by government. 

There is a risk that the indemnity letter will not provide the 

same level of protection that would exist within a legislative 

provision. 

 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

Third, as minister I have stewardship and oversight 

responsibility over the Community Initiatives Fund; however, 

the reporting relationship with the fund is only supported by an 

MOU [memorandum of understanding] that is not legally 

binding. These legislative amendments will provide the minister 

with clear authority to establish reporting, performance, and 

management expectations. 

 

Fourth, the amendment will update and modernize the wording 

of the granting provision. The modernized wording will ensure 

the board members are able to fulfill their mandate to ensure 

that Saskatchewan communities receive tangible benefits from 

casino profits. 

 

These amendments clarify government’s accountability for the 

fund and provide the board of trustees with the ability to 

manage the fund more effectively. The ministry has consulted 

with the Community Initiatives Fund board of trustees 

regarding the proposed changes to the Act, and they are pleased 

to support the recommended changes. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved second 

reading of The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment 

Act, 2011. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

again pleased on behalf of the official opposition to give the 

Assembly our perspective as the official opposition on Bill No. 

9, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the outset there’s two areas that we’re quite 

seriously concerned about. When you look at the Bill itself, we 

notice how the minister has positioned himself to do a couple of 

things: save himself and his government from lawsuits because 

obviously one of the items that he’s identified here is the fact 

that . . . And I need to make sure I get the right information 

here, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the liability and it’s section 

28.6, Mr. Speaker, and it says here: 

 

“Liability in tort 

28.6 The board of trustees may: 

(a) sue with respect to any tort; and 

(b) be sued with respect to any liability in tort. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he mentioned in his comments at the outset 

that through their association with this government that they 

were protected by that means and that this new agreement here 

would have the board of trustees, themselves, be able to sue or 

be sued. Now is that, that is a huge change in this particular 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. I’m not too worried about the 

appointment of the board of directors because they’ll do, they’ll 

appoint who they want. But are they really setting up this 

particular board to become involved with lawsuits from them, 

or to them, with having the government wash their hands of that 

particular problem? 

 

[15:45] 

And I would suggest that, Mr. Speaker, the whole notion of . . . 

You know, the process that the minister has spoke about, 

you’ve got to be careful that you don’t leave some of your 

partners high and dry. Because are they going to afford these 

particular, this particular board with a lot of legal advice? Are 

they going to afford them a legal team? And, Mr. Speaker, 

when you start seeing some of these problems being transferred 

to a board of directors, you become more and more concerned 

with what this particular minister is trying to propose. So that’s 

one of the flags that I certainly see from the initial view of this 

particular Bill. 

 

We need to find out, is that par for the course with some of the 

other organizations throughout Canada? Do other jurisdictions 

do this as well? Do they say, okay, we’re going to appoint you 

as a board, but guess what? You guys sue or get sued; that’s 

your responsibility. Don’t bother us. We’re government; you’re 

separate from us and so on and so forth. And I don’t know if 

that’s the case, Mr. Speaker. We need to find out those 

particular points and that’s one of the reasons why other 

jurisdictions and how they do their particular work in this 

particular agreement, if it’s similar, if there’s some changes, or 

there’s some radical points of interest that they want brought 

forward. That’s some of the things that this opposition wants to 

try and look at for now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing is that we look at superannuation, that: 

 

The board of trustees may establish and support any or all 

of the benefits of the employees and dependants of the 

employees: 

a superannuation plan; 

a group insurance plan; 

a pension plan, superannuation or employee benefit 

program. 

 

Like were those processes in place before? Were these 

employees considered Government of Saskatchewan employees 

that were working for the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation? 

And now they’re being transferred. What impact does that have 

on the actual relationship with the government? 

 

So we look at all the processes with this particular minister’s 

plans. You begin to say, the transition, what is that about? Are 

these new employees? Obviously people that worked for the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation for a number of years, were 

they considered government employees or were they considered 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, Saskatchewan Gaming 

employees? And that’s the question. The impacts on the 

superannuation benefits, their pension benefits, the health 

benefits, who pays for that? Is that coming out of the gaming 

revenue? Or is it coming out of the Saskatchewan government’s 

revenues? 

 

So we need to get that information, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one 

of the things I think that people out there would have a lot of 

interest in. And how many employees are we talking about? Is 

it five employees? Is it 10 employees? The Bill itself talks about 

the right of the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation to hire 

employees. Now is there a limit to the amount of employees? 

Can they hire as many as they want as they deem fit as a board? 

Is it going to be less or more from the government direction as 

to the current complement of employees? If they let go of all 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

their employees and contract all the services out, is that 

considered a government action or a Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation action? 

 

These are some of the questions that we want to know as the 

official opposition because there is so many questions to this 

particular Bill, questions that we know we’re going to have a 

tough time finding answers of over the next couple of weeks, 

never mind the next couple of months. So again, the invite to 

groups out there that may have information on this particular 

Bill, that we need to find that information beforehand and we 

have the two or three months necessary at this time to get that 

information and certainly incorporate it in our position as the 

official opposition. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the board being able to 

be sued or to sue, we talked about the employees of this 

particular corporation Act and all the benefits that they might 

have. And now we also need to talk about the payment for the 

board. And I point out that I think the payment for the board is 

going to be similar to that as defined by the Public Service 

Commission. Now I’m assuming that goes for not just the board 

of directors, but the employees as well. So the question that 

people ask out there, well what are board members being paid 

to be on the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation? Is there . . . 

There’s obviously per diem. There’s also room and travel and 

so on and so forth. But is there a per diem that is being afforded 

to these individuals when they do have their meetings? And 

how often do they meet and where do they meet and so on and 

so forth? So these are the questions that we have to ask in 

relation to the board of directors in terms of how they’re being 

paid. And we need to know where they’re from and how many 

board you’re looking at. 

 

And has there been any board position that this minister has 

guaranteed to any particular person or organization at this time? 

Has there been a deal made beforehand saying once this Act is 

in place, then you from the Métis nation will be the rep there. 

We will let you appoint so and so on there. Has that deal been 

made? Because obviously there is some Métis funding that is 

being put in place to the gaming corporation. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask that question because there are many people 

asking me that same question, and we certainly need to know. 

 

The other thing that’s important, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of the 

financial statement: 

 

. . . the board of trustees shall, in accordance with The 

Tabling of Documents Act, 1991, prepare and submit to the 

minister: 

 

(a) a report, including the report of the auditor, on the 

activities of the fund for the preceding fiscal year; and 

 

(b) a financial statement setting out the revenues and 

expenditures of the fund for the preceding fiscal year, in 

the form required by Treasury Board. 

 

And finally: 

 

(2) In accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 

1991, the minister shall lay before the Legislative 

Assembly each report and financial statement that the 

minister receives pursuant to subsection (1). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming that under the financial statement, 

the minister said he never really had the authority to request 

that. Now with this Act, that authority is clearly granted to him, 

as he indicated in his opening statements. Now the question that 

people of Saskatchewan had beforehand: didn’t he have that 

authority before? What were the problems with that process? 

And what were some of the challenges that he faced or their 

government faced in relation to that financial accountability and 

transparency ethic that they may have had with this particular 

board? Was there some problems there? 

 

And that’s kind of the situation that we’re looking at as an 

official opposition is we have a great interest in what this 

particular minister proposes. We have a great interest in what 

this particular file will certainly bring to people of 

Saskatchewan. And we have an even greater interest in ensuring 

that this minister doesn’t do things through this gaming 

agreement that has a rich history and has helped many 

organizations, that simply empower him and disempower the 

process and certainly take away from the funds itself, money 

that may be used for salary when that salary was paid 

elsewhere, money that’s supposed to be used for the fund when 

the money is now being paid for benefits for the employees, 

benefits for all the consultants that they may hire. Like where is 

all that additional money coming from? Is there a transfer from 

the government’s responsibility, the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation, to this particular board? 

 

And I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that that’s the case because 

that’s exactly how this particular minister likes to operate. He 

likes to transfer responsibility — whether it’s a legal 

responsibility, whether it’s a financial responsibility — to 

another organization. And then if there’s firings or there’s 

problems, oh you can sue them. Don’t bother trying to look at 

us as the government. And that’s very typical of this minister 

and that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we simply don’t trust some of the opening comments of that 

particular Bill. We don’t want to see any kind of trust afforded 

to that particular Bill. We don’t want to take any assumptions of 

goodwill from that Bill. 

 

So it’s got a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why when 

there’s any kind of credibility issue attached to that Bill, we 

want to make sure we give it as much a thorough look as 

possible. So, Mr. Speaker, in relation to Bill No. 9, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, I, as the 

member of the official opposition, I move that we adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 9, The Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation Amendment Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to speak about The Parks Amendment Act, 2011. Over the 

past four years our parks have experienced record growth in 

visitation numbers. This increase makes it even more important 

that we give our parks officials and enforcement staff improved 

definitions governing private development and enforced 

enhancement procedures to ensure that all park visitors enjoy a 

high-quality experience. 

 

The Parks Act is to be amended in three areas. First, the 

amendment clarifies that invested capital, in reference to 

dispositions in parks, means invested private capital, not 

government investment. It further clarifies that development of 

a property on a recreational lease, i.e., a cottage, is not subject 

to the regulations on private capital investment. 

 

Second, The Parks Act amendment will allow park enforcement 

officers better ability to deal with individuals who contravene 

specific regulations where, under current legislation, 

enforcement has been difficult. This includes amendments to 

allow the powers of eviction of park officers to be prescribed in 

regulation. The term of eviction is also being increased from 48 

hours to 72 hours in order to apply to the full duration of a long 

weekend. 

 

Currently The Summary Offence Procedures Regulations, 1991 

indicate several offences under The Parks Act and regulations 

when an officer may withdraw the specified penalty sum option 

and require the defendant to appear in court. When this occurs, 

The Parks Act currently specifies a judge can fine a person 

found guilty up to a maximum fine of $1,000 and require the 

offender to pay restitution. This amendment with regards to 

restitution defines property to include built facilities, natural 

and cultural resources within a park. The amendment will assist 

a judge in deciding what items should be included when 

determining the value of restitution for any damage done by a 

person found guilty of contravening park regulations. This 

maximum fine for summary conviction at the current level of 

$1,000 was established in 1986. Twenty-five years later, there 

is a need to increase this fine to maintain its significance as a 

deterrent to those who would knowingly contravene park 

regulations. 

 

In the past, we have witnessed major impacts to park land such 

as bulldozing trails or major park encroachments without proper 

approvals. In looking at other western provincial jurisdictions, 

we see that both Alberta’s and British Columbia’s park 

legislation have much higher fines for individuals, up to 

$100,000 and $1 million respectively, and are up to one year 

imprisonment. Manitoba’s park legislation identifies a fine of 

up to $10,000 and/or up to six months imprisonment. To be 

closer aligned with other legislations and provide a greater 

deterrent, the maximum fine amount is being increased from 

1,000 to $50,000. 

 

Third are amendments to legal descriptions, including 

corrections to plan numbers, confirmation that highway 

rights-of-way are excluded from parks descriptions, and 

correction of errors in legal descriptions. 

 

Amendments to legal descriptions include a change to the 

boundary of Moose Mountain Provincial Park, resulting in the 

withdrawal of 6.35 hectares — that’s 15.7 acres — of land to 

facilitate the sale of this land to the village of Kenosee Lake. It 

should be noted that the land being de-regulated from Moose 

Mountain Provincial Park has been impacted by a previous 

commercial development which no longer exists, is separated 

from the rest of the park by highway or village development on 

all sides, and is deemed not to hold any intrinsic value for the 

park. The village of Kenosee Lake first inquired about 

purchasing this land as early as 1999. 

 

To conclude, I am pleased to move second reading of The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2011. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has moved second reading of Bill No. 10, The 

Parks Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

. . . I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

on Bill No. 10, we want to make sure that the people of 

Saskatchewan know exactly what this particular minister is 

proposing. And right at the outset, Mr. Speaker, the word 

privatization of our parks stands out like a big neon sign, Mr. 

Speaker. I think people have to begin to watch very carefully 

what this minister and this government does in relation to our 

provincial parks. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the amendments on this particular Act to 

amend The Parks Act, anything that these, any time that these 

folks have something planned for our parks, that people of 

Saskatchewan ought to be very, very careful and ought to very 

thoroughly read what some of the Acts and some of the plans 

that this particular minister may have for our parks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now they talk about the other simple things, which I think are 

always things to direct attention away from what they want to 

do such as removing old rusted vehicles or old boats and all 

that, they have that as part of the Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But what they do at the outset is they simply talk about the 

authority and the ability to bring people in that, and I quote 

from the Bill: 

 

The amendment clarifies that only invested capital from 

private sources would be considered with respect to the 

$250,000 limit that would initiate the requirement for 

Lieutenant Governor in Council approval. 

 

The intent has been that this section refers to commercial 

and institutional leases and not for individual cottage lease 

development. The amendment confirms this intent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know we have development in our 

provincial park system. We know that there’s a lot of people 

live in these parks year-round, and many of them certainly live 

there seasonally. There’s nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker, 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2011 

as they do add to the protection of the parks and they do 

certainly participate in many of the decisions that affect the park 

in general. And they, to me certainly from my point of view, 

that they act as stewards of the park in many, many ways. And 

there’s nothing wrong with that at the outset, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we have to begin to know what the plan is of this particular 

government when they start looking at doing some of these 

things. And that’s why at the outset, the privatization of our 

provincial park system is something that leaps out from these 

particular pages and when you talk about any of the aspects of 

this particular Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, certainly they threw in the enforcement on 

officers being able to remove vehicles that are “unlawfully 

placed, left or kept on any road, trail, street, lane, parking place 

or other area” within the park, to impound these vehicles and to 

remove them. They talk about any water vessel that may be 

rusted or abandoned. They talk about the “impounding and 

disposal of animals running at large.” They talk about the 

regulating and controlling the mooring and docking, regulating 

the use of explosives within park lands. 

 

These are all some of the different issues that they throw in with 

the Bill, all the while taking away from the single-most 

prominent line in this particular Bill, which we certainly looked 

at, and that is that “. . . only invested capital from private 

sources would be considered with respect to the $250,000 limit 

that would initiate the requirement for Lieutenant Governor in 

Council approval.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again as I mentioned at the outset, looking at 

this particular Bill, and this is a Bill that really warrants a lot of 

attention from many of the groups out there that look at the park 

system as their own. They look at the magnificent beauty of all 

our parks throughout the province and through the country, for 

that point. 

 

But certainly from the Saskatchewan perspective, they begin to 

wonder how many more of these developments that this 

government wants to propose can the sustainability of the lands 

within those parks really handle? And that’s the big question 

that we have. Has there been any studies to determine that? 

Because obviously as you begin to allow some of the private 

sector money to flow into some of these parks, it becomes less 

and less of a government/environmental perspective and more 

so of a for-sale prospective, Mr. Speaker. So you have to really 

make sure that you assess these applications and this whole 

process very, very closely, and that you ask for advice from 

those people impacted. 

 

Now I know a lot of cabin owners and people that have, as I 

mentioned at the outset, that have had the opportunity to build 

their own homes, and they really take pride in the park. And 

they look after the park very well, and they add to the park 

protection in general. Now we’re starting to see a lot more 

activity and a lot more commercialization of some of our parks. 

Does that have a negative, drastic effect overall? We don’t have 

those questions, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t believe the 

government has them as well. So we need to ask some of the 

cottage owners’ associations, some of the people involved with 

the maintenance of the park, the staff as an example. We need 

to ask the people that lease land within the park as opposed to 

owning land, and we need to ask them all these questions that 

are being proposed by this particular Bill. 

 

And we’re not getting any of that information from this 

particular minister or the government. So we need to reach out 

to those groups, again as I mentioned, to every single one of 

these Bills, to reach out to them and to ask those questions that 

is necessary to make sure people understood and understand 

what this minister is proposing so they don’t do something 

totally different later on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister if he had those 

consultations? Has he had any intake from some of the 

provisions that he’s allowed? Has there been any deals made of 

any particular groups of people? Is there provisions set aside for 

some of their friends to take advantage of some of the 

amendments in this Bill? Has there been any kind of 

consultation with the cottage owners’ associations and all the 

groups out there? And if so, are there are any notes attached to 

that? These are the questions we have. 

 

And as I mention, every single Bill that we spoke of this 

afternoon, we need the time, the two or three months we need 

between the winter sitting and the spring sitting to seek that 

information out from groups and organizations so they can 

mount a challenge to this government to show them that this is 

not what the people of Saskatchewan want. And it’s not just a 

matter of using the opposition for that purpose, it’s really to 

begin to qualify their own opinions back from whatever park 

that they may live on or near, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those that may be paying attention to the Assembly this 

afternoon, An Act to amend The Parks Act really has a lot of 

challenges and problems to it. And we, as the opposition, want 

to find out some of those answers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I notice that there’s a few parts of the Bill 

that the minister scratched off. Now I don’t know whether that’s 

typical of this particular minister and how he presents Bills to 

the Assembly, but there’s been a number of Bills that were 

stricken. And I’m just wondering why. Why were they stricken 

from the Act? Was there something that changed? 

 

And I’ll give you a good example. Under item no. 5, existing 

provision 32(1), where an enforcement officer on reasonable 

grounds believes that a person is contravening any provision of 

the regulations that prohibits or regulates any offensive 

behaviour, he may order that person to cease the contravention 

or may order him to leave the park land and to remain out of 

park land for a period of 48 hours. 

 

They withdrew that, Mr. Speaker. Now why was that 

withdrawn from the original Act? And it’s crossed off on these 

explanatory notes that were presented to us by the minister. 

Now there’s some questions on that particular aspect. Are they 

worried that this is giving the COs [conservation officer] too 

much authority and too much power? So one hand, you’re 

giving them the authority to do certain things. But guess what: 

you can’t do this. So is that healthy for a park? Some people say 

it is. Others say it isn’t. 

 

So these are some of the points that we saw immediately as we 

went through some of these Bills. And I can tell you that there 



December 12, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

are many, many more questions than answers. And that’s the 

purpose and that’s the reason why we have the necessary time 

frame to seek that advice from different groups. And we 

certainly will as the opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to some of the other points that 

are being raised in this particular Bill, as I know that some of 

my colleagues and other groups and organizations are aware of 

what the Bill entails because obviously they’d be online. And 

we would ask them to participate. Bring forward your ideas. 

Bring forward your concerns. Bring forward some of your 

solution and really help educate the opposition in this case if 

there’s something that you totally disagree with and that you 

want to mount the challenge with. So I think that’s really, really 

important, Mr. Speaker, and that we do all we can to take the 

time to understand these Bills. 

 

So on that note, I move that we adjourn Bill No. 10, An Act to 

amend The Parks Act. And I so move, Mr. Speaker . . . I meant 

the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Athabasca that the debate on Bill No. 10, The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2011 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the work of committees and as discussed between 

House leaders, I would adjourn the House with Human Services 

commencing at 4:15 in room 8, followed by Crown and Central 

Agencies, Economy, Public Accounts, and Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice all in room 8. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:09.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 121 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 121 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 121 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 121 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 122 

  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 122 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 122 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 A Community of Support 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 122 

 Recognizing a Community Leader 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 122 

 Human Rights Day 

  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................... 123 

 Request for School in Hampton Village 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 123 

 New Neonatal Ambulance for Regina and Area 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 123 

 Provincial Economy on the Right Track 

  Tochor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 123 

 Saskatchewan Business Contributes to Bluenose II 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 124 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Conflict of Interest Guidelines for Health Regions 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 124 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 124 

 SaskTel Staffing 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 125 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 125 

 SaskTel Revenues 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 125 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 126 

 Workplace Safety 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 126 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 126 

 Funding for Post-Secondary Institutions 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 127 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 128 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 11 — The Court Officials Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les fonctionnaires de justice 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 129 

 Bill No. 12 — The Court Officials Consequential Amendments Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 129 

 Bill No. 13 — The Constitutional Questions Act, 2011/Loi de 2011 sur les questions constitutionnelles 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 129 

 Bill No. 14 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 129 

 Bill No. 15 — The Uniform Building and Accessibility Standards Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 129 

 Bill No. 16 — The Correctional Services Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 130 

 Bill No. 17 — The Child Care Amendment Act, 2011 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

 Bill No. 18 — The Degree Authorization Act 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi de 2011 modifant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 130 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 

 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Collaborative Law) Amendment Act, 2011 

 Loi corrective (droit collaboratif) de 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 

 Bill No. 3 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 135 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 136 

 Bill No. 4 — The Pension Benefits Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 137 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

 Bill No. 5 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 140 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 141 

 Bill No. 9 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 142 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 143 

 Bill No. 10 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2011 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 145 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 145 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


