




















































Hansard: March 17, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6761 

 March 17, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased and honoured to welcome a group of students and staff 

from Father Megret High School in Wollaston Lake. 

Accompanying them is the principal, Harold Flett. It’s good to 

see you. Give a wave, Harold. And also a chaperone, Veronique 

— give us a wave — and nine wonderful young students. It’s 

an honour. I got a chance to meet with them last night. We’ll 

get a chance today to have a visit. 

 

They came a long way. They travelled by vehicle of course 

from Wollaston, and unfortunately, we had a little discussion 

about the ice road and what they have to go through and some 

of the conditions that they’re faced to travel on when they want 

to come out of their community. And these students will be 

graduating, all of them, this year, and I was glad to hear that. 

They’ve worked hard. It’s wonderful to see them in their 

Legislative Assembly. It is an honour that you take the time to 

visit us here. This is your House. We represent you as the future 

of our province. We owe a lot to you. We want you to continue 

to do the good work you’re doing. 

 

And I just want to say, your stories you shared with me 

yesterday, it was wonderful to hear your challenges but also the 

hope you have for your future. That instills something. I see 

your laughter. And we had a good time. And a sense of humour 

is good. And, Mr. Speaker, they had a wonderful sense of 

humour, and they want to move forward. And I just want to say 

it was an opportunity . . . One of them had a birthday. 

Kimberly, happy birthday yesterday, 21st birthday. We had a 

good time last night. I just wanted to acknowledge that, her 

birthday. 

 

I just want to ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

students. And I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

students and their chaperones to their Legislative Assembly. It’s 

an honour to have you here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join my colleague from Cumberland in welcoming these 

students from Wollaston Lake. And certainly as Aboriginal 

members of this Assembly, as always it’s always important to 

recognize the Aboriginal people and to tell them that this is 

your House just as much as it’s anybody else’s House. So I 

want to join my colleague. And I understand my colleague from 

Cumberland is spoiling his constituents. He’s buying them 

something to eat today and that’s a very expensive proposition, 

but he’s a very generous man. So eat as much as you can. 

 

And I also want to especially recognize Harold Flett, the 

principal. Harold taught in my home community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. He’s from Cumberland House originally and 

Harold’s had an extensive career in public service, particularly 

in education. I know his family quite well — Ted and Gerry, 

and all the sisters and other brothers. So I want to make a 

special recognition of Mr. Harold Flett and to tell him in Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So once again, Harold, welcome to your Assembly. Students, 

welcome to your Assembly. You’ve got a great MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly]. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations, and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know that in Saskatchewan, the economic gap between the rich 

and the poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we know that 

citizens living in poverty have long identified affordable 

solutions, including the work around the Saskatoon health 

disparities report and the Canada Without Poverty, Dignity for 

All campaign. They all call for a comprehensive poverty 

elimination strategy. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents in Saskatoon 

Massey Place who live in the community of Hampton Village, 

and the petition is about the need for a new school in the 

community. The petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 



6762 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in the 

community of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan which 

speaks to the issue facing these Saskatchewan residents, which 

is the combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in 

many communities across the province and that many of these 

renters have suffered some pretty serious increases in their rent, 

and that the majority of Canadians now live in provinces with 

rent control guidelines including Manitoba, BC [British 

Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island and that 

the argument that the private market would deliver sufficient 

affordable housing in the absence of rent control has proven to 

be false. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Humboldt. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to read a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about Bill 160 and the detrimental effect it will have 

on the development of human rights law in the province. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in the province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Wapella, Regina, 

and La Ronge, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the two 

consecutive deficit budgets, the two years of debt growth under 

the Sask Party, and the consequences this has for Saskatchewan 

people — all at a time of unprecedented revenues to 

government coffers — this year alone growing the government 

debt, the public debt, the debt of the taxpayers by $400 million. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present a 

petition for a private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the board 

of members of Bethany College. The prayer of the petition 

requests an amendment to The Bethany College Incorporation 

Act, 1993 to clarify that Bethany College shall not be subject to 

taxes or levies, specifically the education portion of property 

taxes, excepting those imposed by the village of Hepburn. 

 

Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Regina Restaurant Celebrates 10th Birthday 

 

Mr. McCall: — Happy St. Patrick’s Day. Mr. Speaker, on this 

day as thoughts turn to celebration of the Irish and things Irish, 

often these thoughts will include looking for a bite to eat, a drop 

or two to drink, and a good craic in general. And in the city of 

Regina, as folks set out to celebrate, literally thousands of 

revellers will be converging on one of Regina’s finest 

establishments — O’Hanlon’s. 

 

And giving folks all the more reason to celebrate, Mr. Speaker, 

is the fact that O’Hanlon’s is marking its 10th birthday. For 10 

years Niall O’Hanlon and Paul Gardikiotis and all the gang at 

O’Hanlon’s have been serving up the black and delicious and 

many other tasty Irish delights at what has been consistently 

voted in numerous categories a winner in the Prairie Dog 

newsmagazine best of Regina survey. 

 

And what’s not to like about O’Hanlon’s, Mr. Speaker? There’s 

the friendly, thoughtful, even therapeutic service. There’s the 

tremendous contribution to Regina’s live music scene. There’s 

the solid, mutually beneficial partnership with Robert and Anne 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6763 

and the folks at the Copper Kettle. There’s the pub itself, 

located right in the heart of beautiful downtown Regina. 

 

And all kinds of different folks have been drawn to O’Hanlon’s, 

whether it was the cast of Corner Gas or Keifer Sutherland or 

downtown office workers or diplomats or business people. 

There’s students, there’s street people, or even a few journalists 

and politicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And O’Hanlon’s has taken that support and given back 

generously to a number of worthy causes, such as the Rachel 

Davis Foundation or different Dog River Howler rugby 

initiatives or local sports teams, just to name a few. 

 

So happy birthday to O’Hanlon’s, Mr. Speaker, and Happy St. 

Patrick’s Day to us all. Slainte M’hath! Erin go bragh! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Remembering Ernest Boychuk 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I rise today to honour Saskatchewan’s first ombudsman, Ernest 

Boychuk, who passed away earlier this week. Mr. Boychuk was 

born in Saskatoon on March 29th, 1934. He attended 

Westmount School, Bedford Road Collegiate, and took his 

Bachelor of Arts and Law degrees at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He had an early love for the sea and joined the sea cadets 

where, in 1951, he was chosen to attend an Empire training 

camp in England. There he received the Best Class Leader of 

the Empire Award and enjoyed tea with the Queen at 

Buckingham Palace. At 29 years of age he became commander 

of the HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Unicorn, the 

youngest commanding officer in Canada at the time. His 

leadership was rewarded with the Silver Destroyer Award for 

the best reserve division in Canada. 

 

Ernest Boychuk began his remarkable and varied career as a 

lawyer in Saskatoon with the law firm of Rees, Smigelski and 

Shmeiser, and later with the city of Saskatoon legal department. 

He became a magistrate, and later the first judge of the 

Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 

 

He was, to most Saskatchewan residents, most well known as 

Saskatchewan’s first ombudsman. He was responsible for 

developing the framework that is now our current ombudsman 

system. He later chaired the Wage and Price Commission and 

Public Utilities Review Commission. Ernest Boychuk was very 

popular with the public and was a true gentleman. He was 

enormously proud of his Ukrainian heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ernest Boychuk was a person who continually 

gave of himself to our province and truly made Saskatchewan a 

better place. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

Outdoor Hockey League Concludes Successful Season 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year 

marks the fourth year of the Outdoor Hockey League in 

Rosemont. Once again I enjoyed supporting the team as a 

coach. Mr. Speaker, nothing beats Canada’s game being played 

on an outdoor sheet of ice. The weather was often cold, but the 

shack and kinship always warm. 

 

I want to sincerely thank the dedicated group of fellow 

volunteer coaches, specifically Jared Kleisinger, head coach 

and organizer, as well as Josiah Jordan, Stephen Kenny, Clinton 

Kleisinger, Luke Blondeau, Brad Trew, Chad Wilchynski, 

Trevor Lakness, Jeff McEwen, Tyler Willox, and Curtis 

Dorosh. 

 

I want to thank shack managers and community leaders Judy 

and Dennis Zawyrucka, and the Rosemont Mount Royal 

Community Association for their support. The OHL [outdoor 

hockey league] strives to ensure that hockey is available and 

accessible to all youth that want to play at no cost. I want to 

thank league director Laura Logan, Ehrlo Sport Venture and its 

donors, Conexus, KidSport and Kinsmen. 

 

I also want to recognize the devoted players, ranging in age 

from 8 to 18 and the parents, guardians, and friends that joined 

us throughout the season, often braving the elements. 

 

It was a fantastic season, concluding this past weekend with an 

indoor tournament in Lumsden. I ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me to recognize and to thank all that 

make the Outdoor Hockey League such a meaningful program. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Correctional Centre Replacement Project Receives Award 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the Regina 

Provincial Correctional Centre 1913 replacement project was 

recognized by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating 

and Air Conditioning Engineers or ASHRAE in the 2011 

ASHRAE technology award program with an honourable 

mention award. 

 

The ASHRAE technology program recognizes on an 

international scale successful applications of innovative design 

for effective energy management, indoor air quality, and good 

mechanical design. Specifically the RPCC [Regina Provincial 

Correctional Centre] of 1913 replacement project was 

recognized for its outstanding achievement in design and 

operation of energy-efficient buildings. I would like to 

recognize and thank MacPherson Engineering Inc. of Regina 

for submitting the project for the award, but more importantly 

for their innovative mechanical design work that led to this 

honourable mention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to reducing our 

environmental footprint in whatever way we can, and this is just 

another example of that, just as our government extended the 



6764 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

EnerGuide program, October 31st, 2013, which provides 

incentives to make homes more energy-efficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many, many environmentally conscious acts over 

a period of time will result in drastic changes in the future, and 

our improvements to the Regina Provincial Correctional Centre 

will pay dividends for future generations. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Regina & District Labour Council Awards 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday, March 12th, was the 

Regina & District Labour Council annual awards dinner. This 

annual event honours the work and achievement of individuals 

in support of our community. This year’s Labour Community 

Service Award went to Terri Sleeva, a community activist who 

has made significant contributions to our community through 

her volunteer service. 

 

Her accomplishments are too long to list, Mr. Speaker. This 

year she was nominated for the YWCA [Young Women’s 

Christian Association] Women of Distinction Award. She is a 

member of Oxfam Regina, Regina anti-poverty network, the 

Queen City tenants’ association, as well as countless other 

boards and advocacy groups. 

 

As many of Terri’s peers mentioned at the awards ceremony, 

her efforts and energy are contagious and inspiring. Her 

dedication to the community and the social justice movement 

are incredible. Terri is both an important part of her community 

as well as an example of a leader who should be followed in her 

support of our community. 

 

The second award of the evening, the Labour Activist Award, 

was awarded to Donna Smith and Larry Kowalchuk, two 

extremely dedicated community activists in their own right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina & District Labour Council has a 

long-established history of community support for the working 

people in the Regina and area. I’d like to invite all members of 

the House to join me in offering congratulations and support for 

the efforts of the Regina & District Labour Council in 

recognizing community leaders in our community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thursday, March 

17th is St. Patrick’s Day, the annual celebration of Ireland’s 

patron saint. St. Patrick was a Christian missionary in the fifth 

century. He is credited with bringing Christianity to Ireland. It 

is said he introduced the Irish to the concept of the Holy Trinity 

by using a three-leaf clover. Another legend tells of how St. 

Patrick banished all snakes from the Emerald Island. It is 

interesting to note though that following the ice age, there 

actually were no snakes in Ireland. 

 

When this great province was founded, one in ten of our 

residents were of Irish origin. While many in Saskatchewan can 

claim Irish ancestry, St. Patrick’s Day allows everyone to be 

Irish for a day. The Irish have been a crucial part of 

Saskatchewan’s development and it is fitting to recognize them. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping that everyone will raise a glass of their 

favourite green beverage at some point today and join in this 

traditional Irish toast: 

 

May the road rise to meet you, 

May the wind be always at your back, 

The sun shine warm on your face, 

The rain fall soft upon your fields. 

And, until we meet again, 

May God hold you in the hollow of his hand. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Top of the morning, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today is the day when the most unlikely people can be 

heard to say, kiss me, I’m Irish. No matter their background, 

everyone wants to share the good fortune and good humour of 

the sons and daughters of Erin’s Isle. And the Irish don’t mind, 

Mr. Speaker. They don’t mind sharing their heritage with 

others. That’s because the Irish are known for their generous 

and, you might even say, liberal nature. 

 

It’s been their history to share what they’ve been given with the 

whole world: their literature, their music, their learning, and 

their laughter — even their potatoes, Mr. Speaker. On this side 

of the House, we don’t like to talk too much about spuds, 

though on the other side, they love to harp on them. But it’s 

talking, Mr. Speaker, for which the Irish are best known. 

They’re a nation of smooth talkers with the gift of the gab. 

Whenever you hear the colourful turn of the phrase, Mr. 

Speaker, you know somewhere in the speaker’s family tree, no 

matter how far back, there’s a leaf of Irish green. 

 

Just wait until next Tuesday, Mr. Speaker, when the Finance 

minister reveals his Irish heritage with all the blarney he 

delivers with his budget speech. Mr. Speaker, the motto of the 

province: “from many peoples, strength.” On this feast day of 

St. Patrick, I ask all members to join with me in celebrating all 

of the many peoples’ traditions — including the Irish — that 

give such strength to our province. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Kidney Transplants 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, after the 

election of the Sask Party, one of the big disappointments that 

the people of Saskatchewan had was the shutdown of the 

kidney transplant program. In 2009 I think was the year it was 

shut down. This is a program that had done a number of 

surgeries where families’ issues around kidney transplants were 

looked after. That program has been restarted I believe last 

year, September 1st. 

 

My question to the minister is, after six months of reopening 

the program, how many surgeries have been done? How many 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6765 

kidney transplants have taken place in the first six months of 

the reopening of that program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important to note that Saskatchewan residents are receiving 

transplants as matches are made. They’re being done in 

Edmonton, Mr. Speaker, paid for by the Saskatchewan 

government. Living donor transplants are being done here now, 

Mr. Speaker. As far as the exact number, I don’t have that 

available today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, we had put a question to the 

government asking the question of the number of surgeries 

completed since the opening. And the question was to the 

Minister of Health: how many kidney transplants have been 

completed in Saskatchewan from September 1, 2010 to March 

6th? That’s in the first six months. The answer is three; that’s 

how many have been done in the first six months of the 

reopening of the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008, in the last full year that the program 

operated, 37 surgery transplants of kidneys were done in the 

province of Saskatchewan under a program that was in place 

for many, many decades, worked successfully, did hundreds of 

transplants. 

 

To the minister: can he tell the people of the province how he’s 

pleased with a record that shows that in the first six months 

since the reopening of the program only three transplants have 

been completed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I mentioned, the important thing to keep in mind here is 

Saskatchewan residents are receiving transplants, Mr. Speaker. 

In many cases it’s in Alberta, paid for by the provincial 

government here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of the issue is we’re currently working on 

recruiting more specialists. Mr. Speaker, recruitment’s an issue 

not only in Saskatchewan, all across Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve done good work in recruitment of physicians in general. 

We’ve added 228 more physicians, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

certainly not afraid to set targets like the members opposite 

were. A good example of that, Mr. Speaker, was in nurse 

recruitment. They wouldn’t set targets, Mr. Speaker. We set a 

target of 800 nurses during our first term of government and, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve already exceeded that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to dealing 

with important issues to Saskatchewan families this 

government is less than outstanding. And when it comes to the 

kidney transplant program, nothing stands out more than the 

fact that they shut down a program that was doing 37 

transplants per year — and had for many decades in this 

province — was shut down. Now reopened, likely the press 

conference cost more than what they’re putting into the 

program. 

 

The fact is, at a time when 115 families are on the wait-list in 

the province, when we have record resource revenue, how is 

that the minister and this government can’t get their facts lined 

up and the program back in place that will meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan families who are under stress waiting for kidney 

transplants in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Highways and Transportation 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the patients are the 

important thing here. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to know 

that all patients with matching kidneys have already received 

their surgeries. Any on the waiting list are waiting for a match, 

Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, we’re ensuring that people who 

do have the opportunity to have the transplant get it done, many 

of them in Edmonton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very important issue. Mr. Speaker, 

those comments are coming from the Leader of the Opposition 

of the party that closed 52 hospitals in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Environmental Issues 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The New Democratic 

Party has been asking important questions about what this 

government is doing to protect the people of Saskatchewan 

from the very real concern of pollution coming from the oil 

sands area of Alberta. 

 

In response yesterday, the minister said he wanted to take a 

collaborative approach. Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing wrong 

with collaboration, but we’ve seen how this government’s 

collaborative approach works with other governments. With 

Ottawa there was nothing for the Montana carbon capture 

project, nothing for the 800 million of resource revenues that 

we’re owed from Ottawa. And, Mr. Speaker, with Alberta, no 

progression whatsoever on the road to Fort McMurray from La 

Loche. Why should the people of Saskatchewan expect 

anything to come out of a collaborative approach other than 

another empty promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to thank the acting Environment critic from the opposition 

for his question. And we had a very good discussion about this 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker. This is a topic that we take very, very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re going to be moving 

forward as we’ve identified with an acid deposition 

management framework in the coming weeks, as well as an 

enhanced boreal water testing program coming forward this fall 

. . . this spring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the acting critic for the Environment yesterday 



6766 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

had a number of areas where he was inaccurate, as was the 

Environment critic on Tuesday, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 

Environment critic a couple of days ago said that funding had 

been reduced. In fact that is not the case, Mr. Speaker, under 

this government. 

 

In fact if you want to look at the record of the NDP [New 

Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker, the last . . . They raised the 

issue of Lake Athabasca, Mr. Speaker. Lake Athabasca, the last 

testing that we had prior to this government was in 1999, Mr. 

Speaker. From ’99 until 2007, there wasn’t a comprehensive 

testing of Lake Athabasca. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when that 

ended I think the member from Athabasca was the Environment 

minister. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, of course the members opposite 

heard me say there’s nothing wrong with collaboration, but the 

people of Saskatchewan need more than a collaborative 

approach. In fact we need a comprehensive approach, Mr. 

Speaker, a comprehensive plan. 

 

The pollution from another province is affecting Saskatchewan, 

and besides the health and environmental impacts, it also 

affects us financially. Can the minister tell us what he’s doing 

to quantify the damage oil sands pollution is doing to the 

environment and the people of Saskatchewan? And how will he 

determine what this province will seek in financial 

compensation for that damage? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, further to my previous 

answer on Lake Athabasca because that was an area that was 

raised by the opposition, Mr. Speaker, we have tested 

downstream areas of the lake in 2007, 2008, 2009. We will be 

doing so further this year, Mr. Speaker, and we are in the final 

stages of implementing a water monitoring program for the lake 

itself with the governments of Canada and Alberta, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to be able to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan how our northern lakes have changed over the 

past 20 years. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell the 

people of Saskatchewan what those lakes were like 20 years 

ago because the NDP didn’t monitor the lakes in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We are making up a lot of ground 

in filling the gaps that were left by the previous government. In 

fact, in fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote by a report issued by 

the Saskatchewan Environmental Society in 2009, and it says: 

 

Prior to the autumn of 2007, there had been very little 

monitoring for acid rain in northern Saskatchewan. 

However, this has now changed for the better. We wish to 

commend Saskatchewan Environment staff for the very 

important monitoring work they have undertaken over the 

past two years. 

 

Mr. Peter Prebble was one of the authors of this. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the Minister of 

the Environment already quantified the history of the lakes of 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. He once called them 

pristine, Mr. Speaker. So we can go from pristine to where 

they’re going in the future, Mr. Speaker, and what are we going 

to do about that? 

 

Pollution, Mr. Speaker, is migrating across the 

Alberta-Saskatchewan border by air and by water. Studies have 

shown that water around the oil sands is becoming 

contaminated and flowing into Saskatchewan. The air we 

breathe is poisoned as 70 per cent of the gases expelled from 

the oil sands are blown into Saskatchewan. But the 

Saskatchewan Party is only telling us they want to take the 

collaborative approach to this problem. They’re not saying if 

he’s actually doing anything to protect us from these toxins. 

 

If there’s one thing we know, Mr. Speaker, we’re being 

poisoned. And it’s another thing to know, Mr. Speaker, what 

we’re doing about it. So why won’t the minister give us 

detailed facts about what’s being done to reduce the amount of 

poison being pumped into Saskatchewan from Alberta? Or is he 

embarrassed because he’s actually done nothing but use the 

word collaborative? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the only people that 

need to be embarrassed on the record on this issue is the NDP, 

who had 16 years to enhance the monitoring of northern 

Saskatchewan and didn’t do so. Mr. Speaker, the acting critic of 

the Environment, like the Environment critic for the NDP, has 

talked about a 70 per cent emissions that come from Alberta 

into Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that is from a report that 

studied sulphur emissions from Alberta and that report, Mr. 

Speaker, was issued in 1996 when they were the government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What did they do? Did they enhance monitoring in northern 

Saskatchewan? No, Mr. Speaker. In fact they cancelled the 

monitoring of Lake Athabasca. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be 

coming forward with an acid deposition management 

framework, enhanced testing of our boreal forest lakes, Mr. 

Speaker, and making up for the lack of action by the former 

NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is important to 

work with Alberta on this, Mr. Speaker. A promise to work 

together with another province however, without knowing how 

we will quantify the damage or determine what the 

compensation will be, is not good enough, Mr. Speaker. Toxic 

pollutants are a very real concern to Saskatchewan families, 

particularly parents who want to keep their children healthy. 

 

Instead this government isn’t doing anything definitive with the 

province of Alberta and the federal government to actually 

reduce the poisons coming out of Alberta. Mr. Speaker, the 

Government of Alberta is receiving revenue from the oil sands, 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6767 

but Saskatchewan is paying the price. Why can’t the minister 

understand that building a comprehensive plan today will 

protect Saskatchewan families for generations to come? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said in this 

House over the past days, we have increased the amount of 

monitoring that is taking place in northern Saskatchewan to 

make up for the lack of information that the province has at its 

disposal during the NDP 16 years of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact we’ve enhanced the capabilities within our ministry 

resources to be able to use that information to establish what is 

actually happening in northern Saskatchewan and to model 

what could potentially happen to our lakes and our environment 

in northern Saskatchewan in the future, capacity that didn’t 

exist under the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we’re working at the federal level with our provincial and 

federal counterparts on a comprehensive air management 

system, Mr. Speaker, including acid rain, which is very 

important, Mr. Speaker, on this file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the acting critic for the Environment 

mentioned that, well the NDP government they thought the 

environment was a priority, but they had less money to deal 

with it, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to see that the member has 

identified that if seven and a half billion dollars is the revenue 

of the government, that maybe under that it wasn’t much of a 

priority, but if they had more money they would have done 

more, Mr. Speaker. We believe that the environment is a 

priority, no matter the resources of the government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Condition of Northern Roads 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the natural resources in the 

North generates millions of dollars for the province. The trucks 

that drive Highway 102 serve the mining industry and help 

generate that money. Highway 102 is the only road access for 

communities like Grandmother’s Bay, Sucker River, Stanley 

Mission, Missinipe, and Southend. Thousands of people depend 

on this road to get to and from their home and their place of 

work. 

 

To the minister: will he commit today to investing that wealth 

into paving Highway 102 to Southend? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Transportation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

government recognizes the important role that the North plays 

in the economy of this province, not just now, but in the future, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our government took office we inherited a 

massive infrastructure deficit. I think the most noticeable part 

of that infrastructure deficit was this condition of highways. We 

were considered the province with the worst highways in the 

country when we took office, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, probably the most noticeable area is the North, as 

the member opposite said. Mr. Speaker, we have spent a huge 

amount of money in the North on not only maintenance, we 

have a northern transportation advisory committee that’s 

helping us prioritize highways, Mr. Speaker. And we will 

continue to do good highway work in the North. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP committed to 

building an all-weather road for Wollaston Lake. Since the Sask 

Party took over, the construction of this road has slowed to a 

snail’s pace. 

 

Last April a teacher died on the ice road when she crashed into 

a large crack on the winter road that goes across the lake. 

Leadership in the community in Wollaston Lake is concerned 

about the lack of attention the government is paying to the road 

and to the safety for their staff, students, and community 

members. 

 

To the minister: when is he going to take some of the resource 

money generated in northern Saskatchewan and invest it into an 

all-weather road in Wollaston Lake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

fatality on a highway is a tragedy, Mr. Speaker. It’s a tragedy 

for the friends and family of the deceased, and it’s a tragedy for 

all of us for a life that’s lost too soon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, safety’s a number one priority for this 

government. As I mentioned, the northern transportation 

advisory committee has helped us prioritize highways in the 

North. They’ve identified Highway 155 as number one on the 

list, Mr. Speaker. We will be moving forward there. 

 

The member is specifically talking about the Wollaston Lake 

road. Mr. Speaker, construction will continue on the Wollaston 

Lake road as well. I understand it certainly isn’t moving as 

quickly as the member opposite would like to see. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to point out he mentioned the commitment that 

the NDP made before the election. Mr. Speaker, the NDP made 

massive amounts of commitments right before the election. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, spring is coming. The roads in 

the North are going to be getting softer, and many are in terrible 

shape already. For people in many communities, the crumbling, 

unsafe, muddy highway is the only way in and out of their 

communities. And they are tired of this minister’s rhetoric and 

they want action now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to stand up and start 

making some serious commitments to roads to La Loche, to 

Patuanak, and into Canoe Lake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 



6768 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

I mentioned, there is a massive infrastructure deficit right 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, not just in highways, Mr. 

Speaker. In education, in schools that need to be built and 

repaired. In health care, Mr. Speaker, it’s hospitals and 

long-term care facilities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is a massive infrastructure deficit from 

years of neglect from the members opposite in highways in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, in the year that’s wrapping up right 

now, the fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, $41 million on highways in 

the North. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 7 per cent increase over the 

previous budget. And as far as specifics, Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite will be able to learn more next week at the 

budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the people in the North are 

saying that the minister is not doing anything. And the minister 

often talks about, 16 years you were in power; why didn’t you 

do something? Mr. Speaker, for 16 of those years, 13 were 

spent cleaning up that Tory mess, Mr. Speaker. That’s where 

the 16 years went, Mr. Speaker. When our Education budget 

was one-third the annual debt that we paid on interest alone, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s where the money went, Mr. Speaker. When 

interest alone on the annual basis almost doubled that of our 

entire Health budget, that’s where the month went, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One small business owner was told by the ministry that the 

roads she travels are not properly funded for maintenance, even 

though people can’t travel on the road after it rains. Mr. 

Speaker, this business owner said to me, “If they ever spent a 

day out of Regina, they would see what the roads are really 

like. Whoever thinks that roads are properly funded sure 

doesn’t live up here.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, she didn’t want her name used for a number 

of reasons. But once again, Mr. Speaker, when is this 

out-of-touch minister start getting to his feet and start defending 

northern people and fixing their roads? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, this minister’s on his feet 

right now defending northern Saskatchewan from those 

members opposite. Mr. Speaker, that member was a former 

minister of Highways, and what did he do in the North? He did 

nothing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government, 41 million 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, this government in the 

current fiscal year, $41 million in the North, 7 per cent increase. 

Mr. Speaker, last fall that member challenged me to a public 

debate. Let’s continue the public debate for the rest of this 

session, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Relationship Between Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, for months the Minister of 

Advanced Education has been supporting and encouraging the 

merger of the public Carlton Trail Regional College and the 

private St. Peter’s College. Today, minutes before question 

period, the minister issued a news release stating that the 

merger will not go ahead. Mr. Speaker, why did it take so long 

for this minister and the local MLAs to listen to the many 

concerns from the community from over a year ago? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for an 

opportunity to speak directly to this issue. Mr. Speaker, what 

we’ve said as we’ve come into office is we’re going to be 

responsive to demands and ideas from local communities, 

especially regarding post-secondary education, and at the same 

time we’re going to be responsible to the taxpayers and most 

especially the students, Mr. Speaker, right across the province. 

 

What we said is the respective colleges, in this case St. Peter’s 

and Carlton Trail, should come up with their own plan. They 

submitted a proposal, Mr. Speaker. What we did was then did 

our own due diligence, Mr. Speaker. That report was submitted 

to us by Meyers Norris and Penny. After an independent 

review, Mr. Speaker, Meyers Norris and Penny recommended, 

and we accept the recommendations, that the colleges are not 

ready for a merger, Mr. Speaker. This demonstrates our due 

diligence, Mr. Speaker, being responsive to communities and 

responsible to students and stakeholders right across the 

province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s talk about due 

diligence is garbage. This process, Mr. Speaker, has lacked 

transparency from the get-go. Mr. Speaker, the winter-spring 

2010 newsletter from St. Peter’s College says, “In the other 

development, the St. Peter’s College and Carlton Trail College 

are merging into one institution.” It goes on to say, “The 

provincial government is encouraging the merger.” From the 

Carlton Trail Regional College minutes from a board meeting 

on January of 2010, “Direction has been given from Minister 

Norris to proceed.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this process has lacked transparency 

as shown in committee and through question period. We know 

that millions have been poured into this, the minister’s merger, 

through the knowledge infrastructure program. And who knows 

how much, what is the cost of the Meyers Norris Penny report? 

 

To the minister: be clear with the people of Saskatchewan. Be 

transparent for once on this issue: what is the total cost of this 

failed merger? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6769 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

demonstrated a very unique capacity to misunderstand the 

post-secondary file, Mr. Speaker. He made reference to the 

knowledge infrastructure program. Mr. Speaker, what we said 

is, let’s participate with the federal government, Mr. Speaker, in 

one of the most aggressive infrastructure developments in 

post-secondary education in the history of this province. 

 

We went forward, Mr. Speaker, with countless projects. We 

went forward, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we were supporting 

institutions right across the province. We were able to support 

both institutions, Mr. Speaker, that in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s part of an initiative with the K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] system and the post-secondary system. That 

construction is under way, Mr. Speaker. As well we were able 

to move forward in a partnership with the federal government 

regarding St. Peter’s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those were just a couple of examples from the initiatives from 

right across the province. The initiative of the knowledge 

infrastructure program, Mr. Speaker, more than $117 million 

dedicated to ensuring that our students are able to succeed, not 

only in their studies, but in their careers right here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the minister 

talks about the two institutions because the two institutions for 

some time now, Mr. Speaker, have been sharing the CEO [chief 

executive officer] as approved by the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

The government news release issued this morning goes on to 

say, “The minister requested the boards of both schools 

immediately place the current CEO on administrative leave 

pending the outcome of the current review.” Mr. Speaker, we 

know that the joint CEO was approved by this minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why has the minister demanded that the CEO be 

placed on leave? What is the basis of his instruction to the two 

boards? And, Mr. Speaker, who is conducting the review of the 

CEO? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there were a range of questions that came up, Mr. 

Speaker. What I said very clearly to the respective institutions 

— this was last night in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker — what we 

said regarding this issue is we would request that the respective 

institutions place this individual on leave for 90 days while 

some of these questions can be addressed. They’re going to be 

addressed by Meyers Norris and Penny, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We thought this was a very, very prudent approach to move 

forward and address some of these questions, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Flood Preparedness 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m sure everyone is aware that flooding in the spring 

and summer of 2010 devastated several Saskatchewan 

communities. From what we’re hearing from the Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority, the potential for flooding this coming 

spring and summer is quickly becoming very real. 

 

Both municipalities and individuals in crisis have come to 

depend on the provincial disaster assistance program for help. 

Despite an overwhelming amount of changes to the program, 

this government recognizes that more is needed to be done to 

ensure flood victims are receiving help in a timely way. 

 

In the summer of 2010, our government made several changes 

to the provincial disaster assistance program that were a long 

time coming. We provided appropriate financial support to 

those affected by the floods including immediate financial 

assistance to many claimants. We also worked to improve the 

feasibility, the flexibility of a program by addressing some 

long-standing concerns. These changes were very well 

received. But as a government, we know that there’s even more 

work that can be done. 

 

As of four days ago, on March the 14th, 2011, PDAP 

[provincial disaster assistance program] had received a 

combined total of 5,900 individual and municipal claims, with 

over 3,900 payments made totalling over $14.5 million. This is 

the largest number of claims received in one year in the history 

of PDAP. 2005-2006 was the second highest with less than half 

the claims of 2010. 

 

Given our extremely high claims volume, our government 

recognized more staff is required to ensure our goal of assisting 

people in a meaningful way as quickly as possible and that 

continues to be met. The previous government took over a year 

to get any financial assistance whatsoever into flood victims’ 

hands. Our government however knows that is not good 

enough. 

 

So in order to ensure claimants receive payments in a 

reasonable amount of time, and in order to prepare for the 

possibility of future flooding, I’m pleased to say our 

government is once again taking action. Our goal is to take the 

average processing time down to three months or less from the 

date PDAP has received all of the information necessary to 

process payment. 

 

To do so, we will be doing the following: we will immediately 

recruit and retain 30 additional temporary staff to complement 

our current temporary staff of 22. These staff will either be 

reassigned from within government or be new temporary 

employees. They will work two shifts per day, six days a week, 

to better utilize time and our current space and equipment. This 

will take place immediately. The cost for these staff will be in 

the vicinity of $800,000 when salaries and overhead are 

factored in. However with the ability to recover 65 to 85 per 



6770 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

cent of our costs from the disaster financial assistance 

arrangements or DFAA, the total cost to taxpayers should be 

less than $300,000. 

 

In addition PDAP officials are busy streamlining processes to 

reduce the processing time. Part of that includes looking at 

processing claims based on their relative size and risk. 

 

In closing, I’m confident these changes will further improve 

PDAP, and more importantly go a long way in assisting the 

great people of this province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin my 

response to the minister’s remarks, the minister’s statement, I 

want to thank the minister for providing me with a copy of his 

statement earlier this morning. 

 

As the minister alluded to in his remarks, last year was an 

exceptional year. And we hope that when we look back years 

from now, it will be an exceptional year, although there is 

considerable concern, again alluded to in the minister’s 

remarks, that this year again may be a very desperate and 

disturbing year for many Saskatchewan residents, depending on 

how the melt proceeds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As some members of this Assembly know, my son is a reservist 

and recently received flood training. And I understand, I don’t 

think it’s a national secret, that the Armed Forces are expected 

to be deployed, including reservists, in Manitoba fairly soon, 

and we hope not necessarily in Saskatchewan, but perhaps that 

will may indeed be the case. 

 

The minister seems fairly well pleased in his statement with the 

response of the provincial government. I think there’d be many 

members of the Legislative Assembly who, on both sides of the 

House, who have heard complaints about the administration of 

the PDAP program, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we heard from 

the Association of Rural Municipalities’ concern about delay in 

paying out thousands and thousands of dollars in flood claims, 

Mr. Speaker, and we are going into a new year.  

 

The ministerial statement centres upon additional staff to 

process these claims and to deal with these issues, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is to be welcomed. And we hope that the government 

can do a better job, an improved job over last year’s 

performance. None of the fact that this is an emergency or an 

urgent circumstance justifies anything, of course, less than 

responsible, accountable, and transparent awarding of contracts 

for reparations and restoration. And we will be holding the 

government to those requirements. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To ask leave to move 

substitution on committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

asked for leave to move substitution of members on 

committees. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution on Committees  

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

move: 

 

That the name Frank Quennell be substituted for the name 

of Kim Trew on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved: 

 

That the name of Frank Quennell be substituted for the 

name of Kim Trew on the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

move: 

 

That the name of Sandra Morin be substituted for the 

name of Ron Harper on the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Opposition House Leader has 

moved: 

 

That the name of Sandra Morin be substituted for the 

name of Ron Harper on the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 869 through 871. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 869 through 871 are ordered. 

 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6771 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Voting Eligibility Requirements 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to rise today, and at the end of my remarks, I will be moving a 

motion relating to calling on the NDP to support the changes to 

The Election Act and to The Local Government Election Act. 

 

This change, Mr. Speaker, was originated by SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] with a 

request to the government that these changes be put in place for 

voter ID [identification] to become part of the requirements 

necessary to vote in municipal elections. We responded 

positively as a government to that request, Mr. Speaker, as we 

respond positively to most if not all of the requests coming 

from organizations such as SARM [Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA as it relates to their 

endeavours. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we felt it was important that in 

Saskatchewan, under the legislation of Saskatchewan, where 

Saskatchewan has control of it, that the voting requirements 

should be similar across the board where possible, Mr. Speaker. 

And so that’s why we have included, not only just The Local 

Government Election Act, Mr. Speaker, but also the provincial 

elections Act to maintain a similarity between both so that 

under legislation all the voters would be treated equally, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is not something new and 

out-of-the-blue that’s Saskatchewan only. This happens, Mr. 

Speaker, at federal elections as well as provincial elections in 

British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec. So, Mr. Speaker, the 

majority of people in Saskatchewan do operate with a system of 

voter ID in place. 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, he did a 

very good job at outlining how this would work and what kind 

of ID would be useful or proper to be used, Mr. Speaker, in 

identifying a voter when they came to the polling station. And 

it’s a fairly exhaustive list, Mr. Speaker, that the minister 

outlined, such as driver’s licence, health card, Canadian citizen 

passport, certificate of Canadian citizenship, a birth certificate, 

a status Indian certificate, a social insurance number card, old 

age security card, student ID, provincial territorial identification 

card, liquor ID card, Mr. Speaker, hospital and medical clinic 

card, and on and on. There’s about three paragraphs here, Mr. 

Speaker, of various types of ID that would be acceptable for 

proving one’s identity when they come to the polling station, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, voters from across the province will be using 

these ID cards when they vote in federal elections. They will be 

using these ID cards when they vote in municipal elections, and 

they will be using these ID cards, Mr. Speaker, when they vote 

in provincial elections. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it won’t be long before voters are experienced 

with this and very familiar with the process. But we understand 

that when the law changes, people in general are not that 

observant before the fact actually happens. So we will be 

proceeding with a broad educational component to these 

changes, Mr. Speaker, to allow people to become familiar with 

the requirements when they go to vote in either provincial or 

municipal elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And the reason, Mr. Speaker, that these changes are taking 

place across the country and in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 

to protect democracy, to maintain the integrity of our 

democratic process. Mr. Speaker, if you listened to the 

members of the opposition, they would argue the exact opposite 

saying, it has never been a problem. It has never happened that 

there have been irregularities in the electoral process. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to point out one in particular that affects 

this House, that affected this House in the past, and still has 

some effect on this House. 

 

In 1999, Mr. Speaker, in the election in Wood River, an 

individual was elected by one vote, that being cast by the 

returning officer in the proper manner, Mr. Speaker. When that 

election was challenged, many irregularities were found during 

that election including a large number of people, large enough 

to affect the outcome of that election, who voted in Wood River 

but were not resident in Wood River and therefore not allowed 

to vote in the Wood River constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The judge found this and threw out the election result because 

of inappropriate voting by individuals who were not entitled to 

vote in that constituency, Mr. Speaker. They were fully entitled 

to vote in whatever constituency they were resident in if they 

were residents of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The judge found 

in this case they were not residents in the Wood River 

constituency. The election was overturned, and in 2000 there 

was a by-election, a costly by-election, Mr. Speaker, which I’m 

happy to report that the current member for Wood River won 

very handily, Mr. Speaker. He won it again in 2003, and he 

won again in 2007, Mr. Speaker. And he will win it again in 

2011, is my prediction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are saying that if this 

change takes place that immigrants will be disenfranchised, Mr. 

Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, immigrants are not allowed to vote 

in Saskatchewan elections. They are not Canadian citizens, 

even though they may be resident in Saskatchewan. Once they 

become Canadian citizens, Mr. Speaker, they are no longer 

immigrants. They are now Canadians, Mr. Speaker, and entitled 

to vote in the province of their residency and in the 

constituency of their residency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would find it highly unlikely that any new 

Canadian citizen would not have a passport or some other form 

of photo ID, such as a driver’s licence. Each and every one of 

those individuals would still have family remaining in 

whichever jurisdiction they emigrated from and would be 

wanting to return to visit their loved ones, so they would have 

at least a passport, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the facetious arguments that have been 

presented by the members opposite are not valid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen that in the past there has been 



6772 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

subterfuge and ballot box stuffing occur within Saskatchewan. 

We don’t know if that has happened in provincial or municipal 

elections, but it certainly has happened in party elections, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party as 

part of their nomination process requirements, rule no. 7 

demands that voters who vote in a nomination process for a 

candidate for provincial election have photo ID to identify their 

constituency of residency. So, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP 

members condemn the legislation that we have presented in The 

Election Act and The Local Government Election Act, they are 

condemning the very practice put in place by their own party, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if you look at what happened in the recent NDP leadership 

race, I can certainly understand why they would now have that 

in their requirements for nomination, Mr. Speaker. When we 

look at what happened in the Meadow Lake constituency where 

one individual, one individual sold memberships, Mr. Speaker, 

or claimed to have sold memberships, putting 1,100 names on 

those applications and submitting them to the NDP central 

headquarters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now with the requirement of a photo ID, I’m not sure how they 

plan to have that 1,100 new members vote when the members 

didn’t even know they were members of the NDP Party. So 

somebody, Mr. Speaker, was going to access that voters list and 

the cards that entitled those members to vote, and vote for this, 

either as an individual or as an organized attempt, Mr. Speaker. 

That constitutes voter fraud, Mr. Speaker, voter fraud that was 

caught by the other candidates in that election. And that 

volunteer, Mr. Speaker, was a volunteer for the current member 

from Regina Douglas Park, the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly understand why the New 

Democratic Party demand voter ID and residency identification 

in their nomination process because it’s certainly been a 

problem within their party in the past, Mr. Speaker, very recent 

past — two years ago roughly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan support this move to 

ensure the integrity of our voting process and the integrity, Mr. 

Speaker, of our voters and of our elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Rosemont the other day 

was saying that we were disenfranchising seniors, Mr. Speaker. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, most of our seniors have voter ID of some 

kind: driver’s licences, passports, the many other types of 

identifiers that we have designated, Mr. Speaker. And he would 

seem to be indicating that the seniors in my constituency 

personally did not support me. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have won 

the vote of seniors in my constituency consistently for many 

years. And in fact if they want to check the polling results of 

the long-term care facilities, I have won those all as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see this attempt by the New Democrats as 

another attack on rural Saskatchewan in particular. They went 

through the closure of hospitals across the province including, 

Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency, Gainsborough, Oxbow, 

Lampman, Fillmore, and Wawota, Mr. Speaker. They closed 

acute care in every one of those constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this change will be to the benefit of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a number of other comments that have 

been made by the members opposite, which I think that bear 

some concern. You know, it reminds me a little bit of George 

Orwell’s allegory in the Animal Farm where all of the animals 

are equal, but some animals seem to be more equal than others. 

And in this case, Mr. Speaker, the NDP believe that the rules 

that they use in their leadership, in their nomination process, is 

good for them but the same rules should not apply to the 

general voter in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we do not believe 

in elitism like the NDP do. We believe that everyone, Mr. 

Speaker, needs to be treated equally in legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this process is good across the country; it is good 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; and I am very pleased that we 

can support this process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Coronation Park was saying that 

it’s a shame, that shame on this piece of legislation, which in 

actual fact is almost a carbon copy of the NDP’s own rules. He 

called this change offensive, Mr. Speaker, so I gather he is 

speaking also against the rules of the NDP Party when it comes 

to the nomination process. I guess, I guess he just maybe isn’t 

familiar with the rules of his own political party because 

clearly, clearly the Leader of the Official Opposition wasn’t 

particularly clear about the rules of his party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe that these two Acts are very good 

Acts and well needed in the province of Saskatchewan. I would 

therefore move: 

 

That this Assembly call on the opposition NDP to support 

The Election Amendment Act, 2010 and The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010, as they are 

precisely in line with the NDP’s policies regarding 

constituency rules and regulations for their nomination 

process. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion by the member from Cannington 

is: 

 

That this Assembly call on the opposition NDP to support 

The Election Amendment Act, 2010 and The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010, as they are 

precisely in line with NDP policies regarding constituency 

rules and regulations for their nomination process. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter into this debate. Mr. 

Speaker, we have a member moving a motion, citing that it’s in 

precise line with the rules and procedures of the New 

Democratic Party. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you that that 

is outright wrong. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t anywhere near the rules 

of the New Democratic Party. 

 

To use the voting procedures of another political party in its 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6773 

internal processes and say it’s the same when you don’t even, 

you’re not a member of that party, you haven’t participated in 

that party, and you’re quoting rules that don’t exist, Mr. 

Speaker, well then I have concerns about the whole premise in 

which they brought forward the legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they can say that those are the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, but the reality is that those aren’t the rules. Mr. 

Speaker, the rules of the New Democratic Party in its 

nomination process say that the local constituency executive 

gets to establish the rules that govern the individual nomination. 

So, Mr. Speaker, they may have a set of rules that was used in 

one constituency for one reason or another at some point in the 

history of the party, but those aren’t the rules of the party. 

That’s a rule of a single constituency, if they even have such a 

rule in any constituency that was ever used. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a more fundamental issue about 

democratic rights and about the rights of every Canadian citizen 

having the right to vote. Our democracy is more important than 

any political party’s view on how they can marginalize voters 

or how they can get themselves re-elected in the next provincial 

election. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this 

government’s trying to do is they’re trying to disenfranchise 

voters that likely don’t vote for them. Mr. Speaker, that’s an 

abuse of our democratic system and it’s abuse of power of a 

government and it’s downright wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when these same rules were put in place by the 

federal government, then federal chief electoral officer 

Jean-Pierre Kingsley was strongly opposed to requirements for 

voter ID because it would be a barrier to students, low-income 

voters, and new Canadians. Mr. Speaker, those are the exact 

same concerns that we have brought forward day in and day out 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The right to vote, Mr. Speaker. I want to repeat that. The right 

to vote. Every Canadian citizen has a right to vote. If you don’t 

have photo identification and you take away that right from that 

citizen, you’re disenfranchising that citizen. You’re making 

them a second-class citizen. You’re taking away a right that’s 

been guaranteed since the very inception of our country. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that should be important to all of us who are 

responsible for democratic processes. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is no system in the world that’s 

perfect. There is no system that we can say that there may not 

ever be a mistake made. But, Mr. Speaker, to put in place a set 

of rules that disenfranchises citizens of our country that don’t 

have photo identification, who may not have a permanent 

residence because they can’t afford rent or can’t afford to own a 

home, to say those people that don’t have a permanent 

residence and don’t have photo identification aren’t citizens and 

don’t have rights, Mr. Speaker, that’s going back to the day 

when we didn’t allow women to vote in our society and we 

didn’t allow Aboriginal Canadians to vote in our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve advanced significantly. We have in our 

country some of the most advanced democratic rights in the 

world. Why, at this point in our time, do we have a government 

who wants to go backwards? Why does it want to 

disenfranchise any citizen from exercising their right to vote? 

Mr. Speaker, it is one of the most important things any 

Canadian can ever have, and that is the right to exercise their 

vote, the right to determine who will govern them, the right to 

determine who will make decisions on behalf of all 

Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very serious 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the process of interviewing candidates for 

the future chief electoral officer in Saskatchewan, when people 

were asked the question whether or not they agreed with the 

issue of voter identification, none of them did. Electoral 

officials across this country disagree with the requirement for 

photo identification. And they do it for a reason: because they 

strongly believe in the principles of our democratic society and 

strongly believe in the principles that every citizen has the right 

to vote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, anything any government does, any 

government does, that limits the right of a citizen to exercise 

what is their ultimate authority — their right to decide who gets 

to make the laws, who gets to make the decisions in which all 

citizens must live by — to take that right away from any 

citizen, Mr. Speaker, is wrong. It is absolutely wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s well known that those who have lower income 

statuses, Mr. Speaker, those who don’t understand our political 

system well, new Canadians, Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal 

Canadians who live in remote areas, senior citizens who live in 

nursing homes — they’re less likely to have photo 

identification because in the case of some they don’t drive. In 

the case of others there’s no reason to drive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it all goes to a fundamental right, Mr. Speaker. And that 

fundamental right is, every citizen should have every 

opportunity . . . We should do everything we can to broaden the 

opportunities of Canadian citizens to vote, not in any way try to 

limit those who participate in the voting process, Mr. Speaker. 

We should not do anything to eliminate or disenfranchise any 

citizen exercising the one and most important fundamental 

right, the most important fundamental right that any citizen has 

that comes with their citizenship and being Canadian, Mr. 

Speaker. And when we limit that right, Mr. Speaker, we are 

abusing our power as legislators. We are abusing our power as 

legislators when at any time we try to take away the democratic 

right of any citizen to vote for any reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, years ago those issues were challenged, and those 

who are incarcerated in prisons were given the right to vote, 

Mr. Speaker. And the courts took away, the courts took away 

their rights and put them in . . . They incarcerated them, Mr. 

Speaker, and at one point they lost their right to vote. And then 

the courts decided they had the right to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have had example after example after example in our 

country where we have gone beyond to ensure that citizens had 

the right to vote. It is the most important right any Canadian 

citizen has. And, Mr. Speaker, there may not be, there may not 

be negative intentions in this legislation. There may not be. It 

doesn’t matter what the intention is though if the consequence 

is that even a single citizen who wanted to exercise their right 

to vote, who should have been able to exercise their right to 

vote, doesn’t get that right to vote. 



6774 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, if a single citizen who shows up at the polls — 

who lives in that voting area, Mr. Speaker, in that constituency, 

or in that civic electoral district, Mr. Speaker — does not get 

the right to vote, then we have by our actions discriminated 

against that citizen and taken away that which is most 

fundamental for every Canadian, that which makes us stand out 

around the world in our values as a society that sets us out from 

many, many, many countries around the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to attribute motive. We can do 

many things, we can do many things to encourage people to 

vote. We can do many things to allow people to exercise their 

right to vote but, Mr. Speaker, we had an example used by the 

Government House Leader about a problem where there was a 

problem in Wood River. But, Mr. Speaker, the system 

obviously worked because the system caught the problem and 

the system corrected the problem, Mr. Speaker. The system 

corrected the problem. A system that corrects its own problem, 

Mr. Speaker, is a system that’s working. 

 

So let’s not create, let’s not create a scenario that 

disenfranchises a single Canadian voter. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has lapsed. I recognize 

the member for Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 every voter is required to produce ID 

adequate to supply proof of identity and residency in order to 

vote. If enumerated, the voter may use government-issued 

photo ID that establishes identity and ordinary residency. If not 

enumerated or they do not have photo ID, voters must show 

two pieces of prescribed ID such as social insurance card, a 

utility bill, to establish both identity and ordinary residency. 

These are the changes that our government has proposed for the 

municipal and provincial election Act. 

 

I would like to once again read into the record the Regina 

Northeast NDP rules for nomination dated, Mr. Speaker, 2010. 

I quote: 

 

Section 5: During registration of eligible voters at the 

nomination convention, any person not appearing as a 

member on the most recent membership list provided by 

the provincial office shall be required to provide proof of 

membership and residency before being permitted to 

register to vote. 

 

Section 6, and I quote, “In any case where a question of 

residency in the constituency arises, the chairperson of the 

credentials committee will request proof of residency.” 

 

Section 7, and I quote: 

 

For the purpose of proving residency, a driver’s licence or 

comparable government-issued photo identification is 

preferred. However, the following are acceptable: a letter, 

invoice, or property tax notice issued within the previous 

90 days from a government agency or utility . . . that is 

addressed to or identifies persons at this address within the 

boundaries of the constituency. 

 

Adults who are voting delegates can also establish proof 

of residency by providing proof that they are the spouses 

(married or common law) of another adult who has 

established proof of residency. 

 

Children under 18 years of age can establish proof of 

residency by providing proof that they are the minor 

children of adults who have established proof of 

residency. Persons 18 years of age and older residing with 

their parents will be required to provide separate proof of 

residency. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I understand some 

members have a debate going on between them. I’d ask that 

they’d, if they’d simply go behind the bar to enter into the 

debate and allow the member from Regina Wascana Plains to 

be heard. Thank you. I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Our . . . [inaudible] . . . for supporting this 

amendment has to do with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that the people of Saskatchewan, the people 

of Canada expect that their government is going to do whatever 

is necessary to ensure the integrity of a voting process. People 

do not want government sticking their nose into most things. 

However, Mr. Speaker, I do know that they do want them to 

stick their nose into ensuring the integrity of these processes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to join in in such a lively debate 

on policies that are so very similar, Mr. Speaker. The only 

problem is, is that it appears that the opposition members do not 

seem to know or understand their own party’s policies. There 

have been many comments in this House about Bill 161, The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 and Bill 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Certain opposition 

members have spoken with full outrage, stating requiring voters 

to supply proof of residency is an attempt to disenfranchise the 

public. And I quote: 

 

Now the Saskatchewan Party will tell you that, well they 

can go and get photo ID. [Heaven forbid, Mr. Speaker.] It 

doesn’t have to be a driver’s licence. [And I quote.] They 

can go to any licence issuer and get photo ID. Well isn’t 

that fantastic, Mr. Speaker? [This person continues.] So 

we’re going to make people go through the extra trouble 

to exercise their right to vote in the country of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province expect that this 

government, our government, will ensure that there is integrity 

in the voting process in this province. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

wondering now if the member from Regina Walsh Acres would 

also like to repeat these words to her NDP Party organizers that 

required the NDP faithful to produce proof of residency of their 

members. Now if it is such a terrible inconvenience to have 

people in the province show proof of residency when voting, 

why would her own party require this from the NDP members 

in their nomination process? 

 

The member from Regina Coronation Park also made 

comments on The Election Amendment Act as recently as 

Tuesday in this House. And I quote: 

 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6775 

Why would we say to people that have spent their lifetime, 

most of them, building this province, making it what we 

[all] inherited, making it the most vibrant and wonderful 

province of Canada, why would we want to say to those 

people, oh you’re old. You don’t count any more. You’re 

too old. You can’t vote. You have no photo ID. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask that same question to that 

member respecting his own party’s policy. Why would you 

make your members show proof of residency? Why would you 

turn away new members of your party from choosing their 

candidate just because they did not have photo ID? We all 

know the reason why, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, why would 

the NDP turn seniors away that may not have photo ID and still 

want to be part of the political process? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you go to return an item at a big box store in 

this province, you have to show photo ID. We’re talking about 

returning products, and yet the members opposite don’t think 

it’s right to have to prove residency, prove identification when 

you’re voting — the most fundamental, democratic right in this 

country. Mr. Speaker, why are the NDP trying to further 

disenfranchise the disenfranchised through their own policies? 

 

Another comment made by the member from Athabasca kind of 

made me wonder if he was aware of his own party policy. The 

member further states, “I go back to the whole notion of photo 

ID for voting, which I think is wrong to do.” I ask the member 

for Athabasca: is your party doing the wrong thing when their 

own policies demand photo ID as proof of residency at their 

own nomination meetings? Mr. Speaker, I cannot understand 

why the NDP MLAs are flip-flopping on this issue every time 

they stand up in the legislature and oppose the idea of proof of 

residency. They are speaking out against their own party 

policies. This is ridiculous. 

 

The member from Coronation Park does the exact same 

flip-flop as he carries on during debate on March 15th. And I 

quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We need to encourage them . . . we’re not doing so when 

we are demanding photo ID. Because a photo ID . . . Also 

we are requiring a residence, two pieces of information 

that state what your residence is.” 

 

The member continues, “We’re opposed for a whole . . . 

[variety] of reasons.” Opposed to what? Integrity of a 

democratic process? Mr. Speaker, I know this may become a 

little repetitive, but how in the world can the NDP MLAs stand 

in their place and so blatantly speak out of both sides of their 

mouth, consistently and constantly flip-flopping on issues? 

 

[11:30] 

 

Who are they saying is wrong? The people of Saskatchewan 

want and deserve to know the reasons why the NDP members 

are opposed to proof of residency. Their own members do so 

when choosing candidates for an upcoming election. It is sad 

but true. Even our own motion for today had been tabled, the 

member from Rosemont continued to bash his own party 

policies.  

 

There’s a very real danger [I quote] that the clear 

preference for photo identification could lead to some 

people and many people being disenfranchised. We are 

worried about this. We’re going to fight against this, Mr. 

Speaker, and we see it as wrong-headed. [Good grief, Mr. 

Speaker.] We recognize that with the legislation that’s put 

forward, it’s going to be difficult for many to comply with 

. . . Thus it’s going to be difficult for them to cast that vote 

. . . 

 

I cannot believe that this member would speak out so 

vehemently against his own party nomination rules, which is 

exactly what we’re talking about with the amendment. Mr. 

Speaker, I am amazed that the members from Rosemont, the 

one member from Rosemont, with all his passion has not 

resigned his NDP membership and decided to sit as an 

independent, that is if he really felt that the idea for voter to 

prove residency was so wrong, so simply wrong. 

 

I would like to switch gears now. Part of the reasons why the 

NDP would have implemented a need for proof of residency 

within their own party. We all know that their current Leader of 

the Opposition would not have asked for this measure. He 

seems to enjoy some leeway in the area of membership sales. I 

wonder if it’s all possible that sometime after the Leader of the 

Opposition became leader, around 1,100 members called up the 

provincial NDP Party and asked for more strict voting rules. 

 

I know that this is one of many issues with respect to 

flip-flopping by the members of the opposition. As a result, I 

support the amendment put forward and decry the opposition 

provided by the members of the opposition. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

honour today to stand on behalf of the opposition caucus and 

just speak a little bit about an issue that we know a fair amount 

of. I’ve heard two members opposite, the member for 

Cannington and the member now for Wascana Plains, quoting 

from things I have said as recently as earlier this week. And 

I’ve heard both of them suggest that I don’t know my own 

party’s constitution. 

 

A little bit of history, Mr. Speaker. In the early ’90s we had a 

party constitution that dealt almost exclusively with this 

document, which is the NDP Party constitution. The convention 

in Saskatoon dealt almost exclusively with our party 

constitution because I challenged the Chair at that convention, 

and that led to virtually the entire constitution dealing with our 

party constitution. So please, Mr. Speaker, I beg government, 

Sask Party members, do not tell this member I don’t understand 

my own party constitution. 

 

By way of further explanation, I want to read what my NDP 

constitution says about nominations. And under section 5(f) it 

says, “The Executive shall,” speaking about constituency 

organization executives: 

 

(f) The Executive shall fix the date and location of the 

Annual Meeting of the Association and, with approval of 

the Provincial Executive, shall fix the date and location of 

a Nominating Convention when required. 



6776 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

(g) The Executive shall appoint a Nomination Rules 

Committee that shall prepare a set of rules which may 

include: 

(i) Nominees holding elected positions; 

(ii) Registration procedures; 

(iii) Balloting rules; 

(iv) Any other items. 

These rules shall be subject to the approval of the 

Executive of the Constituency Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the NDP constitution says about the 

nomination process, so they don’t need to tell us what our 

constitution, our party constitution says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to some of the rules . . . I know the 

ones that were just read by the member for Regina Wascana 

Plains, and it’s the rules for nomination in Regina Northeast 

that were recently followed, but what she conveniently missed 

was . . . She read rule 7. What she conveniently missed was rule 

8 which says, “In cases where eligible voters are not able to 

provide written documentation to establish residency, an oath 

may be presented as a substitute for identification and proof of 

residency and age.” 

 

So we have provided, at every turn, an opportunity for an oath. 

That’s what we’re asking for in opposition with respect to The 

Election Act and the municipal election Act, is the simple 

opportunity for people to have that right to vote, to simply 

swear an oath, when . . . Preferable is, preferable is photo ID, 

but in the absence of that we will accept a SaskPower bill or a 

tax notice, two pieces of that type of ID, or you can simply 

swear an oath. 

 

And in one of the other nomination rules that I have, it says that 

the party shall provide the means to do that right at the 

nominating convention, but it’s in all cases at the discretion of 

the local constituency executive. And my experience has been, 

without fail, Mr. Speaker, that NDP constituency executives 

want to have every single person that should be eligible to vote, 

to be able to vote as easily as they can in an NDP nomination. 

Without fail, that’s what we believe. That’s what we stand for. I 

defy you to find anyone, any New Democrat that would say I 

have misrepresented my party, my membership, or our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it very strange that the Government House 

Leader would move such a disingenuous motion. And my 

question on this motion which is: 

 

That the Assembly call on the opposition NDP to support 

The Election Amendment Act, 2010 and The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010, as they are 

precisely [this is a quote from the motion, as they are 

precisely] in line with NDP policies regarding 

constituency rules and regulations for the nominating 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have just outlined irrevocably how that is 

patently not true. It is just not substantiated in any way, shape, 

or form. 

 

I’m wondering how it is that the Sask Party Government House 

Leader can present such a complete fabrication that cannot be 

substantiated as fact, but how is it that I can’t call that a lie or a 

mistruth? How does that work? How is it that something can be 

fabricated by the Sask Party government, a complete 

fabrication, and yet I can’t call it a mistruth or a lie? 

 

When I’ve established some credentials as a very long-term . . . 

I’m in my 24th, soon 25 years as an NDP MLA. I have a long 

and proud history within my party. Some people say it dates 

back to before I was born, when my grandmother was an MLA 

in the forerunner of the NDP, the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation]. From ’44 to ’48 she was with 

Tommy Douglas’s first government. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

long, deep, and abiding interest in politics in Saskatchewan, in 

making things better for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s 

what I’ve tried to make a career of. 

 

And I resent when a Sask Party government or anyone else tries 

to put falsehoods into our mouths and tries to misrepresent what 

a proud political organization, a proud movement the CCF — 

now NDP — what we stand for. We stand for people having the 

right to vote. And we want to make sure . . . All we ask is, 

allow, like we do, allow for the swearing in of voters when they 

. . . If they have photo ID, this is great. If they’ve got a couple 

of pieces of letters from a tax notice or SaskPower, SaskTel, so 

on, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Biggar on his feet? 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to raise a point of 

order. The member, the member said he knew the rules, and 

then they went ahead and indirectly called our side, our motion 

lies and that we were untruth. And I believe the member should 

withdraw and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been 

listening very carefully to what the member has said. And, Mr. 

Speaker, he’s saying how, he’s questioning how he cannot do 

that. He is not saying at all that the members opposite have in 

fact done that, Mr. Speaker. And I will ask you to review very 

carefully the wording prior to making a ruling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve been listening very carefully. The 

member didn’t direct his comments directly at any individual. 

The comments are directed . . . When members start to call 

other members as liars or having misrepresented what other 

members are is, as I understand, is how the rule applies. And I 

will certainly look at it but as I have been listening I do not find 

the point of order accurate. I recognize the member from 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 

clear, it is clear to me that the Sask Party government has no 

interest in seeing that a significant part of our population not be 

disenfranchised from voting. I’ve spoken about renters. I’ve 

spoken about the more than 3,000 individuals who are couch 

surfing in Regina alone, as we speak, that don’t have what you 

would consider a fixed address, most of them through no fault 

of their own, Mr. Speaker. 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6777 

How is it that we can have that situation, and yet the Sask Party 

government says, oh but, you know, you’ve got to have photo 

ID? Well can you have a photo ID when you don’t have a fixed 

address? How is it that people with very minimal means, very 

minimal dollars . . . The government is saying you have to go 

out and spend 10 or $20 or $80 to get a passport so that you 

will have photo ID so you can vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, late last week I spoke to a constituent who was in 

tears because she didn’t know how she was going to make it to 

the end of this very month with respect to food. And she’s a 

frugal constituent. She was in tears. She did not know how 

she’d meet the end of the month, and to ask that person to 

spend 10 or 20 or some other amount of dollars just to get a 

photo ID is outrageous. It’s outlandish. That represents several 

days of food for a person that has too much month at the end of 

the pay as it is, Mr. Speaker. And the government doesn’t seem 

to get it. They just don’t understand. This is a Saskatchewan for 

the wealthy only and the rest be damned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is shameful. I want to finish my remarks by 

saying once again, as irrevocably as I can, I resent it when a 

Sask Party government tries to pretend they know what my 

New Democratic Party constitution says. I resent it when they 

say that we on this side don’t know what our party constitution 

says or what our party’s nominations rules say, or that, worse 

yet, that we don’t understand what NDP members across this 

proud province feel and think. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they should rethink the election Acts, both of 

them. They should allow for an oath, a swearing in of voters, 

and that would solve the problem. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. Why 

is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Request leave to introduce a very 

special guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

honour to introduce a special guest that I see seated up here 

today and has stopped in, I suspect, to observe proceedings here 

today. And that’s His Worship, Mayor Don Shirley from 

Carlyle, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to welcome Don to his 

Assembly. 

 

I know that specifically Don has served his community with 

integrity for many years, both as a lineman with SaskPower and 

now as mayor. And he’s presided over a period of time with 

significant growth for that community and has done so with a 

steady hand and with vision and with exceptional organization 

required for the community. 

I’ve seen Mr. Shirley’s response in action as the community 

was under great strain, Mr. Speaker, when baseball-size hail 

devastated the community this summer, Mr. Speaker. And that 

steady hand and the principles and service to his community 

certainly reflects the way that Mr. Shirley conducts himself. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming His Worship, Mayor Don Shirley of Carlyle to his 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Voting Eligibility Requirements 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

join the debate on the motion brought forward by the member 

from Cannington, the Government House Leader, and I will be 

supporting this motion. 

 

A few things I want to point out, Mr. Speaker. Just some brief 

remarks about The Election Amendment Act of 2010. It will 

introduce and enhance voter identification requirements, 

including the use of approved photo ID. If you do not have 

approved photo ID, you will be required to show additional 

forms of ID to prove your identity and your ordinary residence, 

or to have another voter vouch for you. 

 

So clearly, Mr. Speaker, there is ample opportunity for voters 

without specific ID as a driver’s licence to prove their 

identification as well as their place of residence. We see that 

voters already are required to show approved ID in order to 

vote in federal elections and in provincial elections, including 

British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec. It’s appropriate that 

Saskatchewan move to meet the evolving national standards in 

this respect, Mr. Speaker, and to improve the voter integrity and 

voting integrity of this fair country. 

 

They will be required to show identification prior to voting. 

Those with approved, government-issued photo ID will need to 

show only that ID in order to get a ballot. However those 

without that ID will be required to show additional forms of ID 

or be required to have another voter with such ID vouch for 

them. And each one can vouch for only one voter, Mr. Speaker. 

So we see ample opportunity to make sure that these people are 

ensured their right to vote. 

 

To ensure that voters are not inappropriately disenfranchised by 

this change, we’ll be authorizing in the regulations a broad 

range of supplementary information that may be used to 

establish identity and ordinary residence for a voter. We’ll be 

starting with the review of the existing federal list for such 

information and are currently conducting consultations to 

identify any additional forms of Saskatchewan information that 

would be of local assistance. So, Mr. Speaker, clearly all this is 

intended to do is preserve the integrity of this process, as is 

alignment with many other provinces, and are the direction that 

our municipalities would like to head in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as federally. 



6778 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

Now clearly this position taken by the New Democratic Party is 

hypocritical. Disenfranchising people is not the intent of this 

government, nor do I think this legislation would do that. I’m 

wondering, Mr. Speaker, the 1,100 people in Meadow Lake, if 

they feel disenfranchised. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to a comment made by 

the member from Dewdney: everyone has a right to vote. And I 

couldn’t agree with him more, Mr. Speaker. I agree that 

everybody should be able to vote once and in their own 

constituency and have that opportunity to do that. And this 

legislation clearly would help that happen. 

 

I want to refer anecdotally to a little story that I heard. A friend 

of mine who — I think he supports me but I know he has a lot 

of friends in the New Democratic Party — happened to be at a 

church service that was being ministered by the former premier, 

Mr. Calvert, a very respected man and he continues to be 

respected in this province today. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Calvert, he told a little story about 

geese and flocks of geese. And he said, you know, quite often 

you have flocks of geese and they have a leader, but sometimes 

someone that isn’t a leader wants to be the leader of that flock, 

so they’ll go out and they’ll sell memberships to geese that 

aren’t geese. You might sell memberships to ducks. They don’t 

even want to be a goose but they end up getting a goose 

membership although they’re ducks. So you know, Mr. 

Speaker, this will just ensure that those ducks that have photo 

ID don’t have to be geese, they continue to be ducks. And those 

geese with photo ID can be geese. 

 

Most individuals referred to by the members opposite about, 

you know, with reference to being disenfranchised, clearly 

already have ID. I can’t remember, Mr. Speaker, which member 

across referred to university students for example going back 

and forth to university, driving back and forth, and how were 

they supposed to pay for this ID. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 

argue if they’re driving, they likely have photo ID. I think many 

of these people would have ID, that we’re questioning. If not 

photo ID, they will have, as I described earlier in some of the 

key points in this legislation, they will have opportunity to 

prove their ID through a voucher, of somebody vouching for 

them, Mr. Speaker, on an individual basement, or other forms 

of ID that they would have on their person, which most people 

do. 

 

And you know, I’ve run into many people already that are 

going to provincial elections, and when they show up, they 

produce their photo ID, some form of ID. And they are quite 

surprised when they don’t have to. Many residents believe they 

should, and at this time, they don’t have to. And they’re more 

than willing to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, another point that I heard, I think it was the 

member from Coronation Park as he kind of meandered around 

the issue, he talked about those couch surfers and the people 

that don’t have an address. Well, Mr. Speaker, although it may 

be a bit onerous for them, the opportunity is there to get 

enumerated. And once enumerated, that covers that problem, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re more than able to vote once and in their 

own riding. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, people on social assistance, as pointed 

out by the Minister of Social Services, that in the case where 

somebody on social assistance does not have the means with 

which to get their own photo ID, Social Services will provide 

the funds and will help them to do that and get them through the 

process. So, Mr. Speaker, clearly some of the arguments offered 

by the members opposite just don’t hold any water whatsoever. 

 

And again this process, this legislation will align us not only 

federally but the direction that municipalities want to go and the 

direction many provinces in our great nation of Canada have 

already gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’ve pointed out this hypocritical decision is only one 

example of many such, I guess, opportunities to speak that 

we’ll see the New Democratic Party representatives talk about. 

My friend, the member from Cannington, and the member from 

Wascana, they pointed out a lot of the intricacies of this 

legislation. I won’t delve too much into that. They pointed out 

the intricacies of the nomination process and the rules around 

that within the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. I won’t 

delve into that too much. But what I will do is take this 

opportunity to point out some of the NDP flip-flops that we’ve 

seen over the past number of years. And I’ll step through those 

as quickly as I can. I know my time’s coming quickly to a close 

here. 

 

What do they say in opposition? Well they are asking the 

opposition . . . pardon me. In opposition, the New Democrats 

are asking the Saskatchewan Party government to reinstate spot 

loss hail coverage for crop insurance. They’re calling for the 

government to stand up for livestock producers in 

Saskatchewan in this time of crisis. What did they do in 

government, Mr. Speaker? They cut spot loss hail coverage in 

2002, and they continually raised the crop insurance premiums 

while lowering coverage. 

 

Cattle prices were at a lower level in October of 2007 than in 

October 2008, but the NDP had not one mention of supporting 

livestock producers in their platform. 

 

In reference to municipal affairs, Mr. Speaker, what did they 

say in opposition? What are they saying in opposition? They’re 

telling the Saskatchewan Party government that they must 

implement immediate property tax relief for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s clearly happening. 

 

They are saying the Saskatchewan Party government is 

shortchanging municipalities by not putting in place a 

long-term revenue-sharing deal. Again, that is happening. 

 

They’re also saying municipalities received more funding under 

the NDP government. That was in a news release of February 

7th of ’07. Well, Mr. Speaker, what did they do when they were 

in government? They promised a property tax relief since 1944 

when Tommy Douglas promised to do away with it. Never 

happened. Under the NDP, Saskatchewan paid the highest level 

of property tax in the country. And the Minister of Finance 

pointed out very well yesterday the 17 different occasions and 

when the NDP raised taxes in this province over the last 

number of years. 

 

During the 16 years of NDP government, municipalities were 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6779 

shortchanged by $600 million. The only time that the NDP 

actually raised revenue sharing was — when? —2007, an 

election year, Mr. Speaker. And we can clearly see what the 

intent behind that was. 

 

In opposition, when it comes to corporate services, in January 

of ’09, the NDP questioned the frequency of Saskatchewan 

Party cabinet ministers’ travel as well as the amount spent by 

the ministers. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at that record. The 

Saskatchewan Party travel expenses from April 1st to 

November 30th of ’08 — $554,000 and change. The same time 

frame in ’06-07, the NDP spent almost $670,000. And we’re 

not even counting in the factor of inflation there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Tourism, parks, culture, and sport, opposition NDP claim the 

Saskatchewan Party government is making camping less 

affordable for people across the province. However when in 

government, they instituted the wiener roast tax that clearly 

made camping more expensive. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have examples here that are just too 

numerous to go through, through education, through First 

Nations and Métis Relations, through health. The record is very 

clear, Mr. Speaker. There’s just not enough time to go through 

it all. So with that, I will just bring my comments to a close and 

say that I will be supporting this motion brought forward by the 

member from Cannington, the Government House Leader. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

participate in this debate. And I want to ask one very simple 

question of the Sask Party government: why are you putting in 

this new rule where people have to have photo ID to vote? Who 

asked you to do it? Where did it come from? Why are you 

doing it? And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been no answers. 

 

They talk about integrity. They talk about having a better 

system. And, Mr. Speaker, the real truth is they don’t want 

people that live in our Aboriginal communities, they don’t want 

seniors, they don’t want people that move to Saskatchewan, 

they don’t want these people to have any vote and any 

determination on how they select their MLAs. That is the pure 

truth, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what this Bill is all about. 

 

Now I listen to and I watch what a few members are saying, 

Mr. Speaker. And before I go there, I want to say to the 

Minister of Justice — and I’m glad that he’s here today — 

indicating to him that, as he is the Minister of Justice, that word 

is so important to the people of Saskatchewan is justice. And, 

Mr. Speaker, most people that I know have a high regard for 

people that are in the legal profession. But how could the 

Minister of Justice, the person representing many, many legal 

professions, professionals throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan, support a Bill like this? 

 

And forever and a day until I leave this Assembly, until I leave 

this earth, I’m going to remember the name of the Justice 

minister that put this Bill forward that disenfranchised many, 

many of my people in northern Saskatchewan and throughout 

many of the First Nations communities and cities throughout 

this great province. Mr. Speaker, he was the one that took away 

the right from many of these people to vote. And forever and a 

day, if there’s one thing I’m going to remember from this party 

and this Justice minister is that he took away the right to vote 

for many people of Saskatchewan that simply do not have a 

photo identification when they go and vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member from Regina Wascana Plains talked about the 

integrity of the system. And, Mr. Speaker, I understood prior to 

her role as an MLA, she was a police officer. And, Mr. Speaker, 

based on her experience, she should know. She probably went 

into many, many homes dealing with many crises where she 

found seven or eight, nine or ten adults living in one house. 

They may have found two or three young people couch surfing. 

And many times I know the police reports, throughout the 

major centres and through many centres, they mentioned 

somebody’s name of no fixed address, Mr. Speaker. She knows 

how many people out there have no fixed address. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, no matter how you cut it, this Bill and this 

action is purely intended to displace the Aboriginal community, 

the elders, the immigrant community, and those people that 

don’t have proper ID from voting in the next provincial 

election, Mr. Speaker. That’s pure and simple what this is. 

 

And what is astounding to me, Mr. Speaker, what is actually 

astounding to me is that they would stand in this House, many 

of them, and defend that. How could they do that? How could 

they in their good conscience get up and say, this is good for 

Saskatchewan? We know what it is. The Aboriginal community 

knows what it is. The immigrant communities know what it is. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the elders know what it is. 

 

And one of the things that often is astounding to me is how they 

do something as incredibly, as incredibly undemocratic as this, 

then turn around and still try and blame the NDP for doing this. 

Now how does that work, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And come next election, I’m going to tell the people wherever I 

go, the Aboriginal community, the immigrant community, the 

elderly people, and many people that are disenfranchised as a 

result of this Bill, is they’re taking away your right to vote. And 

the reason why they want to take away your right to vote is 

because you don’t vote for the Sask Party to begin with. And 

that’s how you gerrymander the electoral process, and that’s 

how you destroy, you destroy democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what I can’t understand is how a former officer of the law 

and how a Justice minister can stand up and talk about, this is 

right; this improves the integrity of the system. How can they 

do that, Mr. Speaker, when they know full well this is going to 

hurt the democratic process that many people participate, that 

they have been engaged with throughout their careers, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m ashamed. I’m ashamed that they would stand up 

and they would defend that, this Bill, saying that it’s right. How 

could they stand in their place and say this is right? This is 

wrong. This is wrong. This is wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wherever you go, the Aboriginal community — 

I’ll take that one example because of my background — they 

can influence 22 provincial constituencies, 22 provincial 

constituencies at next election. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re having 

a difficult time getting more and more people, Aboriginal 

people, to participate in the election process. Come on board, 

come and vote, we tell the First Nations community. Now this 



6780 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

Saskatchewan Party is saying to people, but before you vote, 

you’ve got to have photo ID and you’ve got to show where you 

live. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that absolutely astounding. We should 

be going the absolute other direction and making it easier and 

easier for people to vote. And what we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, 

is that none of that evidence is there, that the Saskatchewan 

Party want these people to vote. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And I mentioned at the outset, I am ashamed to see this kind of 

action being proposed by that government. And I’m particularly 

ashamed of the people that stand up and purport to talk about 

integrity when they know full well this is going to hurt a lot of 

people from coming out and voting and taking their rightful 

part in the democratic system, Mr. Speaker. This is intended to 

hurt and to limit their opportunity to choose a new government. 

They know it. We know it. And many other people out . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Saskatchewan know it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that justice? Is that justice? The answer is 

no. Nowhere in . . . [inaudible] . . . what they’re trying to do, 

nor justify what they’re trying . . . That’s not justice. The 

member from Wascana Plains goes up and says, oh, we want to 

improve the integrity. Again, I go back, how many people did 

she go see in different homes and noticed the overcrowding? 

And how many people have they seen couch surfing? And how 

many people have they seen with no fixed address? You’ve 

probably seen thousands of people throughout your career. Now 

you’re saying they don’t have a right to vote. How does that 

improve the integrity? It doesn’t improve the integrity one bit, 

one bit. And I’m ashamed again to point out that this 

government put this Bill in place that hurts many, many people, 

that disenfranchises and destroys democracy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they know full well that they’re defending 

the indefensible. They know that full well. And that’s one of the 

reasons why I’m ashamed today to see people that have come 

from careers that impact many of the people that we’re talking 

about today and yet they continue to prop up the most basic 

fundamental problem that they’re going to present to these 

people — and that’s giving them no right to vote, no right to 

choose their government. And, Mr. Speaker, that is shameful. 

 

In Ottawa, when they tried this thing back several years ago, 

there was an estimation of 10 million people that would not 

vote as a result of their request for voter ID. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s 10 million across Canada. Now what does that mean, 

what does that mean to Saskatchewan when we have a low 

turnout in the First Nations communities as it is, we have a 

lower turnout in many of the Aboriginal communities and, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a low turnout when it comes to elderly people 

and to the immigrant community. 

 

And they know it, Mr. Speaker. Now they want to make it even 

lower. And the reason why is because these group of people do 

not vote for them. And what do you do when you want to win 

an election? You gerrymander the process, and you hide it 

under the banner of integrity. Well I’m sorry; we don’t buy that 

one bit. We don’t buy that one bit because that’s exactly what 

people out there know is the net effect, and that’s exactly what 

they know this government’s up to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let their names live in infamy as it comes to 

the whole process of trying to push and to have the democratic 

process very, very strong. They are working opposite of it. 

They don’t want to see it enhanced. They want to see less voter 

turnout and one of the best ways to do that is say, okay to all 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 65-minute debate. 

We will now enter the 10-minute question period. I recognize 

the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has railed on and on 

against the photo ID provision in both The Local Government 

Election Amendment Act and The Election Amendment Act, 

even though it reflects current practices within the NDP’s own 

nomination process. To the member from Regina Dewdney: are 

you aware that these two Acts are virtually identical to your 

party’s constituency association’s own proof of identity rules? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to 

have the opportunity to tell the member just how wrong he 

really is and set the record straight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our constitution is clear that each of the 

constituencies have the opportunity to make the rules, set the 

rules up for each constituency nomination, Mr. Speaker. And in 

nowhere, nowhere does it say that photo identification is 

required, Mr. Speaker. Nowhere, Mr. Speaker, would it 

determine that photo identification is required to vote in an 

NDP nomination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just to let you know what the process is, Mr. 

Speaker, the provincial office provides an updated list of those 

who have memberships right up to that date. If your name’s on 

that list, Mr. Speaker . . . And anybody that has the right to 

vote, Mr. Speaker, name is on that list because the cut-off is, it 

has to be a minimum of seven days before the nomination, Mr. 

Speaker. So the names are on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a situation where the members opposite 

are trying to make something that isn’t really there. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Sask Party’s failed many people in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, maybe no more so though than the 

MLA from Cannington and this Premier in that region, 

specifically as it relates to their failure to provide the health 

services that are required. Specifically we could reference the 

closing of many beds, five beds in Deer View Lodge, Mr. 

Speaker, in Wawota, or the failures in long-term care in White 

Bear or in Carlyle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we see a Bill that disenfranchises many young people, 

First Nations, and seniors from voting in the next election, Mr. 

Speaker. Question to the MLA from Cannington who has failed 

seniors, families, First Nations, and communities across his 

constituency: how can he defend this deliberate attempt at 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6781 

preventing many from voting in the next election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the people of the Cannington constituency, and especially 

Wawota, are well served by this government even though the 

NDP closed the acute care facility there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in listening to the comments from the member 

from Athabasca, he said he was ashamed, and I agree that he 

should be. I’d like to read you a quote from March 16th, page 

6760 from the member from Athabasca, and I quote, “And 

we’re going to come here with guns ablazing, and we’re going 

to tell people exactly what they got to do . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a call to violence and intimidation, a threat 

by the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

threatens this institution and it threatens the people within this 

building and the visitors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no honourable member of this Assembly would 

make those threats against this institution. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act and The Election 

Amendment Act are virtually identical to the NDP’s 

constituency association nomination rules. To the member from 

Regina Coronation Park: why are these rules good enough for 

your membership but not good enough for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in my speech, 

that is absolutely not true. It’s a fabrication of the Sask Party 

government. Read the record. Read my speech and the member 

will know that our party constitution does not say that nor do 

the rules of either of the two nominations . . . constituency. 

Unlike the Devine gerrymander of the 1980s where we saw a 

situation where the constituencies in Saskatchewan . . . There’s 

a divergence of up to four times from the smallest constituency 

was a Conservative constituency. The largest, with four times 

the voters, Mr. Speaker, was an NDP constituency. That’s the 

things that we have always had to fight is untruth, fabrications 

from right wing governments. Shame on you. When will you 

learn? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 

from the Wascana Plains constituency. Murray Mandryk’s 

October 30th column referred to this whole notion of the photo 

ID as, and I quote, “A dopey idea.” Does she agree with that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first off that the people 

of Saskatchewan want their government to ensure integrity of 

the voting process. Mr. Speaker, what they don’t want is a party 

— the members opposite — that speak out of both sides of their 

mouths on most issues and a party of members opposite who 

oppose the integrity of the voting process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has spent considerable 

effort in this House arguing against two Bills that are virtually 

identical to the NDP’s own nomination rules in many of their 

constituencies. 

 

To the member from Regina Coronation Park: will you now 

vote for this legislation or change the nomination rules in your 

constituency associations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the government 

members who have spoken. I think unanimously, all of them 

fabricating a lie about what the NDP, about what the NDP 

constitution . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask . . . 

Order. I would ask the member from Regina Coronation Park to 

be careful of the wording he uses in his responses. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Methinks that 

government members protest too much about what our 

nomination rules say. They are very clear. We’ve read them 

into the record, the parts that affect us. They have read portions 

of misquotes into it. Mr. Speaker, it is just a shame that the 

Sask Party feel that desperate about elections that they have to 

misdirect what the NDP constitution says; misdirect what we 

say about our nomination process run by constituency 

organizations. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Cannington, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, even before this debate started, the member from 

Cannington put out a press release that says that the New 

Democratic Party requires photo identification, Mr. Speaker. 

Even the document from a single nominating convention, Mr. 

Speaker, says it would be preferred, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question to the member is: was that intentional or was that a 

mistake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the rules for Regina Northeast NDP — rules for nomination — 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, it says, “For the purposes of proving 

residency, a driver’s licence or comparable government-issued 

photo identification is preferred. However the following is also 

acceptable . . .” and they list other government documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we’re doing in this piece of 

legislation. If you cannot provide photo ID, there is a long, long 



6782 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

list of other IDs which will be acceptable, Mr. Speaker. These 

rules that we’re putting in place in The Election Act are 

virtually carbon copies to what this constituency association is 

doing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they’re arguing against their 

own rules. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s duplicity is well 

documented. They shut down 52 hospitals to supposedly 

protect rural health care. They used back-to-work legislation in 

order to defend the rights of striking SaskPower workers and 

nurses. They also presumed that not increasing the seniors’ 

income plan would help seniors cope during the 41 per cent rise 

in the consumer price index. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: will you admit that your 

opposition to The Local Government Election Amendment Act 

and The Election Amendment Act is rooted entirely in the 

ignorance of your party’s own nomination policies? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, given the unprecedented 

revenues left to you guys and the people, and the money you’re 

getting today, when we form government we’ll do exactly what 

is fair to the people of Saskatchewan, and that is make sure we 

got a good investment to health care, Mr. Speaker. And when 

we get government, we’ll do the work that’s necessary. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to know how it 

is that couch surfers are supposed to have photo ID when they 

don’t know from night to night where home is going to be. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Seventy-five minute debate has 

elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 2 — Housing 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Forbes.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member has moved the motion 

and therefore the member has given up his place to speak. I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased today to enter into this debate. Mr. Speaker, 

today we’re talking about providing for people in our society 

the opportunity to have a meaningful home, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it be provided through rent or whether it be provided 

through homeownership, Mr. Speaker, and how citizens of our 

province have the opportunity to pay for that rent, Mr. Speaker, 

or to ever be able to afford that home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today many, many citizens in our province live at 

income levels that don’t give them the opportunity to have both 

the right to own a home and to pay their bills, Mr. Speaker. And 

many, many citizens today, as a result of inflationary costs, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government has done very little or nothing to 

address, cannot, cannot, Mr. Speaker — and I want just to stress 

that from a very, very common point of view of many citizens 

of this province — they cannot afford to both have a quality 

residence, Mr. Speaker, and pay their bills. Pay the 

fundamentals of electricity and heating, Mr. Speaker, provide 

food and, in many cases, can’t buy the medications they need in 

order to have a healthy life, Mr. Speaker. We’re making 

citizens choose between the ability to have a quality, a quality 

home, Mr. Speaker, and to be able to live with dignity and 

respect in our communities. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a shameful situation when today citizens, 

who have seen their rent increase up to $400 over the last year, 

Mr. Speaker, and that have seen their utility rates go up, have 

seen their drug costs go up, have seen gasoline go up, Mr. 

Speaker, citizens cannot afford the basic costs of living in our 

rich society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what are we hearing in response? I’m 

hearing in response, Mr. Speaker, that 92,000 people were 

taken off the tax brackets, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s 

be honest what that means realistically to people. Mr. Speaker, 

it means that many of those people who came off the tax 

brackets from one year to the next may be getting as low as a 

dollar or two or three dollars more per year, and that’s all, Mr. 

Speaker. That is all some of them get. On the high end they 

may get a few hundred dollars a year, Mr. Speaker, from the 

previous year because as a result of the changes of income tax 

and the bracket creep, Mr. Speaker. And they’re bragging about 

the fact that a few people get a few extra dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

when their rent has gone up $400 a month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not responsible of a government. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not responsible of a society, Mr. Speaker. We 

need to look at the fundamental problems people face in our 

society and we need to address them, Mr. Speaker. Today there 

are far too many citizens of our province that have no home at 

all, that live in shelters when a shelter bed’s available. But if a 

shelter bed isn’t available, Mr. Speaker, where do they sleep? 

On a park bench, in a park, under a bridge, Mr. Speaker, in a 

field? Mr. Speaker, that’s not acceptable in a province or a 

society that has the wealth that we have in this province. 

 

The problem is, Mr. Speaker, this government has done nothing 

to address these fundamental concerns of the citizens of our 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, the net result is that today more 

individuals are couch surfing, are living on the street, living 

without a residence, without an acceptable place to live, without 

a house, without a home, Mr. Speaker. And we need to address 

this fundamental problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the government is ignoring it. In 2007 the 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6783 

former New Democratic Party government put $100 million 

into an affordable housing strategy. Mr. Speaker, what did the 

incoming government do? Well they froze the spending of that 

money which was already transferred to the Sask Housing 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker. They froze the spending of that 

money for a full year so they would then claim the very projects 

that were under way and being built by the previous 

government. They claimed them as their own. Did they put any 

new money in? Did they do anything to help? Absolutely not, 

Mr. Speaker. They did nothing. But what did they do? They 

delayed the construction of new housing by a year so they could 

claim it as their own, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well that’s not just irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, it’s downright 

wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, since then, in what they by their own 

definition — and I’m saying their own definition — is good 

economic times, Mr. Speaker, what are we seeing? Are we 

seeing a significant improvement in affordable housing to deal 

with the problem that’s emerging in our communities, Mr. 

Speaker? No, we’re not. And that’s fundamentally wrong. 

People have a right, Mr. Speaker, to live with dignity and 

respect in our communities, Mr. Speaker. They have a right to 

be able to afford housing and a place to live and to be able to 

pay their bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every one of us in this Assembly should be 

ashamed of the fact that people in our communities have to live 

on the street, that people can’t get adequate housing. Mr. 

Speaker, we live in one of the wealthiest countries with the 

most potential in the entire world. So why in a country with all 

the potential we have, with all the resources we have, with all 

the opportunity we have, do we have people living on the street, 

not able to feed themselves, not able to look after themselves 

because they don’t have proper accommodation? 

 

Without proper accommodation, it’s difficult to get 

employment, Mr. Speaker. And even if you’ve got employment 

today and you’ve got minimum wage employment, Mr. 

Speaker, you don’t make enough money to be able to afford the 

rent, the food, and the utilities you’d need to have a place to 

live. That’s sad, Mr. Speaker. That is sad in one of the 

wealthiest countries in the world with some of the most vast 

resource opportunity in the world, Mr. Speaker. We’re letting 

people down. 

 

It’s the responsibility of government, it is the responsibility of 

government to help those who need help, Mr. Speaker. Now 

everybody would like to be the individual who is wealthy and 

has every opportunity in the world, has every opportunity to get 

ahead and, Mr. Speaker, live like I would say all of us in this 

Assembly do. We have homes, Mr. Speaker. We can pay our 

bills. Our children have the opportunity to go to university. Our 

children have the opportunity to get ahead. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

fortunate. We’re fortunate and our children and our 

grandchildren have benefited from that. But we also have a 

responsibility to those who can’t live to those standards. We 

have an obligation to those people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should be judged by how we help those who have the least, 

Mr. Speaker, not how we help those who have the most. Now 

I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, that we create a society where 

everybody gets everything for nothing. I’m not suggesting that 

all. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. I’m suggesting that we put true 

effort into making our society better for all people, that we 

endeavour to use the vast resources and wealth of this province 

to ensure that people have minimums, Mr. Speaker, so they can 

live with dignity and respect. 

 

Every one of us should want every citizen to live with dignity 

and respect and have the opportunity to get ahead. Every single 

one of us should want that. And I’m not going to suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are members who don’t want that. I think 

where we have a difference, Mr. Speaker, is in what priority 

that is and the priorities the government sets, Mr. Speaker, the 

priority a government sets for its communities, for its society, 

and for its people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go to one simple thing. I’m going to 

go to potash resource royalties, Mr. Speaker. When the 

royalties were set at $130 a tonne, Mr. Speaker, we were 

receiving about 30 per cent of the income in royalty, the people 

of Saskatchewan were, for the resource that they own. Today 

when we’re receiving $400 a tonne, over $400 a tonne for that 

same resource, we get the same amount of money and we get 

less than 5 per cent, less than 5 per cent on the dollar, Mr. 

Speaker. And if we were today getting that 30 per cent that was 

originally set in place for a return, Mr. Speaker, we’d be getting 

a little over $2 billion more per year. That $2 billion per year, 

Mr. Speaker, could be used to help those in our society who 

need help the most. And I would think all of us should have that 

as a goal, to help those individuals. And Mr. Speaker, what we 

need to do is set priorities to do just that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we need probably in the neighbourhood of 

10,000 affordable housing units or additional housing units in 

the province of Saskatchewan for low-income people, for 

people who don’t have the opportunity to make the levels of 

income you would need to buy a home today. I want to use a 

common sense example, Mr. Speaker. Just five years ago, you 

could buy a three-bedroom bungalow in the city of Regina or 

the city of Saskatoon for somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

200 to $250,000. Today that same bungalow is between 4 and 

$500,000 — double the price, Mr. Speaker. Well that put home 

ownership out of the price range of literally tens of thousands of 

Saskatchewan’s young adults who are moving into the 

workforce, forcing them to stay in rental accommodation years 

longer than they would have prior to that increase in price of 

housing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying, I’m not saying that that’s 

necessarily bad that you have market changes and that. But if 

you’re going to have market changes like that, you have to 

adapt your society, your availability, and your strategy in order 

to deal with those young adults who are now having to remain 

in the rental community longer because they can’t get into 

home ownership as early as they could have. It’s still the goal I 

think of every young adult who is out in the work world, who 

wants to get married and raise a family and contribute to our 

society, home ownership is still their ultimate goal or one of 

their ultimate goals, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going to say it’s the 

only one, but I think it’s what each and every adult in our 

society would like. They like ownership. 

 

Now through forces outside anything that they can control, 

we’ve seen an inflation in housing, we’ve seen 100 per cent 

increase in a very short period of time. Now those factors are 



6784 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

real, they’re going to occur, but what we have to do is adjust 

our strategies, realizing that somebody that may have got into 

home ownership at 25 years of age five years ago, may not be 

getting into home ownership till 32 or 33 years of age today. 

And as a result you have a balloon in the rental market across 

the province, Mr. Speaker. And those young adults who are 

having to rent, Mr. Speaker, are in a situation where they need 

shelter. They need housing. And we have to adjust our strategy 

to provide a greater number of rental accommodations in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we also have to adjust our strategy as you put more rental 

accommodation into the market, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

quality of that housing is sustained over the period of time, Mr. 

Speaker, that existing landlords are required to keep a standard 

of housing, Mr. Speaker. And I know we have programs to do 

that, but we have to be more diligent in ensuring, Mr. Speaker, 

that people who are renting accommodations are able to rent 

quality accommodations so that their children, their children in 

fact can grow up in a home that’s healthy, Mr. Speaker, free of 

mould and infestation. 

 

And I’m not suggesting all homes are full of infestation, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t want to suggest that for a second or suggest 

that landlords are bad landlords, Mr. Speaker. But I’m just 

saying you have to establish standards, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that children, our future generations grow up in what is seen as 

and actually is, Mr. Speaker, quality housing because those 

things make a fundamental difference to the future of that child, 

their ability to, Mr. Speaker, to learn, their ability to grow, Mr. 

Speaker, their health, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Things that are important should be important to all of us, are 

certainly important to their parents and their grandparents but 

also, Mr. Speaker, should be equally important to each and 

every one of us that are elected on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan to represent them. It doesn’t matter which side of 

the House you’re sitting on, Mr. Speaker; we’re elected to 

represent the people of Saskatchewan. And we’re elected to 

undertake on their behalf the establishment of rules and policies 

and principles, Mr. Speaker, that are there to benefit the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not suggesting that, as some would like 

to say from my discussion at the end of this hour, Mr. Speaker, 

that I’m saying the government should be all things to all 

people. I’m not saying that. What I’m saying: as the 

circumstances change, and they have changed rather 

dramatically over the last five or six years in Saskatchewan 

because of economic growth and for good reasons, but we have 

to adjust our strategy to deal with the problems that come with 

that growth. And, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t done that. 

 

We’ve tried to, on one side, continue to operate as we’ve 

always operated. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

seen a significant change in the rental accommodation and the 

housing stock available to the people in Saskatchewan, partly 

because of change in demand because of the cost and partly, 

Mr. Speaker, because the fact that some of the standards have 

slipped over the last few years, Mr. Speaker. Because of the 

high demand, people are . . . There’s continuous occupation of 

all rental properties because of the high demand and the low 

availability, Mr. Speaker, that there hasn’t been the repairs done 

necessarily on all properties that should be done. And in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker, it’s because landlords are trying to ensure 

that people have someplace to live, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

blaming all the landlords or saying they’re bad people. But 

when you’ve got a near zero per cent vacancy rate, Mr. Speaker 

— or the other way to say it is near 100 per cent occupancy rate 

— you need to make adjustments in how you look at the 

problems in order to solve them. Now, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t 

been able to do that. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that we need to do is we need to 

examine whether our own programs that we deliver as a 

society, as a government are adequate for those people who are 

dependent upon those programs. Are our social assistance 

programs adequate? Is our housing supplement program 

adequate, Mr. Speaker? And do they need to be adjusted now? 

Now to have adjusted them a year ago or 18 months ago, you 

know, I commend any government anywhere in the world who 

does, that makes adjustments. But you have to continue to make 

adjustments as the demand changes, as the circumstances 

change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in this province today we spend $4 billion 

— I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker — $4 billion more than 

we did just three years ago. In 2007, the last New Democratic 

Party budget, was $7.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. Today we’re 

spending better than $11 billion. And with all that, with all that 

increased expenditure and opportunity, Mr. Speaker, there are 

many, many families, many children and seniors that don’t have 

as good a quality of life as they did when we only had $7 

billion to spend. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s because we haven’t changed our 

policies, our directions, our priorities to ensure that people are 

first, people are first. We need to put our citizens first. We need 

to care enough to say that maybe, maybe a road doesn’t get 

built this year that goes by my friend’s farm because we’re 

going to put people first. 

 

Government is about making choices. Governing is about 

making choices. Never easy choices, Mr. Speaker, because 

there is always, regardless how much money you will ever 

have, there will always be more demand than there is funds 

available. But governing is about choices, Mr. Speaker, and we 

need, collectively we need to make the choices on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan that are going to benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t think there’s a single citizen in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that wouldn’t like to be a millionaire and have every 

opportunity. If you find me one, Mr. Speaker, I’d be concerned. 

But I can tell you this: very, very few ever get that opportunity. 

And very, very few ever have a day go by that they, in their 

own lives, don’t have to make a difficult choice; they have to 

make a decision. And those decisions affect the next day and 

the next day and the day after that, Mr. Speaker, because we all 

have limited resources. So if I choose to spend money on one 

thing on a Monday, I may not have the money to make a choice 

on Friday. That’s where most citizens of our province are at. 

They have to budget. They have to make choices. And, Mr. 

Speaker, yes, they have to do without things. They have to do 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6785 

without things, and in many cases today people are doing 

without things they shouldn’t have to do without. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this becomes more acute in consideration when 

we look at the future generation of children. Mr. Speaker, doing 

the right thing today presents the opportunity for those children 

of tomorrow to get that good start in life, to get that quality 

education they need; to go home every day to ensure that they 

have a meal in their stomach, Mr. Speaker, that they’re not 

hungry, they don’t go to bed hungry at night; that they get the 

adequate dental care they need, Mr. Speaker, because at an 

early age dental care makes a difference to the quality of one’s 

teeth and, Mr. Speaker, there’s dental hygiene and care for the 

rest of their life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many things done at an earlier intervention stage 

make a tremendous difference in the outcome of a child — their 

capabilities, their desires, their own outlook on the future, Mr. 

Speaker. So we need to ensure that every child in our society 

gets to reach their maximum potential, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about it from a point of view of children meeting 

their maximum potential. Mr. Speaker, I saw on Monday 

morning . . . or Tuesday morning, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, on 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] television, a young 

family being evicted from their home because, Mr. Speaker, 

they couldn’t pay their rent because they weren’t eligible for a 

housing supplement because the home they were renting wasn’t 

of an adequate standard to get a housing supplement. Had they 

got that housing supplement, they could have afforded to pay 

the rent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday a family’s evicted. Today they 

have no home. A mother and a father and two children couch 

surfing, moving from friends’ and relatives’ homes, looking for 

where their next home will be. 

 

For those two young children, Mr. Speaker, to try to put it in 

some perspective, those two young children don’t have the 

security of knowing where their home is every night. Where are 

they going to sleep every night? They don’t have the security of 

knowing, Mr. Speaker, that they will go to the same school, Mr. 

Speaker. That child doesn’t have that security they need in 

order to reach their maximum potential. And I don’t blame the 

parents, Mr. Speaker. I blame the fact that we have not done our 

job as legislators to ensure that we maximize the potential: 

maximize the potential of that child, maximize the potential of 

our society, our province in the interests of every child like 

those two children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, I don’t expect we’re ever going to have 

a perfect world. I don’t expect we’re ever going to be able to 

ensure that every single person meets their true potential, that 

every single person has every opportunity that any of us would 

like to have. But, Mr. Speaker, we can do much more. And it is 

about choices. And today in our society in this province, one of 

the richest in the world with a vast resource base, Mr. Speaker, 

too many families are hurting. Too many children are doing 

without. Too many seniors have to decide between buying their 

medications and paying their rent and utilities, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is fundamentally wrong. We all are elected by the 

citizens of this province to provide for those in our 

communities and to assist in providing for those in our 

communities in all circumstances. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going through a good time, and it’s 

been good economically for us. It’s been good for business 

development. It’s been good and those are all good things. 

Those are not bad things. 

 

But one of the results of it is a tremendous increase in housing 

affordability on the home ownership side, which any of those of 

us who own their homes — and I would say that’s every one of 

us in this Assembly — we benefited from it because we got the 

equity that came with our properties virtually doubling in value. 

We all got the equity. The problem comes with the next 

generation, our children and our grandchildren, who want to 

own the same homes we do, Mr. Speaker. And in many cases 

our children, just by virtue of the opportunities, are better 

educated, more worldly, have greater opportunities ahead of 

them than any of us do. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they’re facing a world where many of them 

get out of school with huge student loans and student debt. Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve gone to post-secondary education which they 

immediately have to start repaying, Mr. Speaker. They’re faced 

with rents and home affordability. If you ever want to own a 

home, that’s outside the market to a much later stage in their 

life, Mr. Speaker, unless you’re fortunate enough that your 

parents have enough money to help you. But without that help, 

home ownership is probably outside your reach for a good 7 to 

10 years longer than it would have been otherwise. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what can we do about these things? Well we 

can develop policies and we can put money . . . I guess to put it 

short, we can put our money where our mouth is, Mr. Speaker. 

We can step up to the plate and we can do something about it. 

But what’s it going to cost? Well the reality is it’s not cheap. 

The reality is if we wanted to provide affordable housing for 

those who today can’t afford it, it’s probably in the 

neighbourhood of several hundred million dollars. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it couldn’t be done overnight anyway. It would have 

to be done over several years for the simple reason that you 

can’t . . . it takes time to build. Infrastructure isn’t built 

overnight. 

 

But we have to understand the magnitude of the problem today, 

understand what the magnitude of the problem will be 10 years 

from now, Mr. Speaker. And we have a responsibility to do 

that, a responsibility to act, and a responsibility to serve the 

people who elect us and serve the people of the province with 

both their interests in mind and to work with all the parties, Mr. 

Speaker. This isn’t something that either, any political party has 

a franchise on, Mr. Speaker, or any group of citizens in our 

society have. But first and foremost, we have to have a desire to 

fix the problem. We have to want to fix the problem in order to 

start to fundamentally address those issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing today those who are going to social 

assistance on the increase, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing a rise in 

those who have to depend upon the government for help and 

assistance, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s because the 

cost of living in our province has driven people, driven people, 

Mr. Speaker, to seeking assistance from their government. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s necessarily wrong, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s a trend we do not like to see. It’s a trend we’d 



6786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

prefer not to see, Mr. Speaker. We still definitely have a 

responsibility and an obligation to help those in our 

communities who need help. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a proactive approach. Let’s all 

encourage all governments and all members of this legislature 

to take a proactive approach to create, for the citizens of our 

society and that new set of young adults coming up, 

opportunities to get into home ownership earlier. Let’s not look 

at just rental accommodation, let’s look at how we can help 

those that are in their 20s get to home ownership earlier. We 

can develop programs that help young people get into home 

ownership, Mr. Speaker. We can help people towards home 

ownership who have had to rent their entire lives through 

different programs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s not a one-style-fits-all, but we can develop programs that 

help advance our society, using the money that the people of 

this province own. Because every single citizen, regardless of 

their status in life, in this province own our vast resources, Mr. 

Speaker, so we can use some of that resource revenue to ensure 

that our citizens get their value for their resource, Mr. Speaker. 

They own it. We do sell the right to mine it to individual 

companies, Mr. Speaker, but let’s not forget that we, the 

citizens of our province, own that resource. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this particular motion and I look 

at the situation facing us within this province, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it’s obvious, although I haven’t said it, this an urgent 

problem facing our province and that we need to examine very 

closely how we deal with the problem in the short term, Mr. 

Speaker. And today, today we need more emergency shelters 

than we have available to us. Too many, too many people today 

don’t have a home to go to every night. So we need to look at 

what the short-term problem is, and we need to deal with that 

immediately, which means we need to provide more emergency 

shelters. We need to ensure that nobody has to live out in the 

cold, Mr. Speaker, or nobody has to be without some 

accommodation, Mr. Speaker. But that’s a short-term problem, 

Mr. Speaker, a stopgap to dealing with the real problem, and 

that’s to provide adequate, quality housing, Mr. Speaker, for 

our society, our communities, and for the people of the 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see us do that in a number of 

ways. One would be providing the opportunity for young 

people to get back to a point where they can get into home 

ownership earlier. Mr. Speaker, the change in housing 

affordability has driven that back, I believe, 7 to 10 years. Well 

we can create an opportunity to move that time frame forward 

for the young, young adults in our province. And I think that’s 

beneficial for all of us. That means they no longer then are 

renting accommodation, freeing up rental accommodation for 

others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You see how it works. As more of our families and young 

people get into home ownership, of course they don’t need 

rental accommodation. The rental accommodation opens up for 

others. And, Mr. Speaker, as a result a number of the vacancy 

rate increases, Mr. Speaker, and people have more opportunity. 

The quality of life increases for people because they have 

opportunities for better housing opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and 

it has an affect on the entire housing situation in our province. 

[12:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is never going to leave us without a 

situation where we have to build more affordable rental 

accommodation. We have an aging population, Mr. Speaker. As 

we have an aging population, we need to address the concerns 

of that aging population. We need to be able to provide assisted 

living, Mr. Speaker. We need to look at places that are uniquely 

designed for those who have mobility problems and have, Mr. 

Speaker, special needs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that will change again over time. But we 

have today an increasing seniors population in the province, 

and we will have for the next couple of decades at least, Mr. 

Speaker. And so the needs of the population of Saskatchewan is 

going to continue to change, but one very important and key 

need over the next several years, Mr. Speaker, is increased 

accommodation for our senior citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the one thing we can guarantee is we’re all 

going to get there. We’re all going to one day, all going to need 

seniors’ accommodation at one point in our life. We’re all 

going to age. I think there’s few things you can guarantee in life 

and one is that we’re all going to age and our needs are going to 

change, Mr. Speaker. And at some point we’re going to need 

greater assistance than we have today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so we’re going to need to have 

accommodations for more senior citizens in our communities, 

Mr. Speaker. And one of the things we need to try to do is keep 

senior citizens closer to their families, closer to their home 

communities, Mr. Speaker, closer to their friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it does very little or no good, very little or no 

good, Mr. Speaker, to senior citizens to have them have to 

move a significant distance away from their family, from their 

support mechanisms, Mr. Speaker, those things that we all need 

in order to ensure quality of life. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

every bit as important that our parents and our grandparents, 

and each of us as we get older, have those supports. We have 

our family close by as we need them, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

common sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have to continue to look at 

adopting our housing pattern for the demand, Mr. Speaker, in 

our communities and around the various areas of our province. 

Today there’s very little opportunity in some communities, Mr. 

Speaker. But what’s most sad today is many, many senior 

citizens — many of our parents, grandparents and those who 

built this great province that we live in — today are in hospital 

beds in hospitals because there are no opportunities for care for 

them in their home community, Mr. Speaker, or out in the 

community. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these are challenges that I think that we all 

acknowledge exist, and we all acknowledge need to be looked 

after. They need to be examined and we need to make progress 

on. But, Mr. Speaker, to date . . . And I hope next week in the 

budget, we will see some movement on a number of these 

issues. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in three years, in three years, $34 million for 

housing. In the last year of the last government, Mr. Speaker, in 



March 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6787 

2007, $100 million in a single year. And the subsequent three 

years we’ve seen only $34 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the 

solution. That’s not even the start of a solution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2007 we were looking at a scenario that required $100 

million for seven consecutive years. I want to repeat that, Mr. 

Speaker: $100 million for seven consecutive years to put a plan 

in place to deal with the affordable housing needs of our 

province. Mr. Speaker, that was now just about four years ago. 

Today that would probably be double that because nothing has 

been done to keep pace with the changing environment and 

housing needs in our province. 

 

Today housing or lists on waiting lists . . . Pardon me. People 

on waiting lists for housing in our communities are longer than 

they have ever been. In 2007 there were communities that had 

nobody on the list where there are literally thousands today. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk a little bit about those 

lists. In January of 2008, there were 396 families on waiting 

lists and with an average wait time of 2.9 months to get into 

housing. In February of 2011, that had grown to 879, and the 

waiting time has increased to nearly five months, Mr. Speaker 

— 122 per cent increase in the number of people requiring 

housing, social housing. Mr. Speaker, in some communities you 

wait more than 12 months. The worst community in 

Saskatchewan today is the city of Swift Current, where the 

waiting list is 15 months. I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker. 

The waiting list is 15 months for social housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there’s a single member of this 

Assembly that doesn’t, when they hear that, have concern. And 

I would be willing to bet that most members in this Assembly 

didn’t realize, didn’t realize that in the city of Swift Current 

you’d wait 15 months on a waiting list to get into social 

housing. Mr. Speaker, in La Ronge the wait is nine months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for affordable housing in 2008, there were 205 

families on waiting lists across the province. In February of 

2011, three years later, it’s doubled, Mr. Speaker, to 408, and 

moved from a 2.5 month wait on average to a 5.6 month wait. 

It’s more than doubled — a 99 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

And there are a number of communities for affordable housing 

that are above the 12 months, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not sure 

that many members of this Assembly understand that, know 

this information. Mr. Speaker, for affordable housing, the worst 

community in Saskatchewan is Estevan. And Estevan, you’re 

on a waiting list for 19 months. In Estevan you’re on a waiting 

list for 19 months to get affordable housing. Nineteen months, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in Swift Current it’s 13 months; in 

Saskatoon it’s 11 months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are we doing about this? Obviously nothing, 

because the waiting times are increasing dramatically, 

dramatically, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve seen $34 million put in. 

And they want more, the province. People are coming. They 

want more people to come and work. They want their province 

to continue to grow. Yet today, today the situation for families 

in many communities is unacceptable. 

 

Seniors housing, Mr. Speaker, and this is something that I think 

that we need to pay attention to because as I’ve talked about 

over the last several . . . last hour or so, Mr. Speaker, about the 

fact that we have an aging population, more and more people 

requiring assisted living, more and more people moving into 

seniors accommodation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2008 we had 521 people on a waiting list across the 

province, with an average wait time of three months before you 

can move into seniors housing. Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

average wait time of 6.2 months, 48 per cent increase, and, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s a pattern forming here that I think should be 

considerably alarming to certain members of this Assembly. 

 

The worst community for seniors housing in Saskatchewan is 

the city of Swift Current; you wait 15 months. And La Ronge is 

nine months. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I need to point out 

what’s obvious. The Premier’s home constituency is Swift 

Current. And you know what? Today if the Premier came in 

and announced, or if the Premier stood and announced today 

that we were going to spend considerable money in his 

constituency to deal with this housing problem, I’d support that. 

I would support it because it needs to be done and I don’t care 

if it’s in the Premier’s constituency over others. Why would I 

care? Because it is a legitimate need that families in this 

province have, that citizens in this province have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the Premier wanted to stand in his seat and 

announce today in the budget that he was spending considerable 

money to improve the housing situation in his community, I 

would applaud him for doing that. I wouldn’t say it’s 

self-serving that it’s from his own community. I wouldn’t. 

Because stat after stat shows his community needs it more than 

others. And because it needs it more than others, it should be 

done. It doesn’t matter it’s the Premier’s constituency. It’s not 

self-serving when you’re addressing a real problem that needs 

to be fixed. It’s dealing with the reality. His community, 

because it’s faced growth and it’s faced other challenges, has 

the worst housing situation in the province. And I would 

applaud the Premier if he stood on budget day and said he was 

going to fix it, he was going to address the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that from January 2008, in all 

categories of housing that are closely monitored, we had 1,122 

people on a waiting list in January 2008. By February 2011, it 

has grown to 1,984 — an increase of 77 per cent in just three 

years. We need to address this issue, or three years from now 

it’s going to again have doubled or quadrupled, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is a sign that we have deserted the people of this 

province. We have let them down. We have failed to address 

their needs, Mr. Speaker. And we have put more children, more 

families, and more seniors in vulnerable situations, Mr. 

Speaker, because we have failed to make the proper public 

policy choices, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve failed to address their 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, housing affordability, quality of life are things 

that the people of this province value for all its citizens. I can 

tell you today that the people in this province value the quality 

of life for all their citizens. We are a caring province. Our 

people care about their neighbours, they care about their 

friends, they care about their relatives. We care about one 

another. In no province in Canada is more money donated to 

charity, is more time given on behalf of charities or on behalf of 

others. In nowhere, nowhere in our country do people care 

more than in Saskatchewan. 

 



6788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2011 

So, Mr. Speaker, to sums things up, I just simply want to say 

that we have a responsibility as the elected representatives of 

the people of this province to act in the interests of all our 

citizens to improve the quality of life, to deal with the issue of 

affordable housing, the quality of housing for all the people of 

our province. And we need to do it in several ways. We need to 

help get young adults into home ownership earlier. The 

affordability issue has driven many young adults out of the 

opportunity to build homes or to buy homes until much later in 

life because a home jumped from an average on a 

three-bedroom bungalow in Regina or Saskatoon from say 

$250,000 to $500,000, Mr. Speaker, for a new home. And that 

filters down through the entire housing market, Mr. Speaker. 

Having a negative impact on the end result is there are fewer 

rental properties available for others, Mr. Speaker, because 

people remain in rental properties longer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the quality of life, affordability, dignity, and 

respect, those are all things that we should all value and I 

believe we all do value. So collectively we need to work 

together, Mr. Speaker, we need to work together to solve the 

problem. And this government needs to know and understand 

that there is a problem. They have to be willing to address the 

problem in a comprehensive way on behalf of Saskatchewan 

people, on behalf of low-income people, Mr. Speaker, but most 

importantly on behalf of children because the decisions we 

make today affect future generations. We, the members of this 

Assembly, are people who have great opportunity, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It being now 1 p.m., the time of 

adjournment, this Assembly will adjourn until Monday 

afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6761 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6761 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6777 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6761 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6761 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6762 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6762 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6762 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6762 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Regina Restaurant Celebrates 10th Birthday 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6762 

 Remembering Ernest Boychuk 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6763 

 Outdoor Hockey League Concludes Successful Season 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6763 

 Correctional Centre Replacement Project Receives Award 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6763 

 Regina & District Labour Council Awards 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6764 

 Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6764 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6764 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Kidney Transplants 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6764 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6765 

 Environmental Issues 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6765 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6765 

 Condition of Northern Roads 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6767 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6767 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6767 

 Relationship Between Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6768 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6768 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Flood Preparedness 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6769 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6770 

MOTIONS 

 Substitution on Committees 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6770 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6770 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Voting Eligibility Requirements 

  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 6771, 6781 

  Yates ............................................................................................................................................................................... 6772, 6780 

  Tell ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6774, 6781 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 6775, 6781 

  Weekes (point of order) .......................................................................................................................................................... 6776 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 6776 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 6776 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6777 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6779, 6781 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6780 

 



 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6780 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6781 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6781 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6782 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Housing 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6782 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


