




















































Hansard: March 14, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 30A  MONDAY, MARCH 14, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6647 

 March 14, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for . . . 

let’s see, Municipal Affairs. Sorry about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — That’s okay, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure, I get to introduce a 

gentleman from the Prince Albert Police Service, Chief Dale 

McFee. Dale, you want to take a stand and a wave? 

 

Dale has been a member of the police service in Prince Albert 

for over 25 years — hard to believe. We’ve been friends since 

he played with the Raiders and I didn’t, although I tried. He’s 

been a chief since 2003. In 2008 he received the Order of Merit 

from the Governor General, and although he takes great pride in 

that accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, it’s the things he’s done as a 

leader in the Prince Albert Police Service. He’s tackling 

problems, bringing teams together of workers to deal with the 

poverty issues, addictions issues, and crime issues in Prince 

Albert. He is going to be talking to various ministers this 

afternoon about new, innovative techniques through 

mobilization of these resources in our province to deal with the 

root of crime in our city of Prince Albert and across the entire 

province. 

 

But a bigger source of accomplishment and pride for the chief 

— who was my chief, by the way; I think I gave him some grey 

hairs there too, I might add — is that he has three lovely 

daughters: Jayde who is playing soccer for the U of R 

[University of Regina] Cougars right now, Kacey who is at St. 

Mary High School, and his youngest daughter Meghan. And 

Chief McFee takes great pride in having coached all three of his 

daughters at a very high level of soccer in this province. 

 

So I want to take this time to welcome, Chief, welcome you to 

your Legislative Assembly. And on behalf of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, we will always do well, sir, by taking your 

lead and your vision and your advice. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed my 

pleasure to rise with the minister and acknowledge the gallery 

guests today. Chief McFee, it’s great to see him in the gallery 

today. I had the great pleasure of playing with Dale. Along as 

being friends with him, I’ve played hockey with him in my 

recent past. 

 

He is doing tremendous work in Prince Albert on behalf of the 

police service, looking at not only crime and how to solve crime 

and react to it, but how to prevent it, Mr. Speaker. He’s doing 

some very important work on the root causes of crime and how 

we can make a change both in Prince Albert and in northern 

Saskatchewan. So I very much appreciate the work that he’s 

doing for our community and for northern Saskatchewan. I’d 

like to have the rest of the members of the Assembly help me 

welcome him here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 

Assembly three representatives seated in your gallery of Fleet 

Publications of Winnipeg. Seated in your gallery is Fleet 

publisher George Derksen, a proud Saskatchewan expatriate, 

along with associate publisher Ann Wiens and production and 

circulation manager Delbert Quiring. 

 

Fleet Publications has for years produced softcover 

coffee-table-style books on Canadian cities and provinces. I 

notice this one that they just published is called The New 

Saskatchewan. And I would want to ask all members to join 

with me in thanking George, Ann, and Del for showing 

confidence in our province and recognizing an opportunity. 

Saskatchewan was indeed a great business opportunity for them 

as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members a number of individuals seated in your gallery who 

have come to the legislature today to express some concerns 

that they have around post-secondary education in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to introduce Dwayne Paul, chief of One Arrow First 

Nation. Thank you for being here, Chief Paul. Also we have 

Nathan Bitternose who is a councillor from George Gordon 

First Nation who holds the education portfolio. Thank you. We 

also have Lorne Roper, director of operations for Yellow Quill 

First Nation. Thank you for being here today. We also, Mr. 

Speaker, have a number of concerned citizens from the 

communities of Humboldt and Muenster, and I know it’s a 

pleasure to see them here in the Assembly. 

 

While all of those guests are certainly important, Mr. Speaker, 

perhaps the most special guests that we have here today is a 

class of adult basic education students from One Arrow, Mr. 

Speaker. In speaking with them, for the vast majority this is 

their first trip to the legislature. And I think they chose a very 

important issue and a very important day to come to the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these very 

special guests to the legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like to join with the member opposite in 

welcoming guests, First Nations individuals from across the 

province, some chiefs and leaders and students. Thank you very 

much for coming to your Legislative Assembly. I find it’s 



6648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

always a highlight when we can welcome First Nations 

individuals to this Assembly, and please enjoy your time here. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join my learned friend from Saskatoon Massey Place and 

welcome the First Nations guests and their guests as well. And 

as they often say, it’s always important to recognize the 

Aboriginal peoples and the Aboriginal languages of our great 

province. So I want to take this opportunity to say to them in 

my own language of Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

To my language translation: I’m very happy that they’re here, and 

not to be afraid of this Assembly because this Assembly is theirs 

just as much as it’s ours. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

I would like to introduce a wonderful young lady sitting in the 

Speaker’s gallery, Saskatchewan legislative intern program, and 

the intern is Nicole Hamm from Rosthern. Nicole is an opera 

singer, currently a law student at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan], and she has a master’s in political science. So I’d 

like everyone to give her a warm welcome to her Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the east 

gallery, there is a group of 20 grade 8 students from St. Peter 

School. I wanted to say O’Neill, and that’s the high school right 

next to St. Peter School in Argyle Park. 

 

With the 20 grade 8 students, we have a very distinguished 

guest today. We have none other than the Vice-Chair of the 

Royal Commonwealth Society of Saskatchewan. And it’s quite 

fitting that Peter Kucherepa would be joining this class this day, 

this being Commonwealth Day throughout the Commonwealth, 

and in recognition of what his role is as Vice-Chair of the Royal 

Commonwealth Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

The students are actually doing a display around the 

Commonwealth at St. Peter School, and I hope to be able to get 

there after question period and before the display is all finished. 

So I hope to catch up with them at St. Peter School later this 

afternoon. Of note, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the 

Lieutenant Governor is also going to be at St. Peter School to 

help celebrate Commonwealth Day and the work that the 

students have, and teachers I guess, have done at St. Peter 

School. 

 

This day I ask all members to join me in welcoming all of our 

guests from St. Peter’s School. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I introduce Ms. 

Shaheen Lotun in your gallery. Shaheen would be recognizable 

to many members in this Assembly; she served as a Page in 

2009. In 2009 she also graduated from the U of R, political 

science. In fall of 2010, she graduated from Carleton 

University, African studies and human rights. She’s been my 

intern for a number of weeks. 

 

In that short time we’ve gotten to know each other very well. 

She’s had the opportunity to visit in the constituency of 

Yorkton for a good part of one week and a part of another week, 

attending a lot of events and doing some very important work 

that we do in Yorkton. And she’s just been a total joy to work 

with. And I’d just ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming her to this Assembly. 

 

While I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce another friend to this 

Assembly: Mr. Ryan Steffensen in the blue shirt up in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. Ryan, just give us a wave. Ryan’s a good 

friend of mine. I’ve known him for a number of years, 

originally through my brother: an air traffic controller with my 

brother, currently a commercial pilot — he’s flying for West 

Wind — lives in Regina, hails from the mighty town of Carlyle, 

and is currently flying out of Stony Plain on a King Air 200. So 

I’d just ask everybody to welcome Ryan to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one more 

introduction I would like to make, and I wanted to save the best 

for last. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Cecile Smith who is a 

councillor from Fishing Lake First Nation, and she holds the 

education portfolio. So welcome, Cecile. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce Chad Jeremy from the Salvation Army here in 

Regina. He has been associated with numerous efforts with the 

Salvation Army. 

 

This morning he helped to host an event regarding forklift 

training, and that’s a partnership between the Salvation Army, 

the Regina & District Food Bank, the Carmichael Outreach, 

TransGas, and our ministry as well. Today we’d like to just 

offer our sincere thanks to Chad for his ongoing efforts on this 

new initiative, as well as the continuing efforts of the Salvation 

Army, including the work under way regarding Japan, Mr. 

Speaker. So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Chad to his Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I also would like to, as my colleague from Massey Place 

did, I’d also like to acknowledge Cecile Smith who is a 

constituent of mine here in Saskatoon Riversdale and also 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6649 

works at St. Mary’s school and does so much for the students 

and the families of our community. So thank you very much 

Cecile, and I’d like the Assembly to welcome Cecile. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to rise today to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of the Assembly Mr. Andrew Mackenzie. Mr. 

Mackenzie is a group executive and chief executive non-ferrous 

and a member of the group management committee with BHP 

Billiton. 

 

Mr. Mackenzie joined BHP Billiton in November of 2008 in his 

current position as chief executive non-ferrous. His prior career 

includes time with Rio Tinto where he was a chief executive of 

diamonds and minerals, and with BP where he had a number of 

senior roles including group vice-president of technology and 

engineering, and group vice-president of chemicals. 

 

Mr. Mackenzie is increasingly present in Saskatchewan, and we 

fully expect to see him at a number of Rider games this 

upcoming season. Please join with me in welcoming Andrew 

Mackenzie to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I realize now why these 

introduction sheets are pink, and it’s to reflect the 

embarrassment I have for missing the two teachers from St. 

Peter School, the two teachers joining the 20 grade 8s and the 

Vice-Chair of the Royal Commonwealth Society of 

Saskatchewan. The two teachers are Melissa Barnabe and Tom 

Kuntz. Please welcome these two teachers to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Mr. Mackenzie to the Assembly 

today. I know that they’re making some tremendous 

investments in Saskatchewan, and those investments will 

benefit the future of all the Saskatchewan peoples. Thank you 

for being here today. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce the 

Assembly to a woman who’s sitting in your gallery today: 

Janice Bernier who is a president of her district labour council, 

has been a tireless worker for human rights in Saskatchewan 

and has done amazing work on behalf of Saskatchewan women. 

She’s the NDP [New Democratic Party] candidate in the 

Batoche constituency, and we’re very proud that she’s joining 

our team and will be here in November of 2011. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast.  

Ms. Junor: — Eastview. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan wish to 

bring to our attention the Saskatchewan Seniors Association has 

approximately 180 seniors’ centres throughout the province, 

and the vast majority of them are located in rural constituencies. 

These centres provide much-needed recreation and social 

activities as well as important health clinics and workshops 

which contribute to an enhanced quality of life for many of the 

seniors who use them. 

 

Skyrocketing costs of utilities, insurances, tax, garbage 

disposal, and exterior maintenance — due to that, 

approximately one-quarter of these centres may close within the 

next 18 months. The closure of these centres will lead to the 

deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors, which will 

lead to additional stress on long-term care facilities and 

hospitals. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And these petitions are signed by over 30 people from Shell 

Lake, North Battleford, Saskatoon, Shellbrook, and Carrot 

River. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for tenants 

from unreasonable rent increases through rent controls. And we 

know that since 2007, far too many tenants have suffered 

monthly rent increases of hundreds of dollars, with average rent 

increases of over 35 per cent in Saskatoon and Regina, meaning 

tenants in many cases are paying well over $3,000 more each 

year. And we also know, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of 

Canadians now live in provinces with rent control guidelines 

including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and 

Prince Edward Island. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable rent increases. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today to present a petition signed by constituents of 

Saskatoon Massey Place who live in Hampton Village and their 

call for a new school for their children. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 



6650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in 

Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to again 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about Bill 160 and the detrimental effects that it will 

have on human rights law in the province. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, 

Moose Jaw, Battleford, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the significant debt 

loading that’s going on underneath the Sask Party, all at a time 

when we have unprecedented highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker. 

And of course this sort of mismanagement, this sort of debt 

loading, these sorts of deficits all come at a cost to 

Saskatchewan people. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so submit. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Earthquake in Japan 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

recent earthquake in Japan has produced some startling images. 

In mere seconds, entire villages and towns were swept away by 

the resulting tidal waves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our hearts and prayers are with the people of 

Japan, as well as the people in Saskatchewan who have loved 

ones there. We can only imagine the anguish of being away 

from one’s family during a natural disaster. Mr. Speaker, in true 

Saskatchewan fashion, support groups were almost immediately 

assisting our foreign students at both universities to offer 

whatever assistance was and is still needed. Numerous 

fundraising campaigns have been set in motion to assist with a 

relief effort, and I encourage all of the people of this province to 

offer what they can. Mr. Speaker, I know that when others are 

in their greatest times of need, the people of our province 

always rise to the occasion. 

 

Our prayers are also with the Saskatchewan families who may 

have sons or daughters, brothers or sisters teaching English as a 

second language. We hope that they are all safe and able to 

communicate with their families at home to ease the fears of 

those families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tragedies such as this earthquake in Japan reminds 

us all of the truly important things in life — the health and 

safety of those nearest and dearest to us. On behalf of all MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], my sincerest 

sympathies, thoughts, and prayers go out to all those that have 

lost so much in Japan this last week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member from Estevan, and on behalf of the official opposition, 

I too would like to extend our deepest sympathies to all those in 

Japan and indeed around the world affected by last week’s 

terrible earthquake off the coast of Japan and the resulting 

tsunami. 

 

I’d also like to say to those with friends and relatives in Japan 

that our prayers and thoughts are with you and your family at 

this difficult time. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 

Saskatchewan, through the Government of Saskatchewan, have 

offered 250,000 in assistance. And to the government, I want to 

commend them for that action on behalf of the people of the 

province. I know the people of Saskatchewan will also be 

making many personal donations to organizations offering relief 

and assistance, and I encourage all members and everyone to do 

the same as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, events such as this touch our hearts and remind us 

how fragile the gift of life can be. But they also give us an 

opportunity to show the solidarity and friendship of our fellow 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6651 

human beings in a very, very practical way. And I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the well-known generosity of the people of this 

province, Saskatchewan, will show itself again on this occasion 

as they undertake to help the people of Japan for whom they 

feel such deep concern at this tragic time. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 13th to 19th 

has been proclaimed Agricultural Safety Week in 

Saskatchewan. This week is a time to make note of the hazards 

that exist on farms across our province and to find ways to 

make farming safer. 

 

Compared to the national average, Saskatchewan farmers have 

twice the hospitalization rate and one and a half times the death 

rate from injury. Every single year, an average of 21 people die 

on provincial farms, and over 300 are hospitalized due to 

preventable injuries. Many people don’t realize that farming is 

the fourth most hazardous industry in Canada. We need to be 

aware of the dangers facing our farmers, and as a government 

we must continue to support safety initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farming was a bedrock that this province was built 

on, continues to be a cornerstone of our growing economy. 

While we strive to provide safe workplaces across the province, 

we must also ensure that farms and ranches are safe as well. All 

too often a loved one has been needlessly injured or killed. We 

must work to prevent these tragic accidents from recurring. 

 

On behalf of all MLAs, I would like to send well wishes and 

hope that all producers are safe out there this spring. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Canadian Red Cross Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to pay 

tribute to one of Canada’s best known and most effective 

humanitarian organizations. March is Canadian Red Cross 

month, Mr. Speaker. For over 100 years the Canadian Red 

Cross, following its fundamental principles of humanity, 

impartiality, neutrality, independence, voluntary service, unity, 

and universality has worked tirelessly to provide immediate 

help to whoever needs it, wherever they are, whatever their 

race, political beliefs, religion, social status, or culture. 

 

Today the Red Cross works with governments and 

humanitarian organizations to provide rapid large-scale and 

cost-effective, community-relevant programs. The Canadian 

Red Cross assists vulnerable communities nationally and 

internationally in cases of natural disasters, debilitating health 

issues, and war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is especially fitting that we are honouring the 

Red Cross this month, given the disaster we see unfolding in 

Japan as well as other areas in the South Pacific affected by last 

week’s earthquake and tsunami. Support for these efforts come 

from many volunteers and donors, Mr. Speaker, and we know 

that the generosity of Saskatchewan’s people will find 

expression at this time of need through the Red Cross and its 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all honourable members join with me 

today in expressing our gratitude and honouring the Canadian 

Red Cross for over a century of exemplary and commendable 

service to the high ideal of the greater welfare of all humankind. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Wait Times for Cancer Patients Reduced 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very excited 

today to let you know about a lean initiative in Saskatoon that’s 

improved wait times for cancer radiation care by 92 per cent. As 

you know, lean is an approach to increase efficiency to provide 

the highest level of care to patients. Using this lean 

methodology, not only is access improved for cancer patients, 

but the patient experience is vastly improved by reducing the 

number of appointments they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, eligible cancer patients receiving radiation therapy 

are being offered the opportunity to do their preparation for 

radiation on the same day as their first appointment with the 

oncologist. That simple change reduces the average wait time 

between appointments by five and a half days or 92 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 50 per cent of all radiation therapy 

patients can be offered this change, which translates into a total 

savings of almost 3,700 wait days every year. 

 

Both physicians and patients have seen the benefit of the lean 

approach. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is encouraged by 

the improved access. And, Mr. Speaker, the good news is that 

this initiative has been so successful that there are plans to 

extend it soon to Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency for continuing its continuous efforts to improve patient 

care. Our government will continue to provide the resources 

necessary to give Saskatchewan residents proactive, 

high-quality cancer services. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Psychologist’s Concerns 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from a letter 

addressed to the Premier that I have received from one of my 

constituents, Dr. Wayne Schlapkohl, a registered doctoral 

psychologist. And I quote: 

 

I had the honour of recently meeting you when you 

presented me and my team the Premier’s Award For 

Excellence in the Civil Service. I am a psychologist who, 

among other things, facilitates the treatment programs for 

abusive men for the award-winning Battlefords domestic 

violence treatment option court. I am also providing 

therapy for several very suicidal individuals. I provide 



6652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

therapy to those who are depressed, anxious and 

desperate. But seemingly, I am not important enough to 

have a contract. I grew up in this province, I believe in 

this province, but I am disgusted by the way this province 

— and to be blunt, your government — is treating Health 

Sciences Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

Housing prices have skyrocketed, probably close to 

doubled, food prices are increasing, and you offer us less 

than 1 per cent per year. I believe that what HSAS 

[Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan] is 

presently suggesting is reasonable and I would hope that 

you will accept the HSAS offer. Please help us once again 

give, Saskatchewan a health care system that is the envy 

of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier, the Minister of Health, the folks 

at SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] 

heed the words of this award-winning Saskatchewan 

psychologist. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Congratulations to Junior Curlers 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to bring to the attention of this House the young men and 

women from Saskatchewan who proudly represented our 

country on the world stage. The Regina rink — comprised of 

skip Braeden Moskowy and third Kirk Muyres, second Colton 

Flasch, lead Matt Lang, fifth Regis Neumeier, and coach 

Dwayne Mihalicz — represented Canada and our province 

admirably at the world’s junior men’s championship in Perth, 

Scotland over the past few weeks. 

 

Moskowy and his curling teammates advanced to the bronze 

medal game and came up short in their medal quest, finishing a 

very respectable fourth place. These young gentlemen 

represented Canada well both on and off the curling sheets. And 

I would like to congratulate them on their solid performance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Team Canada on the women’s side was also 

represented by our province. The rink out of the Ituna curling 

consisted of skip Trish Paulsen, Kari Kennedy, Kari Paulsen, 

Natalie Yanko, and coach Bob Miller. These young ladies did a 

wonderful job representing our province and the country all 

week. The ladies’ hard work and great play paid off with a berth 

to the championship final against Scotland’s Eve Muirhead. In 

the end, the Paulsen rink came up short, but with bringing home 

the silver medal, the ladies made all curling fans in 

Saskatchewan proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all MLAs to join me in congratulating 

these two great rinks. The curling future of Saskatchewan looks 

to be in very capable hands. Thank you. 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for Catholic School Divisions 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question today deals 

with the funding of our school system and the need for every 

student in this province to be treated equally when it comes to 

funding of the school system in the province. And a year ago, I 

raised the issue of equitable funding in the province and the fact 

that the Catholic school boards in the province are not being 

treated equally with the public school system. 

 

And my question to the minister today is to ask when and how 

the minister intends to balance that out, where the students in 

the Catholic school system are treated in an equitable manner 

with students in the public school system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the students within our 

province are of extreme importance to us as we grow this 

province. And quite frankly, we are working our way through a 

new funding formula. It’s a distribution mechanism that we’re 

working towards. It is not the allocation or the amount of 

money, Mr. Speaker. We have increased the amount of money 

going to school divisions quite substantially over the last three 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there was inequities — and we believe that there 

was — then maybe perhaps that member opposite could explain 

them, because the interim funding that we’re using is based on 

the formula that the NDP had in place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a number of the Catholic 

school boards in the province are saying, because of the 

inequity that this government is providing in terms of funding, 

that a number of capital projects are having to be delayed or put 

on hold. Things like repair of schools, technology in the school 

system, those kind of things are being put on hold. 

 

And my question to the minister is this: if in fact she’s arguing 

that the system wasn’t right when they came to government 

three and a half years ago, how is it that after three and a half 

years they haven’t raised a finger to fix a system that isn’t 

working for the Catholic school system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I want 

to say that our government is very committed to the education 

system. We have to date spent over $400 million on capital 

projects. Those include projects within the Catholic school 

division. The Catholic school division have thanked us. The 

different school divisions have thanked us time and time again 

for those capital projects. 

 

There are inequities. This is a huge undertaking that we are 

within in our province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6653 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — And it’s extremely important, Mr. 

Speaker. We have taken the funding formula that was in place 

under the NDP with all of its inequities. We have made some 

adjustments year over year, but an overall change to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education 

to complete it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the member 

from Walsh Acres would like to join this debate, but the fact is 

we have been using the past formula and adding adjustments for 

student enrolment differences, for LINC [local implementation 

and negotiation committee] agreements, and we’re working our 

way through a new formula that will address the inequities. 

 

I’ve met with the Catholic school divisions. They are providing 

me with information of where they specifically see inequities, 

and we will be looking at that in this year’s funding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well 

that after the Sask Party was elected, there were changes made 

about the funding of school boards in the province that has been 

very detrimental. She knows that. 

 

And my question is, that in light of the fact that the Catholic 

school board a year ago was told that if you just wait, play by 

the rules and just wait, we’ll have funding formula in place . . . 

Well the Catholic school board has waited. They’ve been 

waiting for three and a half years, and now they’re told that 

there will be no funding formula until after the election. 

 

My question to the minister is this: how do you expect the 

people of the province in the Catholic school system to believe 

the promise made for the next election when you haven’t kept 

your promise from the last election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member 

opposite should know that the election promise was the 

reduction of property tax. We have kept that promise. And 

nobody wants to go back to the tax regime of the NDP. That is 

not where they want to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have increased funding for school divisions 

year over year. Our increase in funding has been more than 

inflation during that time . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres to allow the minister to respond like the 

other members are allowing the minister. The Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The increase 

to school divisions has been more than the increase in students 

within our province, and it has been more than inflation over 

those three and a half years. 

Mr. Speaker, as well as, we have made unprecedented 

commitment to capital projects within this province. Many of 

them are projects with the Catholic school divisions. I have 

been meeting with the Catholic school divisions. We will work 

through the inequities. But, Mr. Speaker, they are receiving 

increases in funding. And the inequities were something that 

was in place year after year after year under the NDP. I can 

assure you no school division wants to go back to that funding 

formula. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Relationship Between Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we learned last spring that the 

Sask Party government is quietly dismantling Carlton Trail 

Regional College, a public post-secondary institution, and 

handing it over to a private institution. 

 

Internal documents show that discussions about the merger 

have been occurring since at least the summer of 2009. And the 

Minister of Advanced Education appointed a joint CEO [chief 

executive officer], established a transition board, and the 

process of integrating various core functions of the two 

institutions began. 

 

Board minutes from January 26, 2010, state, “Direction has 

been given from Minister Norris to proceed.” And St. Peter’s 

College winter-spring 2010 newsletter stated, “The provincial 

government is encouraging the merger.” At every step of the 

way, the process has lacked transparency, and there are 

rightfully many people unhappy. 

 

To the minister: will he admit today that this whole merger 

process has been ham-handed from the start? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. What 

we’ve known is that over the course of the last decade, these 

two institutions have co-operated closely, Mr. Speaker. What 

we have done is attempted to be, on the one hand, responsive. 

There was an idea that came from the grassroots to help foster 

and facilitate increased co-operation and the opportunity to look 

at an amalgamation, Mr. Speaker. We actually received that last 

June, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we did is we went out to Meyers Norris Penny. We said, 

let’s have an independent third party look at this. We’ve made 

no commitments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That report is now complete. It’s been submitted to the 

ministry, and within a few days, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be making 

those recommendations public. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the grassroots are sitting in the 

gallery, and not everyone is pleased with the approach the 

minister has taken on this issue. Chief Dwayne Paul of One 



6654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

Arrow First Nation wrote a letter to the editor last month to 

publicly raise his concerns about the dismantling of Carlton 

Trail Regional College. He said: 

 

. . . we are deeply concerned about how the amalgamation 

of Carlton college with St. Peter’s College (SPC) will 

affect the prioritization of services not only for First 

Nations communities, but also the access to programming 

for all communities in the Carlton Trail region. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

No longer will the people of Saskatchewan, through the 

Advanced Education Ministry, have a say in what 

programs will be offered in the area and at what cost. 

Moreover, there has been little mention of what will 

happen to the significant public assets in the event that 

Carlton is merged with SPC. 

 

To the minister: students and community leaders are concerned 

about the implications of dismantling Carlton Trail. Why has 

the minister failed to listen to these concerns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

with the interest of the students in mind, Mr. Speaker, that I 

responded to that letter to the editor, Mr. Speaker. And I said: 

 

To ensure due diligence and transparency . . . [the 

ministry] hired Meyers Norris Penny, one of Canada’s 

largest chartered accountancy and business advisory firms, 

to conduct extensive public consultation and to review, 

assess and provide recommendations on this proposal. 

 

Numerous stakeholders have taken the opportunity to 

participate in these consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that report was recently submitted to the ministry, 

and within a couple of days, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be making 

these recommendations public. We’ve taken very seriously, Mr. 

Speaker, again the obligations to be responsive — that is, ideas 

coming from the grassroots — and at the same time responsible, 

responsible to taxpayers, responsible to students, and most 

especially, Mr. Speaker, responsible to future generations to 

make sure they have opportunities within our post-secondary 

system. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d just like to remind our guests that 

they’re not to participate in any form in the debate. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Chief Dwayne Paul raised many 

questions in his open letter including: 

 

. . . “Who does this merger serve?” 

 

Does it serve the greater good of the majority of students 

and staff who access and run the services, or does it serve 

a smaller, elite group of people or a private institution? 

 

He also said: 

The dissolution of the college potentially has a 

far-reaching impact not only on those in the Carlton Trail 

region, but also for other regional colleges. What threat 

does such a policy pose that other colleges around the 

province, too, will be privatized? 

 

To the minister: what are the answers to these important 

questions? Who does this merger serve, and how many other 

regional colleges will be privatized under the Sask Party’s 

watch? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, under this government 

we’ve seen record investments to post-secondary educational 

institutions, Mr. Speaker, including a 53 per cent increase to 

operating funds for regional colleges, Mr. Speaker. What we’re 

working to do, Mr. Speaker, is ensure that we’re serving the 

interests of the students of this province for today and in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I’ve said, there is a report. It has been submitted now, Mr. 

Speaker, to the ministry, Mr. Speaker. I anticipate that we’ll 

make this report and the recommendations therefore will come 

out in the next couple of days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s important here is to look at the work that, 

the investment through the knowledge infrastructure program 

into both of these institutions, Mr. Speaker, millions of dollars 

in infrastructure that was neglected under the former 

government, Mr. Speaker. We know that. We’ve increased 

operating funds, Mr. Speaker, and now what we’ve attempted to 

do is be responsive to grassroots and at the same time 

responsible to students and taxpayers. We think we have that 

balance about right. And in the next couple of days we’ll come 

forward with the recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the chief of the Prud’homme Fire 

and Rescue department also wrote a letter to the editor to 

publicly raise his concerns about this entire process because 

he’s concerned about the implications for the unique volunteer 

firefighter training program at Carlton Trail. 

 

Ward Perozuk wrote, “I question the actions or inactions of 

Minister Norris and our MLA, Ms. Harpauer . . .” He goes on to 

say, “. . . have they consulted the public for their opinion in 

what the right decision to make is? At present there are too 

many variables that the public is not being made aware of.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the minister commissioned a report 

after all this discussion about a joint CEO, a transition board, 

and other steps to support the merger, Mr. Speaker. With 

community leaders publicly raising concerns and student 

leaders travelling to the Legislative Assembly because they’re 

frustrated and worried, will he commit to table that report 

today? He has it. It should be open to the public. It’s a public 

report. Table it today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6655 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as we’ve said, this work is very, very important. It’s an 

attempt to be responsive, Mr. Speaker, to grassroots ideas about 

ways to move forward, and responsible to taxpayers and 

students, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve recently received this report, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be 

coming forward with the recommendations in the next couple of 

days, Mr. Speaker. The reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is that way 

we can make sure that local stakeholders are positioned and 

prepared to understand our recommendations and moving 

forward with the least disruption, Mr. Speaker, to those local 

stakeholders, and most especially to the students. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Investments in Health Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For two years we’ve 

heard promises from the Sask Party about taking steps to reduce 

surgical wait-lists throughout the province. But just this past 

week, it has been reported that the Saskatoon Health Region 

will miss its targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has promised us that those private 

clinics would erase surgical wait times. Instead we find that the 

government’s plan doesn’t work. To the minister: when will the 

government stop diverting public health care dollars to private 

health care that fails to deliver? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it didn’t take us long 

after we became government to put a Patient First Review in 

place. That Patient First Review identified some issues around 

access, certainly around surgical access. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

certainly heard that on the doorsteps. After 16 years of NDP 

government, we had the longest wait-lists in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what they oversaw. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we began work on a surgical care initiative 

that will look at the whole continuum of surgery, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’ve seen those numbers decrease. In the first three and a 

half years of this Sask Party government, we’ve seen people 

waiting 18 months or longer reduced by over 50 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. People waiting over 12 months have reduced by 25 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. Great progress; lots more to do, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s why we’ve put $40 million more into reducing surgeries 

within the next year, Mr. Speaker, aggressive goals but goals 

that this government isn’t scared to set because, Mr. Speaker, 

the system is working hard to meet them. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Promises, promises. 

The government promised $2.8 million in additional funds to 

the Saskatoon Health Region this past budget. A large part of 

that money was earmarked to go directly to a for-profit health 

care company. 

 

To the minister: with wait times for surgery still longer than 18 

months for about 30 per cent of the patients in this province, 

with no solution in sight — another promise on its way to being 

broken — will the minister stop wasting time and public dollars 

and invest in public health care that actually works? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the past year, 

we’ve hired the services of two third party deliverers within a 

public system — no paying out of pocket, no jumping the 

queue, Mr. Speaker — two third party deliverers, one in 

Saskatoon, one here in Regina, that are seeing the wait-list for 

certain surgeries reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will tell those 6 to 700 people that if we ever go 

back to the NDP, Mr. Speaker, those people would be at the 

back of the waiting list, waiting years was what they had to do 

under NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Health minister 

has told the province that wait-lists for surgeries will be reduced 

to 18 months, and at that point, the existing public health care 

system would carry on. 

 

To the minister: now that he’s missed his target, can he tell us if 

the health regions will receive in the next budget the money that 

they require to deliver public health care for Saskatchewan 

families, or will he continue to waste public money on private 

health care that doesn’t work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our surgical care 

initiative states that we’ll reduce people’s wait to no longer than 

three months by the year 2014. 

 

We won’t be like the opposition that would give up on any sort 

of long-term plan that would see a reduction in wait times, Mr. 

Speaker. That isn’t what this government’s going to do. We’re 

going to fulfill our commitment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I find it really interesting because if we ever 

go back to the NDP, they’ll cancel all the contracts for the 

private surgery clinics, they’ll cancel all the contracts for the 

private ambulances which they oversaw. In fact, will you cancel 

the private contracts for lab services and X-rays? That’s a 

private delivery within a public system. If they’re so dead 

against it, will they cancel them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Resident Physicians 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Professional Association 



6656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

of Internes and Residents of Saskatchewan, PAIRS, have been 

without a contract for over two years. Resident physicians are 

frustrated. They feel unappreciated and unwanted. Their morale 

is at an all-time low. 

 

Over the past two years, the College of Medicine has graduated 

116 resident physicians, and only 46 have chosen to stay in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how is refusing to 

negotiate a fair, respectful contract with resident physicians 

doing anything to increase the retention and recruitment of 

young specialists? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we know the human 

resources challenge that we took over when we became 

government was a huge challenge, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the opposition didn’t want to talk about the nursing complement 

in this province. They didn’t want to set targets. Our 

government set targets, and within the first three years, we met 

a target that we weren’t expected to meet in four years, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what this government has accomplished. 

 

When it comes to physician recruitment and retention, Mr. 

Speaker, under their government, 60 seats for medical training, 

Mr. Speaker, and 60 residency seats, Mr. Speaker — absolutely 

inadequate. Our government has increased the number of 

medical seats to 100 and the number of residencies to 120. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said we’re not 

attracting residents. We had the highest match on CaRMS 

[Canadian resident matching service] of the province’s history 

under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — This is a sad day for Saskatchewan when 

we just hear this. This is a sad day when he takes that as being 

good. Mr. Speaker, despite everything the minister says, 

according to the 2011 Canadian medical resident match, 

CaRMs analysis, the discussion paper put together by PAIRS 

action committee, Saskatchewan didn’t improve on its 

performance in 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the second worst out of 17 

medical schools participating in the match program, and the 

minister is refusing to negotiate a fair and respectful contract 

with the resident physicians. We’re not filling our positions, 

especially in family medicine. 

 

To the minister: when is he going to finally negotiate a fair 

contract with PAIRS so resident physicians will get their 

specialty training in Saskatchewan and remain in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I am very aware that the 

negotiations between the U of S, University of Saskatchewan, 

and the residents is ongoing, Mr. Speaker. Like all negotiations, 

there are times where it gets very tense, but I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that all health providers within this province, whether 

it’s the nurses, whether it’s the doctors, whether it’s the health 

care providers, have received a fair compensation, Mr. Speaker, 

a fair contract. 

 

Well they’re laughing out loud. Mr. Speaker, the last CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] contract that was signed 

under our government had a 95 per cent approval rating, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’re laughing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have work to do on the retention of our 

residents, Mr. Speaker, but we will never go back to the day 

when the College of Medicine was put on probation under the 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite something to be 

proud of: the second worst out of 17 medical schools 

participating in a match program. Mr. Speaker, the minister has 

negotiated a contract with the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] providing doctors with a 24 per cent increase. 

We’ve also heard that the SMA contract, there is a reopener 

clause that allows for a contract to reopen the day after the 2011 

election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the minister prepared to negotiate a fair and 

respectful contract with PAIRS that includes a reopener clause 

like we hear is in the SMA contract where it doesn’t . . . 

[inaudible] . . . the resident physicians as much as other doctors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the contract is being 

negotiated right now between the University of Saskatchewan 

and the PAIRS association, Mr. Speaker. Those negotiations 

and talks are ongoing. I really think that we’re going to see a 

contract, a final contract, in a very near future, Mr. Speaker. I 

certainly hope so for all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will tell you that we cannot go back to the days when we 

would only attract 60 residents to this province, Mr. Speaker — 

absolutely unacceptable. Is that what they would rather do, is to 

go back to the old days, Mr. Speaker? Because this government 

won’t. We’re staying with 120, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to 

improve the retention rate of those residencies year over year, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what this government is committed to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’re all still waiting. It’s 

three and a half years ago. Mr. Speaker, over two years, the 

resident physicians have been without a contract. Morale among 

resident physicians is an all-time low. They’ve written letters to 

the minister, and 90 per cent of the Saskatchewan resident 

physicians have signed a petition asking for a fair contract. 

They have lost faith and trust in the government to the point of 

withdrawing from the doctor recruitment agency. According to 

the PAIRS action committee report, 6 out of 10 residents will 

not stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the main points of the contract negotiations 

is retroactive pay. Will the minister commit today to full 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6657 

retroactive pay for residents so residents will stay in 

Saskatchewan and people will get the health care they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think that member’s 

been in this House long enough to know that we don’t negotiate 

a contract for anyone on the floor of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the member opposite: is that what 

he would do, Mr. Speaker, if he ever got into this chair, was 

negotiate a contract on the floor of the legislature? Is that what 

he would do, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think you can see by 

the track record of this government, we offer fair wages, Mr. 

Speaker, to all health care providers. The University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon is the one that is negotiating with 

the PAIRS, Mr. Speaker. It’s employer-employee negotiations. 

They are at the table right now. Negotiations haven’t broken off 

at all, Mr. Speaker. They’re working to find a collective 

agreement that will be good for all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again I will tell you, and I’ll tell the residents 

and the general public — they’re very, very valuable people 

within our system, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve doubled the 

number of residencies in this province compared to where they 

were under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, residency positions remain 

vacant, second highest vacancy in Canada. Mr. Speaker, in the 

last two years, out of 116 graduate residency physicians, only 

45 chose to stay in Saskatchewan. We have petitions, low 

morale. And, Mr. Speaker, is it no wonder that we are often 

considered a donor province in Canada when it comes to trained 

doctors? 

 

Again, the minister should know what is going on. And I would 

at this time ask him: will the minister commit today to full 

retroactive pay for residents so the residents will stay in 

Saskatchewan and people will get the health care they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try and walk it 

through slowly for that member opposite, that the Government 

of Saskatchewan, this government, doesn’t negotiate with 

PAIRS. The University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatoon does the negotiating with their employees. That’s 

PAIRS; that’s the residents. They’re the ones that do the 

negotiating. 

 

But even if the negotiations were conducted through this 

government, Mr. Speaker, it would be inappropriate to carry on 

those negotiations . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There’s two members on 

the back bench of the opposition that just will not allow the 

minister to respond to the question. I’ll ask the members to 

allow the minister to respond to the question presented by the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell you that if . . . 

Under this government we will not do the negotiating on the 

floor of this Assembly, and I don’t believe they would’ve 

either. They never did before, Mr. Speaker. They loved to 

interfere with negotiations in the back, behind the back doors, 

Mr. Speaker, absolutely time in and time out. 

 

We have offered fair, competitive wages to the health care 

providers, Mr. Speaker. I believe the university will offer the 

same to the residents of this province, Mr. Speaker. But as I 

said, if we ever go back, which I don’t think this province ever 

will want to, go back to the tired, old NDP days of losing the 

College of Medicine and cutting the number of residencies in 

this province in half. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

164, The Police Amendment Act, 2011 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved first reading of Bill No. 

164, The Police Amendment Act, 2011. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 



6658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 165, 

The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister . . . Order. Order. The Minister 

of Justice has moved first reading of Bill 165, The Adult 

Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:30] 

 

MESSAGE FROM 

HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before orders of the day, I 

invite, ask members and our guests to stand as I read a message 

from Her Majesty the Queen, Head of the Commonwealth. 

 

Last week on the 8th of March, we marked the 100th 

anniversary of the first International Women’s Day. The 

idea of having a women’s day was first proposed against 

the backdrop of the rapid industrialization of the early 

20th century. From small beginnings, this idea has grown 

to become a widely recognized way of celebrating women 

around the world. While some people use this day to 

acknowledge the love, admiration, and respect for 

women, others use it to remember the great social and 

political strides made both by and for women in the last 

100 years. There is no right or wrong approach. 

 

In the Commonwealth every year, 26 million girls are 

born. And this equates to one new baby girl arriving 

almost every second of every day. In the time it takes to 

hold the Commonwealth observation services at 

Westminster Abbey, nearly 4,000 girls will have been 

born in Commonwealth lands. And every one of these 

births marks the start of a new life — a journey which 

begins with the hopes of parents, families, and 

communities, and which is continued through the 

aspirations of those girls themselves. 

 

This year the Commonwealth celebrates the important 

role that women already play in every walk of life and in 

every Commonwealth country from the richest to the 

poorest areas, across continents and oceans, from villages 

to places of international debate, in every culture and 

faith, recognizing that women are agents of change in so 

many ways: as mothers and sisters, teachers and doctors, 

artists and craftspeople, smallholders and entrepreneurs, 

and as leaders of our societies, unleashing the potential of 

those around them. 

 

And also this year, the Commonwealth reflects on what 

more could be achieved if women were able to play an 

even larger role. For example, I am encouraged that last 

year the Commonwealth launched a global effort to train 

and support half a million more midwives worldwide. In 

all this work, the commendable goal is to create a greater 

opportunity for women as children and adults to pursue 

their hopes and dreams, to attain their goals, and to make 

best use of their talents and knowledge. 

 

This year, on Commonwealth Day especially, as 

governments continue to search for new ways to tackle 

these important challenges, let us all give a thought to the 

practical ways in which we, as individuals or as groups, 

can provide support to girls and women so that everyone 

can have a chance of a fuller and more rewarding life 

wherever they happen to be. 

 

Elizabeth R 

 

Please be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on Wednesday last during debate on Bill 144 by the member for 

Regina Coronation Park, the member for Athabasca yelled 

profanity across the floor of the Assembly, words which were 

clearly recorded by the video recording system at 1 hour, 48 

minutes and 14 seconds of the recording. I would ask that you 

review Wednesday’s proceedings, and I ask that the member for 

Athabasca withdraw his comments and apologize for his 

behaviour and unparliamentary language. I raise this now since 

the videos were not available until late Thursday afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As you 

know, points of order are to be raised at the first opportunity. At 

the time those comments were made, Mr. Speaker, many 

members on the government side made notice of those remarks. 

At that period of time would be when the Government House 

Leader should have stood on his feet and raised the issue, Mr. 

Speaker, because many of his members were very, very . . . 

yelling and animated about the comments that were made, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

He had the opportunity at that time to raise them, ask you at that 

time to then check the record, Mr. Speaker. Now two days have 

passed, Mr. Speaker. He’s given up his opportunity to do it at 

the first opportunity. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve listened to the point of order 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6659 

presented by the Government House Leader. I’ve listened to the 

arguments against the point of order by the Opposition House 

Leader. And the Opposition House Leader is correct in the fact 

that the member raising it at first opportunity . . . As the 

Government House Leader however pointed out the use of the 

equipment in the Assembly, I think it would be appropriate for 

the Speaker, rather than doing it and making an immediate rule, 

would take the time to review and come back to the Assembly 

with the appropriate response to the point of order. I thank the 

members for their responses. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and to join in on the debate on Bill No. 161, An Act 

to Amend The Election Act. And it’s a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 

do so after those wonderful greetings from Her Majesty the 

Queen, greetings, Mr. Speaker, that reminded us of the number 

of baby girls born in the Commonwealth over the past year. 

And I have to say her comments certainly made me a little 

homesick as I turn my thoughts towards 161, but that is not 

directly related. 

 

But what is directly related to 161, Mr. Speaker, is the ability of 

everyone in our province, whether they’re a man or a woman, 

boy or girl at this time and approaching the legal age to vote, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s essential that everyone have the ability to 

participate in the democratic process. That’s part of the values 

that we espouse as a member of a Commonwealth, and it’s 

something that all political parties, Mr. Speaker, ought to be 

concerned about and ought to promote in our activities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we ought to, as a provincial government and 

a member of the Canadian federation, look for approaches as a 

government that encourages increased participation in the 

electoral process, looks at ways of engaging people who’ve not 

traditionally voted or engaging individuals who are approaching 

voting age and do not have familiarity with the process of 

voting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s essential that we as legislators look at 

what policies, what types of legislation can be brought into 

being that can foster increased voter participation in our 

democracy because, Mr. Speaker, voter turnout and the level of 

engagement that people have with their democracy really is an 

indicator with respect to how healthy a democracy is. Do people 

feel like they control the end result? Do people feel like they’ve 

been listened to? Is the electoral system and the rules around 

voting responsive to their needs? And so clearly, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think there’s a member in the Assembly here that would 

argue or disagree with the need to have an approach to elections 

that encourages participation and ensures that everyone has a 

chance to participate in the electoral process. 

 

So in looking at Bill No. 161, An Act to Amend The Election 

Act, this piece of legislation proposed by the government would 

bring in a requirement for a type of government-issued photo 

ID [identification]. The government news release from 

November 30th of 2010, the opening line says, “The 

Government of Saskatchewan has introduced The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 to require voters at provincial elections to 

produce approved identification, such as government-issued 

photo ID.” So that’s the issue at hand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that when looking at this piece of legislation that’s 

proposed and as it relates to the electoral system, there have 

been other steps that the members opposite have taken around 

the electoral system that to me provide a pretty clear indication 

with how they approach matters to do with elections, how they 

approach the right of individuals to vote. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m thinking about the role of independent 

officers of the legislature, specifically the Chief Electoral 

Officer. In this situation, the individual who’s in charge of 

ensuring that we have free and fair elections in the province and 

that results can be trusted and that all candidates follow the rule 

and the letter of the law and the spirit, in this instance, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw that there was a selection process that went 

under way to select who should be the permanent Chief 

Electoral Officer. We know that the Justice minister came 

forward with a name for his endorsement, presumably speaking 

on behalf of government, and this individual was agreed upon 

by members on the opposition as well. 

 

The snag that came about, Mr. Speaker, was when the issue of 

who would be the Chief Electoral Officer was taken to the Sask 

Party caucus. Well perhaps they threw a fit, perhaps they had 

strong words with the Justice minister, but we know that there 

was some serious backpedalling that occurred and the previous 

decision was reversed. And so an awkward position for the 

Chief Electoral Officer. He’s currently serving as the Acting 

Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, when the caucus, the Sask 

Party government caucus became agitated about the choice that 

the Justice minister had made — presumably they talked about 

it with the Premier, I don’t know, but presumably — to me it’s 

not a clear sign that they support an open process and a 

bipartisan process and a process that strengthens democracy. 

 

So when we look at changes to 161, we know that there are 

some, in my view, some concerns about the approach, the 

philosophy that members opposite have when approaching 

matters of our elections Act. 

 

We know there are many, many important issues in the 

province right now whether it be about royalty resource issues 

and what is a fair return to Saskatchewan people, whether it is 

about affordable housing and determining what steps 

government should take to ensure that there’s an increased 

supply and availability of affordable housing for people in 



6660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

Saskatchewan. We know there are environmental concerns. We 

know there are education concerns at the elementary, the 

primary, and the post-secondary sector. There’s so many issues 

that are occurring right now that require the full input of 

Saskatchewan people, require a clear voice from Saskatchewan 

people on these matters. 

 

And it’s my concern, Mr. Speaker, that if Bill 161 is introduced, 

if the intent of having it introduced is to reduce the number of 

people who are able to participate in the democratic process, put 

up barriers or blockades or challenges for individuals who want 

to vote, Mr. Speaker, that’s a concern to me. And it would be 

also . . . It is even a greater concern, Mr. Speaker, that if the 

people that the government is trying to prevent from engaging 

in exercising their right to vote, if those are individuals who had 

expressed concern with current government policies, that’s even 

more troublesome. 

 

We can think of issues around housing, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, we know that there are many individuals who have 

trouble finding a permanent address, and they may be involved 

in couch surfing in order to find a warm place. They may be in 

temporary accommodations throughout the province. And my 

question is how this piece of legislation would affect some of 

the most vulnerable that we have in our society. And to me 

that’s a concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also other populations in the province, Mr. Speaker, who 

may not have traditionally had government-issued photo ID, if 

this provides a barrier for them to participate in the democratic 

process, I don’t think that’s a positive step either. I think that 

when considering matters of The Election Act, we should be 

looking for ways to strengthen and encourage all members of 

society to participate in the electoral process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I have some reservations about this piece of 

legislation, and I have some questions about the motives of 

members opposite in introducing this piece of legislation 

because I think it may not be necessarily aimed at sound public 

policy or a sound approach to increasing electoral participation 

by society. But it may, Mr. Speaker, in fact be a way that 

members opposite feel they can control the electoral process 

and prevent those individuals, whom they may not appreciate 

how they have to vote or want to vote, from participating in a 

free and fair election. 

 

So those are my concerns, my initial concerns, around Bill No. 

161, Mr. Speaker. And I know members on my side, other 

individuals, have similar concerns as have been voiced. And I 

know many people in the community are also concerned about 

how this piece of legislation may affect their ability to 

participate in the electoral process. 

 

So I think there are some real concerns about this legislation. I 

question the motives for its introduction, Mr. Speaker, and I 

question the track record of members opposite on the issue of 

elections as evidenced by the political games that were played 

by the caucus with respect to the selection of the Chief Electoral 

Officer. So I’m not especially comfortable with taking them at 

face value that this piece of legislation is well intended for all 

Saskatchewan people. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

conclude my remarks and adjourn debate on Bill No. 161. 

Thank you. 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In many 

ways, my contributions will bookend the contributions of my 

colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place very well as he was 

talking about Bill No. 161 which sounds very similar to No. 

162, An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts. And these 

two Bills are hugely, hugely important. 

 

And we see right across the world how people value democracy 

and how critical it is. We watch the events in the Mideast 

unfold and we saw them in the new year. And we are watching 

the tragic events in Libya as the rebels are under attack from the 

government, and we see how the UN [United Nations] is 

struggling to come to terms with their role as international 

peacekeepers. And yet people, citizens, the good citizens of 

Libya are paying the brunt of this inaction. 

 

And so when we talk about democracy here and we think about 

these pieces of legislation before us today, we think how big of 

a deal could it be. It’s a huge deal. People are dying around the 

world because of what we hold near and dear to our hearts here. 

And sometimes just the simple actions of what a government 

can introduce can have a huge impact. And we’ve been really 

focusing a lot; the media’s been focusing a lot around the idea 

of photo ID. 

 

And it’s something that I’ve really come to appreciate over the 

last few years in Saskatoon where somebody pointed out to me, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you realize it, but at one point it 

was easier to vote for the mayor of Saskatoon, easier to vote for 

the mayor of Saskatoon than it was to get a library card, to get a 

library card. Can you believe it? And people just had to go in 

and swear that they were a citizen of Saskatoon and they were 

only going to vote once and they were able to vote for the 

mayor. But to get a library card in Saskatoon you had to have 

photo ID. You had to have photo ID. And so here we have the 

same sort of logic. And I think that for many of us, we truly 

don’t understand the challenges around ID. We take it for 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6661 

granted. 

 

I’m very fortunate having lived in the same place. My ID comes 

on a regular basis every five or seven years from SGI. In fact I 

get the photo part of it free because I happen to have lived in the 

same place for that many years, whereas others, it’s a huge, 

huge challenge. It’s a very hard challenge. It’s not an easy one 

to overcome. And there are costs to it, and the costs to those 

folks who are finding barriers to it are pretty significant. 

They’re not easy to find 25 or 35 or $50. You know, even a 

birth certificate we think of as pretty straightforward. They’ve 

been mailed out when your child was born, and not so any 

more, so not free. 

 

And I think this is something that we have to come to terms 

with, but I think that we have to really rethink this. And I know 

that as we struggle with photo or ID fraud — a huge issue — 

and the move a couple of years ago to get to a super ID 

especially to get into the States, what we wanted to do was get 

some sort of way to get into the States so that we’d have some 

. . . one piece of ID that would solve all the problems. I know 

we can go too far, but somewhere in the middle there’s got to 

be some reasonableness that people in Saskatchewan have some 

ID that they can go to vote and they can expect that that will 

happen. 

 

But I want to back up a bit, Mr. Speaker, because what I really 

have found with the problem, with Bill 162 and so many of the 

Bills, is really around the consultation aspect of it — a Bill like 

this that’s so important. I understand usually the two parties, the 

opposition and the government . . . And I think in the last 

go-round we even had the Liberals involved. Even though they 

had no sitting members in the House, they were invited to 

participate in the discussions around how can we make this Bill, 

the changes to The Election Act, better than it was before? 

 

And I think that’s a very worthwhile goal and we should always 

strive to make our legislation as responsive as possible so that 

people, when they go through an election, we can learn from 

that. And we should have those consultations and we should be 

able to change. I don’t think any legislation, particularly when it 

comes to election, should be carved in stone. 

 

But there are a couple of ideas that I really wanted to talk about 

and I think, I was hoping that the venue would come up, but it’s 

never come up. I know in Saskatoon one of the big challenges 

— and I am very serious about this — are paid election signs on 

lawns. We’re seeing more and more that signs on lawns, people 

are often offered 20 or 25 bucks if they could put up a sign on 

the lawn. Now that’s not against the law. There is no law saying 

you can’t take 20 bucks. No, but it should be called a paid 

election sign and there should be a category that says I have 

spent . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m creating some interest 

on the other side, especially from the member from Moose Jaw. 

I don’t know whether he does it or not. He seems to be an 

expert in this area of paid election lawn signs. I don’t know. 

 

For me it’s a commitment of whether or not you support your 

local candidate. It’s not about whether you get 20 or 25 bucks. 

Maybe that’s something they do over there. I don’t know. But 

for me it should be a category of expense. I have spent . . . 

Maybe he spends 1,000, $5,000 on lawn signs at 25 bucks a 

shot. I don’t know. But I understand that that was happening in 

Saskatoon where people were being offered . . . to say, listen, 

can I put a lawn sign up in front of your house and I’ll give you 

25 bucks? Why not? But it gives the impression that there’s an 

endorsement, and there’s no endorsement. It’s just a simple 

business transaction. But there is no category for that expense, 

no category and no way of tracking. Was there a way? Were 

people paying more money out for that type of thing? 

 

And then connected to that, Mr. Speaker, was . . . In many ways 

we see this now, particularly in municipal elections, in 

provincial and maybe in the federal election that may be coming 

up, how municipal bylaws are enforced around lawn signs. I 

don’t know what happens but it seems the people take a bit of a 

holiday when it comes to enforcing municipal bylaws around 

lawn signs that aren’t on private property. Why is it they stay up 

for a couple of days, a week or so? I don’t know, but I think 

there should be a role in provincial government saying, listen, if 

there’s an issue around people breaking bylaws because of 

provincial election, we’ll pay the extra expense to make sure 

those signs come down right away so there’s no unfair 

advantage to anybody. 

 

I think that would be a reasonable inclusion in this Bill, but we 

were never asked. We were never asked. Nobody asked us. So 

what do you think? What do you think? This is designed 

completely from the point of view from the Sask Party 

government, what works best for them. And it seems from the 

response I got, they kind of like to pay people for the lawn signs 

and they have no problem with that and they have no problem 

not helping out the bylaw enforcement officer to make sure 

those signs come down right away. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, clearly we probably should debate this issue 

more. And maybe the members opposite will bring forward a 

Bill regarding the lawn signs during election time. I hope they 

do. I hope they get on that right away. 

 

But so we have a problem with the process. We weren’t asked, 

the political parties weren’t asked, what do you think? What 

could we do to make elections better and more fair in 

Saskatchewan? You know, in fact, Mr. Speaker, we understand 

that many of the stakeholder groups weren’t asked. And this 

was a bit of a surprise to them when they saw this in the fall, 

that all of a sudden there might be some changes, some changes 

coming down the line, particularly when it comes to ID. And 

we saw a group in Saskatoon that had to hold a press 

conference and put out their concerns. 

 

And you know, but now there is a process and I didn’t realize 

this until last week. And you know, this is something that 

happens where we keep our ears to the ground, and I don’t 

know how many members opposite know about the 

consultation that’s going on, and ironically it’s being led by the 

department, the Ministry of Municipal Affairs — not the Justice 

officials, who I would think would normally be in charge of 

this. That’s sort of the direct line. It’s through Justice, not 

through Municipal Affairs. 

 

But I understand there is a role for Municipal Affairs because 

some of these things impact that. But why would a junior 

ministry like Municipal Affairs or in this case . . . Because 

actually Municipal Affairs has a very important role, but when 

we’re talking about provincial elections, you’d think there’d be 



6662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

some profile, some advertising on this. Because people have 

heard about it in the news. It’s already out there. It’s not just 

something for stakeholders. 

 

It’s something that the public has a lot of interest in because 

they’re very concerned around the idea of what will happen 

when they go to vote, and what kind of expectations will the 

returning officers or deputy returning officers have when they 

go to their local poll? Will they be up on all the new 

regulations? Will they be in the know? I don’t know. Because 

the way this government operates, there’s some people in the 

know and other people are left in the dark. It’s just the way they 

operate. They just operate that way, and somebody will get the 

memo and other people will not get the memo. And we feel that 

it’s got to be better than, it’s got to be done better than this. 

 

We see last spring when this government ran through 

legislation, particularly around the wildlife habitat legislation. 

They were saying, oh yes, everybody knows. Everybody 

knows. Everybody’s been consulted. That, they were not. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Even the ones that were named were not. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, in fact the ones who were named were not 

even consulted. And then so they were left kind of in this odd 

position of, what do we do? What do we do? We thought we 

were respected stakeholders and we were left in the dark. 

 

And here we have the same thing happening here. And I would 

really urge this government to do more public advertising, more 

education around this, because this is a huge, huge issue and it’s 

an issue right across the board in terms of voters’ rights to 

participate in what we value so much, this democracy of 

Saskatchewan where we’ve been able to say generally people 

have been able to vote. But that’s not always been the case. And 

I think . . . And particularly in my riding where I have a few 

shelters. 

 

The Salvation Army hostel is in my riding, and I know when it 

comes to voting this will be a challenge for them. Because the 

process last time was only one person from the hostel itself 

could swear only one other person in. And so there had to be 

equal number of employees as there was clients. And that was a 

real problem because clearly there weren’t that many employees 

and it really became a bit of a bottleneck. How do you get all 

these people who want to vote, be able to participate, clearly 

had the right to vote but somehow weren’t valued. So we have 

. . . We could have improved. We could have improved. But 

I’m not sure the direction here is what’s happening here with 

this government in this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know many people want to speak on this Bill 

and it’s an important one. We have lots of questions when we 

get into committee, particularly about the consultation process 

because we didn’t, you know, we haven’t really been officially 

informed about this consultation process or invited. 

 

This is one that they’re doing through Municipal Affairs and 

it’s going out to selective people who may or may not have got 

the letter. We understand it’s pretty hit and miss. I don’t know 

what the rhyme or reason, who got on the list and who didn’t. 

I’m sure we’ll hear all about it though, or maybe we won’t. 

Maybe we won’t. That’s often the case is we won’t hear about 

it. 

 

But we’ll be asking questions in committee about how many 

stakeholders, how many individuals. Was there advertising on 

this consultation process? What’s the deal with the photo ID? 

How are they going to ensure that people have the ability to get 

the ID that is required? And is there a way of ensuring that 

when the polls open that everybody that’s working for Elections 

Saskatchewan is on the same page, that we don’t have 

somebody thinking that, oh for sure you must have photo ID 

because, you know, it is named in the Act. 

 

You know, in fact I’ll read . . . It’s page 4, section 20 when it 

talks about new sections 76 to 76.2. So just in case the folks at 

home aren’t sure what we’re really talking about, I wouldn’t 

mind reading this, and I’ll quote. The title of the subsection is:  

 

“Evidence of identity and residence 

76.2 An elector shall: 

 

(a) provide to the deputy returning officer and the poll 

clerk the following evidence to prove his or her identity 

and residence: 

 

(i) one piece of identification issued by a Canadian 

government, whether federal, provincial or local, or 

an agency of that government, that contains a 

photograph of the elector and his or her name and 

address; or 

 

(ii) two pieces [and goes on, two pieces] of 

information prescribed in the regulations, each of 

which establishes the elector’s name and at least one 

of which establishes the elector’s address; or 

 

(b) establish his or her identity and residence in 

accordance with the procedures prescribed in the 

regulations”. 

 

So here you have . . . You know, it talks about the photo ID, but 

it uses the word “or” so you have a bit of an out. But I mean I’m 

. . . You know, when we get to election day and we have a 

deputy returning officer who feels that they have been studying 

up on their law, may not fully understand what “and” or “or” 

means and people are turned away in frustration, turned away in 

frustration. That shouldn’t happen. 

 

So as I said, we look forward to hearing about this in 

committee. I look forward to hearing more about the 

consultation process. I hope in the very short days that actually 

they do some advertising, because the days are going by here, to 

call for some public participation. 

 

I don’t know if they’re just dismissing that out of hand, thinking 

the public doesn’t really have much to say about elections and 

democracy here in Saskatchewan, and that they are consulting 

only stakeholders. And we don’t know who those stakeholders 

are. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve put up the pieces that 

I wanted to. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I did want to talk about the lawn signs because I didn’t get my 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6663 

opportunity to . . . And it really is something that drives me 

crazy when I’m driving up 29th or along Idylwyld. And I don’t 

see the bylaw enforcement officer anywhere. And I said, and I 

wonder where do these signs come from? Where are all these 

signs coming from? And I think that’s a problem. It really is a 

problem because I don’t mind if it says paid by the whatever 

party is, but they seem to imply something else. So with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of Bill No. 162. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it is truly a pleasure and an honour for me to have the 

privilege of entering into this debate on behalf of the fine 

people of Regina Northeast and to share with my colleagues 

here some of the thoughts that I have and some of the issues 

been brought to my attention on this particular Bill. Mr. 

Speaker, this is of course Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this particular Bill pertains to a very 

important subject that affects our society and affects each and 

every one of us. And although maybe . . . And I’m as guilty as 

anybody else. I don’t quite have a full grasp or a full 

understanding of what all this Bill impacts upon and what an 

important aspect and what really an important pillar it is that 

supports our society, is the rules of human kindness or human 

respect I guess you would say, as is outlined in the Human 

Rights Code. 

 

And basically I think that’s what it is, Mr. Speaker, is simply 

respect for each other and an understanding and a tolerance of 

each other. And though we may have different backgrounds and 

have come from different ways of life and perhaps have had 

different experiences throughout our life, we all have our rights 

to have a place in our society that is respected and is protected 

and that we can do so with . . . and live in this society without 

fear of being discriminated against simply because we maybe 

have different backgrounds or may be of a different experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, these amendments that have 

been introduced by the government, which when passed would 

dissolve the Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal, and it 

would dissolve it in favour of having the cases heard by court. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are, I suppose, an argument that could 

be made for both the continuance of the tribunal. But I suppose 

equally there are arguments that can be made for finding ways 

and means that would add even greater efficiencies to the 

system than the present system through a tribunal process, 

although there is something to be said about having more than 

one individual hearing the cases and then making the decision 

on those cases. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is very important. And we must 

not lose sight of that, that we want to, I suppose, have the 

ability to have an understanding or an expertise in the hearings 

of these various cases as brought forward to the Human Rights 

Tribunal. We have people there that have had the experience 

and have the expertise and have the knowledge that will reflect 

the many different aspects of our society. And after all, Mr. 

Speaker, that is sort of the hallmark of what makes 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan. It’s “from many people’s, 

strength.” Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what it is: from many 

people’s. And that’s what makes our society here, I think, 

extremely unique as . . . rest of Canada. 

 

But I think Saskatchewan sort of holds a special place there 

because of the fact that we have a society that’s so diverse. We 

have people from all over the world that have immigrated to 

this great province of ours, to this great country of ours and to 

our province and to our cities that make up Saskatchewan, and 

that continues on. And I think, Mr. Speaker, we are all the 

better for it. We’re all the better for it because the diversities 

that come to our great province, that create our society, 

strengthens us. And I think we as a society benefit from that 

strength. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very, very important that when we 

do make any amendments, any changes at all to the Human 

Rights Code that we do so very carefully and that these are very 

thoughtful changes and that the proposed changes have been 

aired to absolutely everyone in this great province of ours and 

everyone’s had the opportunity to express their thoughts and 

their concerns on the proposed amendments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that’s very important because, as I said, I think 

there is something to be said for a tribunal or more than one 

person hearing the cases as being presented rather than allowing 

the decision-making power into a hand of one individual, which 

raises some concerns. I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, that there 

isn’t ways and means to ensure that that is balanced and fair. 

And there may be a mechanism in place to be able to ensure 

that those decisions made by that individual are fair and are 

balanced and do represent the best interests of our citizenship 

and best interests of the individuals involved and of course the 

best interests of our society. But, Mr. Speaker, I think we have 

do that. We have to be very careful when we make those 

changes. And we have to do so in a way that will ensure that we 

have exhausted every opportunity to identify any flaws that may 

arise when we disperse of the tribunal system in favour of 

having the cases heard in a court setting. 

 

And the government I know has said, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Court of Queen’s Bench will hear cases only when all other 

avenues to resolve have been proven unable to address the 

issue. And, Mr. Speaker, that is fine and dandy. But once again, 

Mr. Speaker, I am concerned that we place in the hands of a 

very small group of people — in fact we place in the hands 

really of one individual — the decision-making process that can 



6664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

affect really the way our society looks at a lot of the rules and 

regulations. And I think that, Mr. Speaker, we have to be very 

careful. We have to be very careful that we don’t move too 

quickly in that direction and we overlook some of the aspects of 

the advantages of having more than one person or a tribunal 

system doing the hearings. So I think, Mr. Speaker, we must be 

very careful. 

 

And I also would like to know, Mr. Speaker, what the 

government proposes here that would replace the tribunal 

system but yet be the in-between, I guess you would say, before 

it gets down to the courtroom. What mechanism would be used 

to identify ways and means to resolve the issues, or what 

mechanisms would be exhausted before the issues would find 

its way into a courtroom atmosphere? And that, Mr. Speaker, 

has certainly not been made very clear to us by the government 

as to what mechanisms they would propose to use to ensure that 

every opportunity is truly exhausted before the case is moved 

into the courtroom atmosphere. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I believe, and I’ve always believed this, 

that the court system is something that you only use, only use, 

only use as a very last alternative, that some mechanisms and 

every mechanism available to us to be able to address issues 

and resolve problems should be used before we end up in a 

courtroom atmosphere. Because I think, you know, the 

courtroom atmosphere doesn’t lend itself well for the give and 

the take of opinions and issues. 

 

And I think that, you know, it certainly would be an advantage, 

I think, for all people involved if we were able to arrive at a 

mechanism, a system that would ensure that there’s fairness, 

there’s balance. And yet, Mr. Speaker, that the process is done 

in a way that doesn’t cause the cases to be strung out and to be 

left up in the air for not only days, Mr. Speaker, not only 

months, but years on end, that we would have a resolve that 

would be done as quickly as possible, but to ensure that that 

resolve reflects the fairness and the balance within our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tribunal was originally created as a 

replacement for the boards of inquiry which were appointed by 

the minister to review individual cases where the commission 

decided that they had merit or where the complainant was 

appealing a decision referred to it by the commission. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that is the intent of the tribunal. It was to be 

there as a mechanism to resolve the issues that were being 

created. It was to take the pressure off and to replace the boards 

of inquiry . . . [inaudible] . . . appointed by the minister was 

there to be able to review the cases that were being presented 

and give the opportunity to the complainant to have this 

mechanism of appeal to a third body, to another body of 

individuals who would be able to hear the case, be able to 

weigh the issues and collectively come to a decision and a 

recommendation rather than leaving that powers in the hands of 

one individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think, you know, I really like the idea of the tribunal 

system having the opportunity to have its input and to have 

more than one opinion and more than one set of eyes and ears 

addressing the issue as being presented. I understand, Mr. 

Speaker, that that does create a problem as far as backlog is 

concerned. I understand that that causes the system to slow 

down, and we need to find the ways and means to address that. 

But at the same, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s better to err on the 

side of caution than it is to err just for expediency purposes. 

 

And this is what concerns me about these amendments, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they haven’t necessarily been well thought out. 

They haven’t certainly been . . . Amendments have been 

brought forward by the government after careful consideration 

and in due course of the government having the opportunity or 

taking the opportunity to do extensive consultations throughout 

the population — at least not that I’m aware of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact I have yet to see any evidence of any consultations at all 

that the government has done, certainly with the stakeholders 

involved or any meaningful consultations that have been done 

that haven’t been sort of directed. I understand whatever 

consultations, as limited as they may have been, were only 

consultations that were being directed by the government rather 

than open-ended, wide-ranging inquiry from the general public 

for their input into the issues to ensure that the 

recommendations and the amendments being proposed by the 

government are those that reflect the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people and for those people who find it necessary 

to use the human rights system, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

sometimes it would take months for the board of inquiry to be 

appointed, and particularly if the minister’s office was having 

difficulty identifying a member of the bar that did not have a 

conflict of interest with one of the parties that was in the 

dispute. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was real movement afoot to speed up the 

process because actually it was being identified that the original 

process, process of boards of inquiry, was certainly not an 

efficient way of handling this. In fact and what we were seeing 

was just huge, huge waiting periods and backlogs — and I 

guess you call it waiting lists — and, Mr. Speaker, that certainly 

wasn’t in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So the tribunal system was certainly an improvement over the 

boards of inquiry, and it allowed for the ability of the 

decision-making process to be in the hands of more than one 

person. So you had, you know, you had good input. You had 

good understanding. 

 

I think also it gave the opportunity to have the tribunals 

comprised of people from different walks of life in our 

province, from different backgrounds and different experiences. 

And that, I think, enriched the value of the tribunals, Mr. 

Speaker, because it give them that expertise, that 

inter-expertise, that you simply won’t find if it’s narrowed 

down to . . . the issues are narrowed down, the complainants are 

narrowed down to a courtroom setting where one individual, a 

judge, will be making the final decision that will affect people’s 

lives. I don’t think it has the same richness as the tribunal 

system certainly did have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Of course there was the delayed . . . And justice was a 

complaint as a result of having the boards of inquiry. And the 

tribunal was originally created in part to address these concerns. 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was certainly an improvement over the 

efficiencies and the effectiveness of hearing the complaints 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6665 

under the human rights Act that the tribunals certainly 

addressed. 

 

One of the concerns of course was the length of time it was 

taking the boards of inquiry to be gathered, the boards of 

inquiry to hold their meetings, to hold their hearings, to then in 

order to be able to make a decision. So it was causing a backlog 

or a drawing out of the process, Mr. Speaker, which we would 

hope that the tribunals certainly did address. 

 

Now is there a more efficient way, a more effective way to 

ensure that these move even further and causes greater 

efficiencies within the system so that the hearings can take 

place in a more timely fashion so that the people in 

Saskatchewan who find themselves in need of using the process 

of the Human Rights Commission would do so and would 

receive a fair hearing, a balanced hearing, and do so in a timely 

fashion? Now, Mr. Speaker, that is certainly the goal.  

 

But we must be very careful when we make those changes, 

when we move from a tribunal system to a courtroom setting 

that we actually achieve what it is that we hope to achieve here. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in order to do that, the government has 

already indicated that they will only use . . . The Court of 

Queen’s Bench will hear a case only when all other avenues of 

resolve have proven to be unable to address the issues. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what are all those other avenues? What 

avenues does the government propose to put into place that 

would address the issues, would be able to find resolve to the 

issues, would be able to find the common ground, would be 

able to find agreements between the individuals who are 

opposing one another before, before it would go to a Court of 

Queen’s Bench? And, Mr. Speaker, that has never been made 

clear certainly to me. I haven’t seen any evidence of what the 

government suggests it might do in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s unfortunate because I think, Mr. Speaker, if that 

information was made available to not only the opposition, but 

if that information was made available to the public in general, 

it would go a long way to addressing some of the concerns that 

have been brought to our attention, the attention of the 

opposition, as to the results of what would happen if we move 

very quickly from the tribunal system to a courtroom system 

where one individual, a judge, would hear the case and make 

the decision. 

 

There seems to be a void there, Mr. Speaker, of the government 

being able to provide that information, at least to the 

satisfaction of the opposition and certainly the satisfaction of 

the people in Saskatchewan, that would provide us that 

information and assurance and thusly give us the comfort of 

knowledge that there will be meaningful mechanisms in place 

to ensure that every attempt is made to resolve the issues, 

resolve the issues before it gets to the court system.  

 

Because like I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I don’t personally 

believe that the court system is the best atmosphere in which to 

resolve issues. I think it certainly limits the ability to negotiate. 

I think it limits the ability to compromise within the individuals 

who find themselves in that situation, Mr. Speaker. So I think 

that’s unfortunate. And I wish the government would have 

made it a lot clearer as to what they propose would be the 

vehicles that they would use to provide the opportunities to 

resolve the issues between the time the complaint is laid and 

before it arrives at the Queen’s court. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, many people have expressed concerns that 

the tribunal system takes too long to issue a decision on 

complaints referred to it. And that’s true, Mr. Speaker. I think 

the ideal here would be to be able to not to have waiting lists, 

not to have waiting lists on the Human Rights Code, not to have 

waiting lists so that these issues as they come forward could be 

resolved in the quickest possible way. It’s the best interest of 

everybody, not only as a society but of the individual’s 

involvement, Mr. Speaker, the involvement in a case like this is 

something that hangs over their head. And it’s very . . . it leaves 

you sort of that uncomfortable feeling of you don’t know 

what’s going to happen in the future here. 

 

So it’s an issue that I think we all in our society would like to 

see when they do arise and when it is necessary to have a third 

party make that decision as to whether or not there is a human 

rights violation here, that it is done so in a much expedient way 

so that it is in the best interests of all those who are involved to 

have it done as soon as possible. Saskatchewan people have the 

right to expect a timely resolve to their complaints, particularly 

when it comes to issues involving a deeply personal and 

emotional . . . and to go to the very core of who we are as 

human beings. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that, you know, the desire to have this 

moved forward in an expedient way is one that certainly the 

opposition would support because that is, I think, should be the 

goal of all of us in government is to ensure that Saskatchewan 

people receive the best of whatever it is they’re looking for. In 

this particular case, Mr. Speaker, it’s a settlement or resolve of 

an issue under the Human Rights Code. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, really is part of the rules that govern us 

within our society, that govern us within our province, govern 

the rights of each and every one of us — yours, mine and 

everyone else who is a citizen of this great province of ours — 

certainly should enjoy the comfort and knowledge that they 

have a Human Rights Code that will protect them and ensure 

that their rights are upheld. 

 

And when we find ourselves in circumstances that we find 

perhaps an infringement upon those rights or infringement upon 

a citizen of Saskatchewan’s rights as far as the Human Rights 

Code is concerned, then I think it is a desire to have that resolve 

achieved as soon as possible. And if there is a way of doing it, 

Mr. Speaker, that is even more efficient and more expedient 

than the tribunal system, I’m certainly in favour of that. 

 

My concern here, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that there is a 

balance, and ensure that the rulings put forward do truly 

represent a fair and equitable resolve to the issue being 

presented; that, Mr. Speaker, I am not comfortable on 

suggesting that a courtroom atmosphere is the mechanism to 

use to arrive at that. I do not believe that, Mr. Speaker, because 

I believe that there needs to be the opportunity for give and 

take. There needs to be the opportunity for negotiations. There 

needs to be the opportunity for individuals who find themselves 

in this particular situation to be able to address their issues 

through compromise and through perhaps even clearing up of 



6666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

misunderstandings. 

 

And that is what I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that we would see 

the government move forward to, to ensure that there would be 

some mechanism that would: (a) increase the efficiency within 

our systems, but to do so in a way that ensures that we continue 

to have fairness and have balance within the decision making 

that’s being rendered in human rights issues. 

 

The human rights tribunal, you know, was set up as an 

independent quasi-judicial provincial body that adjudicated the 

human rights complaints under The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code. And, Mr. Speaker, that certainly, certainly is a 

system that we need to continue on in this province. We need to 

continue it. And I know that the government’s desire, at least as 

I understand it, the government’s desire here is to move forward 

and introduce a system that’s going to cause even greater 

efficiencies and speed up the system and reduce the backlog, 

and that I would certainly support and that I would applaud. 

 

My only concern, Mr. Speaker, is I haven’t seen any evidence 

of: (a) what system the government plans to put into place that 

would address the void that I see between the complainant 

having a concern and having that heard in a Queen’s Bench 

court. There needs to be some mechanism put into place that 

would address that in-between, Mr. Speaker, so that we have 

ways and means to resolve these issues before they get to that 

court setting. So I think it would be in the best interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan if we were able to provide that 

opportunity to those people find themselves in that situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a couple of more points before I conclude my 

remarks here. It’s often been suggested, I guess you would say, 

that the backlog is something that needs to be addressed here. 

And that is, I think goes without saying. 

 

But my concern would be, Mr. Speaker, is what has the 

government done as far as being able to carry out a reasonable 

amount of consultations that would support the 

recommendations and the amendments that the government is 

putting forward here. And, Mr. Speaker, I think what is 

important in any of this process, in any of this process, what is 

important is that the government gets it right. I mean this is 

changes to the Human Rights Code. 

 

This is something that is very, very important to the 

fundamental principles that govern our society, the fundamental 

principles that govern our actions within that society. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it should be enhanced and we should be 

looking at educating our population, particularly the younger 

ones coming up as to what is meant by human rights and how 

each and every one of us in our society has a claim to our 

society and has the rights within our society. That needs to be 

protected and when necessary that protection be enforced. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in order to do that we need to talk to the 

stakeholders that are involved. And I would like to know, Mr. 

Speaker, what level of consultation did this government do? 

Did this government do any consultations, first of all? Did they 

do any consultations in regards to this particular issue and the 

amendments that they’re proposing? If so, who did they consult 

with? If so, when did this consultation process take place and 

over what time frame did it take place? 

The next question I would have, Mr. Speaker, of the 

government is what method was used to consult? Did they hold 

public hearings? Did they give everybody in Saskatchewan the 

opportunity and the — which I think they should have — the 

right, Mr. Speaker? They have the right to the opportunity to 

participate and to express their opinions, to express their 

thoughts on this particular issue because I think this is a very 

important issue. It’s not just something that we can brush under 

the rug, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s very important because once again I do believe that 

the Human Rights Code is one of the pillars that support our 

society. It’s one of the pillars that holds up the goodness and the 

rights of our society and all people within that society. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, when you make changes to the Human 

Rights Code, you have to make those changes very carefully, 

very thoughtfully, and you have to make those changes only 

after you’ve given the people of this great province the 

opportunity to express their thoughts and to share their opinions 

on those amendments. And I don’t see, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government has done that. In fact I have yet to find any 

evidence of any level of true consultations. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there was some, there was some, I 

would say, call it secondary consultations that was done by 

officials of the government. And it was done through a 

mechanism not offering the people of Saskatchewan to come 

forward and without encumbrances offer their opinions and 

their thoughts on the matter and make recommendations as to 

what they would see changes within the Human Rights Code. 

Rather, Mr. Speaker, I see them, as I understand it, the 

consultations that were done, as limited as they were, were 

done, were really guided consultations. 

 

It was sort of after a policy was developed, then that policy was 

floated amongst . . . in front of, I should say, stakeholders and 

said, well what do you think? And the discussions were limited 

to the policy that was developed rather than being open and 

rather than having it opened up, the whole issue opened up, so 

that the stakeholders and the people of this great province 

would have input into all aspects and all changes and all the 

amendments that would be proposed by the government. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again I think this government has failed 

in doing its consultation, as it’s becoming more and more noted, 

Mr. Speaker, through not only this Bill, but many other Bills 

that we’ve had the opportunity to debate in this great Assembly. 

That this government seems to fear consultation, seems to fear 

the idea of going out there and listening to the people of this 

great province and getting feedback from them. 

 

And I don’t know why, Mr. Speaker, because I would think that 

the role of any government, the role of any government and the 

desire of any government would be to create legislation and 

regulations and rules that govern our society that are in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people, and that are clearly and 

thoughtfully proposed by the people of this great province. 

 

And in order to do that, Mr. Speaker, you have to go out and 

talk to the people of this great province through, and I think in 

this particular case it warrants, through a public hearing process 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6667 

where hearings all across this great province, in every 

community, in every corner of Saskatchewan, would allow the 

people who are interested, allow the people who have concerns, 

allow the people who are affected, the stakeholders in 

particular, that would give them the opportunity to come out 

and, in a public forum, be able to lay out their thoughts and 

their plans and to share them with the officials of the 

government. 

 

That could then be brought back to government in a manner that 

would allow the government to make the best possible decisions 

on amendments to the, in this particular case, the Human Rights 

Code, and to do so in a way that would end up providing a 

product that is in the best interest of Saskatchewan people. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that is what we all desire. I know that the 

difference in the political parties often, Mr. Speaker, is the 

vehicle or the road we choose to reach that particular end. And 

we can have that differences and we can have the debates over 

whether this — my road or my proposed road or their proposed 

road or their methods or my methods — are the better ones. 

That’s the debate we can have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at the end of the day, at the end of the day we should have, 

as the hallmark of our efforts here in this great Assembly, is to 

ensure that the people of Saskatchewan are left with, our 

deliberations are left with the best possible legislation, rules, 

and regulations that govern our society that we as human beings 

can put together. In order to do that, we have to listen to the 

people of this great province. We have to, I think, on very 

important issues such as this one here, public consultations, 

public hearings should be done. And I am disappointed, Mr. 

Speaker. I see that the government has not chosen to do that, 

but rather has brought in these amendments who we do not 

know if anyone in this great province have had really any input 

into it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think in my brief time here, I’ve had the 

opportunity to outline very briefly some of the concerns that I 

have with this particular piece of legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

with that I know that many of my colleagues have a lot more to 

say about this and will want to debate this to a further end. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160, The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to rise and 

join the debate on Bill 147, The Public Interest Disclosure Act. 

I think it’s interesting timing that this Bill comes forward. And 

we can go back and look at the current government’s handling 

of some of the issues that have come to the attention of the 

official opposition. And when employees bring concerns 

forward, whether they’re, I guess, a law that’s being broken, a 

policy not being followed, it’s very clear that some employees, 

Mr. Speaker, want to be protected if they come forward. And 

they should feel that way. They’re representing the people. 

They’re trying to do the best job they can and many people that 

are out there working for the government in different areas and 

professional areas that they chose to work in that field. They 

want to be protected if they’re bringing concerns forward and 

they see things or they’re questioning things. They’re not sure 

— maybe it isn’t clear — but they want to bring it forward. 

 

And unfortunately we’ve seen this government’s handling of 

some of the information that’s brought forward to the 

opposition and how the government handled that. It’s very 

concerning, very concerning that now they want to come in 

with a type of Bill that would protect whistleblower, someone 

bringing information forward to the opposition. 

 

Whether it’s a, I guess, a legal matter or just not following 

policy, like I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear. People 

want to . . . and the guilt that they must feel. And I can only 

imagine. You have a family. You have a mortgage. You’re 

trying to make a life for your family. You’re a hard worker. 

You’re a law-abiding citizen. You’re doing the right thing. You 

might’ve been working for the government or working in an 

agency or a Crown corporation or one of the ministries for years 

and years, devoted, because you care about what you’re doing. 

 

And then to have a government, I guess, come forward and do 

what they did, when we’ve seen information that comes 

forward and how that information is brought forward, because it 

embarrasses the government of the day, well that’s not right. 

Individuals, workers, have a right to be protected. And they 

have a right and an obligation to bring that information very 

clearly to the opposition or to whoever they want to, to disclose 

that information without feeling fear, anxiety because they feel 

like they’re being attacked. 

 

That a ministry or whether it’s a minister or any one of the 

officials would go after somebody in any ministry, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s bizarre that in a day like this and the time — and we are 

supposed to have evolved, to give people protection — we have 

a government, their own record, the way they handled things, 

very clear. The public have seen it. You can’t hide that. You 

have a history. You can’t hide that. 

 

People are nervous, even to this day. They’re nervous to bring 

things forward. Why should someone be worried to bring 

anything forward if it’s something, whether it’s policy being 

breached . . . You know, very clear. Very clear that there should 

be protection for those employees to bring the information. But 

you have a government of the day that wants to say, no, you’re 

not going to do that because we don’t want to be embarrassed. 

We want to make sure we keep everything hush-hush. Why? 

 

Now they want to come out and introduce a piece of legislation 

that’s supposed to give some protection. How about the 

employees? And have there been employees, and the ones that 

did come forward, how have they been dealt with, Mr. Speaker? 

How’ve they been dealt with? Not very good, not good at all. 



6668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

They didn’t come out too good under the Sask Party’s, I guess, 

administration. They haven’t done so well. They went after a 

few people, and some people lost their jobs. And I mean they 

may think it’s all right to do that, put a little scare out there in 

the people. It isn’t right. 

 

If there’s something done wrong that’s done, whether it’s a 

policy, whether it’s a law that’s been broken, the employee 

should have a right to come forward and not feel fear, bully, to 

be bullied. Why should someone feel like they’re being bullied 

or have fear? And, you know, when you think about it, we talk 

about our education system. We make it very clear, talk about 

anti-bullying legislation. We try to protect so people are not 

bullied, pressured, fear for losing their job, their income. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that stuff happens and it’s very 

clear it’s happened. We witnessed some of it over this last, I 

guess, since the Sask Party has taken office. I have witnessed it 

myself sitting here. There was some interesting things going on. 

 

So when they want to come out with a Bill that’s going to 

protect whistleblowers, the employees, and good employees, 

very loyal, but maybe that employee doesn’t look at the same 

philosophy of the current administration. So you know what? 

They do a little digging, little digging more. They go after 

individuals. Where did that information come? Who leaked it? 

Doesn’t matter if they found the guilty person; doesn’t matter if 

they found the person that reported it. They go after whoever. 

They’re going to show, they’re going to show the people out 

there that have worked for their ministry and for the 

government, if you do this, here’s what’s going to happen. 

 

So don’t tell me that’s not being a bully. Don’t tell me that’s not 

putting fear in people. It is, and it isn’t right. Nobody deserves 

that when they’ve got their family and they’re working hard; 

they’re trying to make ends meet. And if that was reversed on 

anyone else to feel like, Mr. Speaker, that a Bill like this, 147, 

to protect them? 

 

It’s interesting to see this Bill come forward now and the way 

it’s being presented. You know, they want to believe in having 

a commissioner, and they talk about a commissioner. That 

commissioner will be responsible. But we’ve seen what they’ve 

done with some of the independent officers of this legislature, 

with their recommendations and what they brought forward. 

They haven’t acted on. 

 

So I mean there’s questions about the different things that 

they’re willing to do to keep things under wrap, to keep the 

public not knowing everything so that they don’t know. It’s 

interesting that, at the end of the day, the people truly have to be 

worried about bringing information forward. 

 

And we don’t know how many are out there, Mr. Speaker. 

There may be a lot of people out there right now that want to 

share stuff, but they’re nervous. They have a mortgage. They 

have family. A lot of people aren’t feeling the boom. They’re 

just trying to make ends meet for their family. A lot of people 

aren’t feeling the economics and the benefits that others are 

seeing. Not a lot are seeing that. There’s very, very few that are 

seeing the economic success. And it’s frustrating to watch. 

They’re just trying to make ends meet. 

 

And you look at them. And they look at the cost of living. And 

some of these people might be renters. They’re just getting into 

it. And they’re looking at their job. And they have children, and 

they want to make sure that they have a good living for their 

family and provide for them. But they’re nervous. Do I bring 

this forward? In light of what the past practice has been of the 

Sask Party government, some individuals will not bring that 

forward because of fear, and that isn’t right. 

 

And you can come later and bring in some legislation that’s 

going to give them protection should they . . . And they might 

be able to go to an individual with one of the ministries and 

report this. Well I don’t know about that process, who that 

individual will be that . . . And who’s going to pick and 

designate which individual in the ministries will this person go 

to and express their concern, whether it’s policy, law? I’m not 

sure that I would want to, seeing their record on how they deal 

with people bringing information forward for the public. And 

the public has a right to know what’s going on and you 

shouldn’t hide it from them. 

 

And you can throw stuff around and mix things up all you want, 

but at the end of the day, when it’s a person’s job, their income 

and their family, and they fear. And I say that it’s not a nice 

thing to have someone working for a government ministry or 

agency or Crown corporation that’s living in fear. The stress 

that’s working for an agency that gets funding from the 

government that’s supposed to be responsible for different 

agency — whether it’s the CBOs [community-based 

organization] or there’s many other agencies that get funding 

directly from the government — those individuals that work for 

those agencies out there, will they have that same protection? 

And we can see that some organizations have had their 

challenges with individuals. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And they weren’t sure how to bring that information forward. 

Caused some individuals lots of stress. And some people, you 

know, unfortunately they’re stressed so much that they have to 

go on sick leave. The pressure that’s on them, it affects their 

health. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s unreal to think that now, 

after individuals have experienced this, to trust legislation that’s 

going to protect them now. 

 

And the process that they’re bringing this in, a commissioner 

will hear it. And if people feel confident, depending, I guess, 

how this individual’s selected, and we’ve seen some of the 

challenges and the direction that the government, the 

administration of the day, is willing to go and what they’re 

willing to do. The pressure they’re willing to put on. 

 

And we talk about trust. Trust is a big thing. It’s huge. People 

want to feel like when they come forward and they share stuff, 

they want to trust that whoever they’re sharing their information 

with, whether it’s breach of policy, maybe it could be as far as a 

criminal situation where the law gets involved, they want to feel 

protected that they bring that information forward. 

 

Or they want to alert the opposition of some of the stuff going 

on that maybe isn’t so up, up, that the public should know 

about, you know. There’s different circumstances, and there’s 

no one side. Everybody has a past, yes. You know, nobody’s 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6669 

perfect. You learn from your mistakes. But I think people are 

wondering truly where this is coming from. 

 

And you look at their record already, and this government has 

done some interesting things and they’ve gone after some 

employees. And I don’t know. I won’t want to get on individual 

cases at this time, Mr. Speaker, but I want to be very clear that 

there’s people out there that live in fear. They live in fear. To 

say to them that they have nothing to be worried about, about 

bringing that stuff forward, that they aren’t feeling the anxiety 

of losing their jobs, their family . . .  

 

And like I was saying earlier, some people may have years and 

years that they have served and they might have been the best 

employee that that ministry, Crown corporation, or government 

agency has ever had. But, unfortunately, because they have 

some information they would like to share or bring forward, and 

whether they share it with the opposition, whether they share it 

with the opposition or any other member, they shouldn’t have to 

feel the fear that somebody’s going to go back and go after 

them because they brought something forward that the public 

has a right to know. There are some things that the public has a 

right to know and nobody should be hiding that from them. 

 

This legislation that they’re bringing in might make some 

people feel, well maybe they can move forward, and they might 

want to come forward. And if this passes, we don’t know — 

will there be protection for those individuals? You know, if they 

bring that information forward, if this Bill should pass, will they 

be protected? Some people would feel not, that they would not 

be protected. 

 

And I hear the opposition members. They have their say. Well 

they had their say. They had people bring information forward, 

and look what they did with it. Look what they did with that. 

Information was shared. The public got . . . Look how they 

handled it. And now they want to criticize. Well I think, Mr. 

Speaker, very clearly, very, very clearly, they can criticize all 

they want, but they should look in their own backyard and how 

they’ve handled the situation . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, there you go. Look in the mirror. Have a look. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I mean very clearly, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, 

people live in fear. In fear. Fear of some of the stuff that’s going 

on by this administration. And you know, you can go around 

and say whatever. They don’t like what I’m saying? That’s too 

bad. That’s the fact. It’s too bad. It’s too bad. Well you know 

what? There was a process that went on and right now I don’t 

see the process happening. And they want to say that this is 

going to protect the employees. Well I’ll tell you there’s a lot of 

employees out there won’t feel so protected by this Bill 

bringing forward. 

 

And you could talk about the process, Mr. Speaker, that they 

may bring their complaint to somebody that’s identified in the 

ministry or they may go to a commissioner. What strength will 

that commissioner have? Because we’ve seen how some of the 

recommendations that the independent bodies we use at this 

legislature to do the work we ask them to do, they brought 

recommendations forward. How did the current administration 

handle their recommendations? 

 

So there’s a lot of stuff going on and a lot of people out there, 

and I think as time goes on, elections coming forward, people 

are going to share information. People are going to share 

information. And they want to make it very clear that the 

official opposition may be the ones that they want to share it 

with, not just to make sure that it’s a certain government that 

you only share it with the government, so that the government 

of the day, so that they can keep it under — I don’t know what 

you want to call it — keep it very clear, away from the public 

because they’re going to handle it so that it doesn’t embarrass 

them; we don’t have any situations. And that’s unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think we’re going to see more stuff coming 

out. And it will come out. 

 

And I think people are going to say they’ve got to do the right 

thing, even though they’re stressed. I encourage them. Come 

forward. Bring your concerns forward. And I know you might 

have to worry about having this administration coming after 

you, but the guilt and maybe the stress you’re feeling . . . We 

will protect you. We will try to protect you. And they want to 

say this Bill’s going to do that. I don’t see it yet. I think there’s 

going to be a lot of discussions and people are going to wonder. 

And whether it gets introduced or not, we’ll have to look at it 

and we’ll have to see how people . . . And do the employees 

feel protected? Because at the end of the day, it is the 

employees with their families. They’re only trying to do the 

right thing. We pay them and we ask them to do the right thing. 

And at the end of the day we hope, we hope that this body and 

the legislature and the members do the right things. We do the 

right thing for the people that we serve and the public. 

 

We look at all the different people that work for the 

government. There’s many of them and they try to do an 

excellent job. And when they see things happening, they want 

to bring that information forward. And they have a right, and I 

think they have an obligation, to bring that information forward 

for the public. The public has a right to know and nobody 

should interfere in that process. Not the Sask Party government, 

not any government should interfere in that. There is a process. 

 

I don’t know how much teeth, how much teeth this Bill will 

have for the commissioner. Will he have the teeth that he needs 

to protect him and to make sure that he protects the employees? 

Or is it going to be somebody who clearly, Mr. Speaker, goes 

and shares that information with somebody from the ministry? 

And then they’re in fear anyway of what’s going to come down 

because of what they’ve shared, whether it’s breach of policy, 

whether it’s law, and there’s a lot of different things going on. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition, the official 

opposition is used for a reason. People share. And you know, 

they share stuff that they want the official opposition to bring 

forward. Because at the end of the day, the official opposition 

has a job to do, and they will do that forward. And they want to 

share that information. 

 

And I know the government of the day doesn’t like that those 

individuals, employees, will share that information whether it 

comes in little envelopes, it comes anonymous. And I’ve told 

some people, Mr. Speaker, if you have concerns, put it in an 

envelope. And if you’re that fearful of this administration, then 

do it anonymously if you can for fear of your family, your 

health, your financial. Put it in an envelope and send it forward. 

We’ll deal with it. 



6670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

And that’s pretty sad when individuals have to send in stuff 

anonymous — fear of their job, of their family, their business. 

There’s different things that could happen. And there might be a 

family business and maybe they’re worried about that stuff. So I 

mean that must just, in their mind, snowball with all the 

different things. 

 

So when I look at this Bill 147, The Public Interest Disclosure 

Act, I don’t know how much teeth it will have for a 

commissioner. We don’t know how that process will be 

developed, whether the individuals in the ministry . . . What 

kind of clout will they have? Will it be a supervisor? Does that 

individual share the philosophy of the current administration? 

Then I guess they would be happy. But if that individual was 

selected and doesn’t share the same philosophy as the current 

administration, well they might have a problem with that. But 

unfortunately, you know . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that a lot of my colleagues want to 

comment on this. And this Bill came up, and I know there was 

some situations, and this Bill’s coming . . . It’s interesting the 

timing of it. We’re going into an election year, and it’s the 

timing. All of a sudden they want to protect the employees. 

After their record and their past dealing with some of the 

situations are very clearly how they handled it as a Sask Party, 

as that administration has handled, now we’re going into 

election year and they want to now come out with this, saying 

very clearly, we want to protect the employees. 

 

I think the employees know. I think the employees know. And, 

you know, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

employees will speak very clearly. For the colleagues that have 

gone through what they had to go through because they have 

shared and disclosed information, they will support the 

employees out there. Their colleagues will support them. And I 

think they’ll send a message to this government of the way they 

handled it. 

 

And they could have handled it fine, but they chose not to. They 

had a decision to make. They made it. Now they live with that. 

 

But very clearly, you know, I guess I know a number of my 

colleagues would like to comment on this Bill, and there’s other 

Bills that will be debated. But you know, it’s very clear the 

employees must be protected at all costs. When they disclose 

information about a breach of policy, whether there’s something 

that needs to be shared, and even if they think that it’s a breach 

of policy, even if they think it may be someone breaking the 

law, I think we owe them enough to say, bring it forward. If it’s 

eating away at you, if it’s bothering you, if it’s causing you 

stress, then bring it forward. But if they bring it forward, they 

shouldn’t have to feel fear that someone’s going to come after 

them. 

 

When I talk about that, to me it’s a bully does that type of 

behaviour. And we have said no to that very clearly. You can 

intimidate people. You can bully. At the end of the day, the 

people have a right to be protected. And all members of this 

House should make it very clear that Saskatchewan residents, 

people that work in our beautiful province are protected. That 

should be very clear. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m ready to 

adjourn debate on Bill 147. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to enter the debate at second reading on Bill No. 

153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010. This 

legislation was first read on November the 15th of last year. Mr. 

Speaker, over the course of the last, well since November the 

15th, a number of members from the New Democratic Party 

opposition have spoken to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and some 

consultation outside of the Chamber has taken place. But as you 

will see from my remarks this afternoon, a number of things 

still are not very clear on the government’s intent with regards 

to this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and that having been said, we’ll 

require some further clarification on a number of these matters. 

 

Back to November the 15th, Mr. Speaker. When the Minister of 

Justice introduced the legislation, he said a couple of things. 

And just for the record I’d like to quote from the Minister of 

Justice’s second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, because it sets 

the tone for the legislation and my remarks that will come 

forward in a few minutes. So I quote from the Minister of 

Justice, three paragraphs from his November 15th letter, and I 

quote: 

 

This Act will accomplish the following: repeal section 8.1 

of the Act that established the civil division of the 

Provincial Court. It will allow Provincial Court judges 

from other provinces to be appointed as temporary judges 

in Saskatchewan when required to deal with a file where 

all Saskatchewan Provincial Court judges are in a conflict 

or appear to be in a conflict position. 

 

It will reduce the waiting period for disability benefits for 

judges from one year to three months. It will require the 

Judicial Council hearing committee to disclose their 

report following an investigation into a complaint 

concerning the conduct or capacity of a judge, with 

certain exceptions allowed. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the third paragraph: 

 

It will clarify how the Law Society of Saskatchewan 

appoints a replacement representative of the Provincial 

Court Judicial Council if the president of the Law Society 

is unable to attend. It will consequently amend The Small 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6671 

Claims Act, 1997 to allow justices of the peace to hear 

small claims matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it sounds, on the surface of it, to be a very simple 

piece of legislation. The key question, Mr. Speaker, when Bills 

of this nature come forward that members of the opposition 

have to ask, Mr. Speaker, the key question is, who is asking for 

these changes to be made? Why are these changes about to be 

made? It sounds good on the surface, Mr. Speaker, but as some 

of my colleagues have indicated in their remarks in the past, it’s 

always the unintended consequence that we must look for when 

we are seeing something that appears on the surface to be pretty 

simple. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one further quote from the Minister of Justice, his 

November the 15th second reading speech. About the middle of 

his speech, the Minister of Justice says, and I quote, “Mr. 

Speaker, integrity and transparency are fundamental to public 

confidence in the court and the administration of justice in the 

province.” 

 

Very key phrase, Mr. Speaker, from the minister’s second 

reading speech. And I’d just like to give some . . . I’d ask the 

public to give some thought to those words, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Justice talks about integrity and transparency 

fundamental to public confidence in the court and 

administration of justice. Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, anything 

that is done with regards to the independence of the court, Mr. 

Speaker, or the administrative function of the court, integrity 

and transparency are absolutely crucial. I agree with the 

Minister of Justice entirely. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice 

should also know that those words, integrity and transparency, 

must also be applied to the government of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Integrity and transparency, I could paraphrase, 

are fundamental to public confidence in the government of a 

provincial jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a number of cases in this legislature 

over the last three and a half years, since the 2007 election that 

question, Mr. Speaker, those ideals of integrity and 

transparency. One in particular, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t 

forget when we’re thinking about those words for legislation 

like Bill 153 would be the wildlife habitat Act amendments that 

were brought forward, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of the 

Environment introduced that legislation making it very clear 

that consultations had occurred widely across the province — 

consultations with the Wildlife Federation, consultations with 

Ducks Unlimited, Mr. Speaker. And it wasn’t very long after 

those words were spoken in the Chamber, that widespread 

consultation had occurred, that the very organizations named in 

the minister’s speech, Mr. Speaker, came forward to say, we 

weren’t consulted. There was no consultation. We had some 

conversations perhaps, but there was no consultation. 

 

And as a result of subsequent conversations and some further 

consultation subsequent to that information becoming available, 

there have now been some changes, additional changes brought 

forward, Mr. Speaker, not to the full satisfaction of all of the 

parties. But, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about integrity and 

transparency in government, we can’t forget that the wildlife 

habitat Act, Mr. Speaker, that was brought into this House, 

lacked both of those words in describing the way the 

government treated that. 

And, Mr. Speaker, most recently we read in the newspaper the 

collapse of the Montana-Saskatchewan carbon sequestration 

project, Mr. Speaker, something that the government with, we 

assumed, much integrity and transparency announced in the 

rotunda of the legislature and said, we’ve got a deal here. 

Montana and Saskatchewan, great project for carbon 

sequestration, Mr. Speaker. They also added, of course, but it 

depends on money coming from Washington and Ottawa. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Washington and Ottawa said no funding 

coming, way back in October or early November of last year, 

Mr. Speaker, when the legislature was sitting. And only now in 

the month of March, after a member of the media stumbled over 

a fact, Mr. Speaker, does the minister responsible admit that 

when the legislature was sitting last fall this government knew 

of the collapse of this project and did not inform anybody about 

that, Mr. Speaker. Lack of integrity. Lack of transparency. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we all remember when the Minister of 

Health stood in the legislature and said, when he was bringing 

forward changes to the regulations about how hospital 

foundations could access addresses of patients for fundraising 

activities, the Minister of Health stood in the chamber and said 

he had consulted with the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Well it wasn’t hours later, the Privacy Commissioner puts out a 

letter indicating he had had no conversation with the Minister of 

Health. There had no been consultation whatsoever. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, there was a ruling in this Chamber holding 

the minister responsible for contempt of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. A ruling said there was a prima facie case, the 

principle involving the Minister of Health who was not properly 

forthcoming with his description of his consultation. Lack of 

integrity, complete lack of transparency in describing what a 

Bill is intended to be and what consultations have occurred 

regarding that. 

 

So when the Minister of Justice says in his second reading 

speech introducing Bill 153, “Integrity and transparency are 

fundamental to public confidence in the court and the 

administration of justice in this province,” he also must 

understand that integrity and transparency are fundamental to 

public confidence in the government of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we in the opposition are going 

to ensure, just as we held the government to account on those 

other matters, Mr. Speaker, we will hold the government to 

account on these matters in this piece of legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me go to comments that were made also on 

November the 15th by the member of the New Democratic 

Party who spoke first on this piece of legislation, the member 

from Regina lakeshore, a previous . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Lakeview. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate the correction. Regina Lakeview, Mr. Speaker, a 

former minister of Justice in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and he had a number of things to say about this piece 

of legislation. But I’d like to quote briefly from his remarks. He 

talks about, he says, “. . . all of these administrative changes 

. . .” Now let me just make sure that Hansard gets this correct, 

Mr. Speaker. I am quoting from page 6046 of Hansard, 



6672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

November the 15th, the member from Regina Lakeview said: 

 

But all of these administrative changes that are here still 

go back to this fundamental question about who requested 

this particular kind of change. Is it the kind of request that 

actually comes from the judiciary itself? As I said before, 

there were recommendations from the provincial 

compensation committee around one specific clause. 

There was also request of change from the Law Society 

on another clause, but all of the other changes, there 

wasn’t an indication of where the request was coming 

[from for these] . . . changes. 

 

And then finally on that same page, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Regina Lakeview says, and I quote: 

 

So on the whole, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some 

appropriate needed changes, but for some of the main 

ones we need a better explanation of where this comes 

from and why. And we have to be extremely careful that 

it is not just a budgetary type of response coming out of 

the Ministry of Justice to deal with some of the financial 

issues that the government as a whole has, because 

ultimately those things, as they’re vetted by courts at 

various levels, will be clearly identified as that. And 

they’ll cause problems for our Ministry of Justice, but 

also for our community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me to be fairly clear that some of 

the matters that the government identifies as housekeeping, 

matters that were brought forward by the Law Society, Mr. 

Speaker, or the judiciary themselves, have been thought through 

and are well-positioned for going forward. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the former minister of 

Justice suggests that we have to look at unintended 

consequence. And he also suggests that some of these matters 

may be stepping into or allowing the Minister of Justice to do 

things that previously have been done by the chief judge, 

administrative matters that are the responsibility and should be 

maintained within the judiciary or the Law Society that are now 

being taken over by the Minister of Justice. Administrative 

matters, Mr. Speaker, and we have to take a look at that. We 

have to look at that very, very carefully. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be saying a little bit more about 

this on the next Bill . . . We’ve got a second Bill that’s 

consequential amendments to this one, Mr. Speaker. But this 

Bill also allows the government to appoint temporary judges 

currently serving on the bench in other provinces. The minister 

has said that this will address cases where the available judges 

on the Saskatchewan Provincial Court have a conflict of interest 

with one or more of the parties involved in a particular matter. 

This does seem simple enough, Mr. Speaker, but we need to 

ensure that there’s clear understanding about when this gets 

done, how it gets done, and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of things in here that we’re pleased to 

support, a number of things that we wish the government would 

stand up and clarify, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of integrity 

and transparency. 

 

[16:15] 

With that, with those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

acknowledge for the government that there are a number of 

other colleagues of mine on the opposition benches that would 

like to speak to this legislation before it goes to committee, and 

therefore I would move that debate on Bill 153 be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak to second 

reading of Bill 154, Provincial Court amendment, consequential 

amendments, Mr. Speaker. This Bill does follow Bill 153, 

which I spoke to just a few moments ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we are all aware that consequential amendments 

mean that there’s a main piece of legislation, and then there are 

subsequent legislation that relates to the first. So I will be fairly 

brief in my comments on this piece of legislation. I am 

interested in repeating a number of comments that were made 

by another member of the opposition earlier in the debate, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’ll do that in a couple of minutes. 

 

This Bill, 154, makes amendments to The Small Claims Act to 

allow the government to repeal the civil division of the 

Provincial Court and transfer significant responsibilities 

currently handled by Provincial Court judges to justices of the 

peace. There may be some merit, as I’ll indicate further in a few 

moments, Mr. Speaker, there may be some merit in doing this 

in some limited cases. However there are potentially serious 

implications for the quality of service being provided to people 

appearing in court and for their right of a fair hearing. 

 

We need to ask a number of questions, such as what functions 

are being transferred out of Provincial Court. What type of 

cases are going to be handled by justices of the peace? What is 

the potential impact on the service that people receive when 

they go to court? Will their rights be impacted? Whose rights 

will be impacted? Who stands to benefit from this change? And 

as I’d indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, who indeed actually 

requested that this change be made? Did it come from the 

judiciary, Mr. Speaker, or did it come from somewhere within 

the minister’s office? 

 

The minister in his second reading remarks back on November 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6673 

the 15th of 2010 was very short, Mr. Speaker. In fact the 

minister’s remarks are no more than three paragraphs in length, 

in which he outlines the couple of changes that are in the Bill. 

But he does not indicate at all where the direction for this 

legislation came from or what impacts it might have. 

 

My colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview, a former 

minister of Justice, had a number of things to say, also on 

November the 15th, Mr. Speaker. Quite a bit of time has passed 

of course since November the 15th, and I’d like to put on record 

again some of the things that the member from Regina 

Lakeview had to say at that time because I think it’s very 

pertinent to the debate and to the current knowledge that 

members would have, thinking about this Bill as it goes 

forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote a couple of paragraphs from 

the comments made by the member from Regina Lakeview at 

page 6047 of Hansard, November the 15th, 2010. Mr. Speaker, 

he says thank you to the Deputy Speaker in the Chair at the 

time, and I quote: 

 

The minister had an opportunity to further explain where 

some of these requests had come from around this 

change. But clearly in the remarks as it relates to this 

particular Bill, No. 154, the minister has said that they 

will be using justices of the peace to do the work of 

provincial court judges in a number of areas where they 

have not traditionally done this work. 

 

And one of the points made is that small claims cases 

obviously would be handled not by a Provincial Court 

judge in all cases, but by a Justice of the Peace. And this 

is a change. It’s like contracting out work, I suppose, to 

another group of workers. It is important that the minister 

tell us if this is a request that is actually coming from the 

Provincial Court judges, the chief judge and their group, 

or if this is something that is being done as a 

administrative financial solution to the situation. 

 

Because when it comes to the courts, the ultimate test is 

whether the citizens of Saskatchewan perceive that they 

receive justice and that they actually receive justice. I 

have a great deal of respect for the justices of the peace, 

but I know that there are many situations where the skills 

of a Provincial Court judge are required for solution of a 

number of the issues. And if this in any way causes 

members or citizens of Saskatchewan to have less faith in 

our court structure, then I think it’s a problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Lakeview on November 

the 15th expressed those concerns. Mr. Speaker, a number of 

months have passed to today, Mr. Speaker, here in the middle 

of the month of March, and this matter has still not been 

clarified by the government of the province of Saskatchewan. 

The Minister of Justice, after several months after these 

questions or this issue has been raised, still has not clarified this 

very simple question: who requested these changes? Mr. 

Speaker, an important question to have answered before we 

move forward so that we in the opposition, members of the 

public, and in fact members within the justice system itself can 

have a full understanding of the context in which these changes 

are being brought forward. 

We do know that there is stress in the small claims system that 

needs some attention. We do know that there are financial costs 

within the small claims systems that the government needs to 

address. And we do know that the Provincial Court judges have 

an interest in seeing some stress removed from the 

administrative side of the small claims system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are matters that legislation could address with regards 

to the administration of the small claims court system that can 

be addressed in a small claims Act of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are important matters. Again, falls into the 

circumstances that in relation to the previous Bill 153, the 

Minister of Justice said, we need to have integrity and 

transparency in the system. Well, Mr. Speaker, in order for us to 

move forward on Bill 154, we need clarification, we need 

integrity, and we need transparency. That having been said, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a Bill on which not a lot can be said or argued 

until such time as there is additional information provided. 

Even consultation is difficult under these circumstances. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, knowing that a number of my 

colleagues are going to want to speak to not only Bill 153, but 

154 which is in front of us today, I would move that debate on 

Bill 154, provincial court amendment, consequential 

amendments debate, be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 154, The Provincial Court 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s today 

my task and my honour to speak on Bill 157, An Act to amend 

The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. This is a pretty elaborate 

Bill in that it takes some 44 pages just of explanatory notes 

explaining clause by clause and the existing clauses, and then 

what is coming up. But I don’t propose to necessarily go 

through each of those clauses, Mr. Speaker. What I do propose 

to do is to capsulate what I see this Bill, Bill 157, doing. 

 

What it is, is a move to make all of the regulations for the oil 

and gas industry seamless, that is, easy — they have one-stop 

shopping, so to speak — and to have our regulations coincide 

with Alberta’s regulations so that it is very easy for the oil and 

gas industry to go ahead and drill in Saskatchewan. And on the 

surface of it, that is great. 

 

But I want to point out one of the things that really troubles me. 

This Bill, the government goes to great contortions to bend and 



6674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

twist and make a pretzel out of itself so that the oil and gas 

industry can drill for oil and gas — something that they do 

every day in every way, not only in Saskatchewan, not only in 

Alberta, not only in BC [British Columbia], Manitoba, other 

jurisdictions in Canada, but throughout the States, throughout 

the world, throughout the entire world they do this, this oil and 

gas industry. 

 

Anyway the government is twisting itself all out of shape to 

make it easy for the oil and gas industry — everything for the 

oil and gas industry, and nothing for people. What I mean by 

nothing for people is if you talk to, particularly, seniors that 

have seen their rents go from 500 to $800 in the last two years, 

they wonder why there isn’t some attention paid to that matter. 

Why all of the attention paid to oil and gas? If you were to talk 

to people involved in post-secondary education, they would 

wonder why isn’t there a little more attention to post-secondary 

education, as opposed to a Bill that is lengthier than the 

explanatory notes — and they’re 44 pages long. 

 

Why is it that the government would spend so much time on 

The Oil and Gas Conservation Act . . . And by the name it 

sounds like it’s a great idea. But one of the things that this Act 

does, Mr. Speaker, is it provides some regulation on how you 

would deal with . . . I want to get the term right, but it is with 

waste gases like carbon dioxide. 

 

Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, two years ago in the rotunda, not 

100 yards from where I’m standing, the Premier and the 

Governor of Montana stood and announced with great fanfare, 

the biggest fanfare they possibly could, a carbon sequestration 

project between Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Huge fanfare — I 

remember it. I remember it vividly. And that would . . . Well I 

mean history has shown that just died in the dark of night, just 

before this legislature came back to sit. No pronouncement at 

all that the carbon sequestration was going to disappear, that 

carbon sequestration project or program with Manitoba and 

Saskatchewan. And it had involvement with the Harper 

government and the federal government of the United States of 

America. 

 

No mention of that cancellation, and yet now we see this talking 

about carbon dioxide as a waste gas. And it’s just one relatively 

small part; it probably appears in various other places in the Bill 

too. But the focus of The Oil and Gas Conservation Act is not 

to deal with carbon dioxide. It is to deal with the oil industry 

and making things easy for that industry. And again I say, 

making it easy while costs escalate for regular people, for my 

constituents. We’ve seen two out of the three years that the 

Sask Party’s been in government, we’ve seen natural gas prices 

charged to homeowners for home heating being the highest in 

Canada for two out of three years. And the gas is produced 

essentially in Saskatchewan. We produce more gas than we use 

here. 

 

We don’t restrict SaskEnergy to buy its gas from Saskatchewan 

only. Indeed a fair amount of it comes I understand out of 

Alberta, and it’s all price dependent. But they would buy, I 

would assume when they’re buying out of Alberta, it’s because 

of a lower price than what they’re able to secure in 

Saskatchewan. Surely to goodness we don’t have SaskEnergy 

going to Alberta and paying a higher price for natural gas just 

so that the government can jack up the rates for homeowners for 

our home heating, natural gas here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So we’re witnessing the worst of worlds for my constituents, for 

the people of Saskatchewan. We’re seeing high rates of, high 

costs of natural gas for our home heating and other uses here in 

Saskatchewan, and yet we see a Bill designed to make it ever 

easier for the oil and gas industry. 

 

You know, I filled up with gas this morning, gasoline coming 

from the oil that’s pumped out of the ground. A buck twenty, a 

buck twenty for a litre of gasoline. A buck twenty, Mr. Speaker. 

I just don’t recall it ever being higher than that here in 

Saskatchewan. But we see prices just escalating incredibly fast. 

There’s no belief that diesel fuel is going to do anything other 

than go up over the next eight weeks as we get into spring 

seeding and farm families, farmers are out on the field and 

needing to fill their diesel tanks. 

 

We see the oil industry that collectively we could call it the we 

can industry. You know, why do they charge a buck twenty a 

litre? Because we can. That’s the best explanation I can come 

up with. 

 

The alternative explanation I can come up with is one where the 

Premier had promised the people of Saskatchewan that there 

would be a cent a litre reduction in the Saskatchewan gas tax 

for every dollar that gasoline went above $60 a barrel. Well it 

dropped to $100 a barrel this morning. That was the report I 

heard on my way in — not 60 but 100. That’s $40 higher than 

where the Premier triggered, said that we should be providing 

relief on our gas tax for consumers as we fill up at the pumps. 

 

Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see that as being another 

promise kept for the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t see that 

being a promise as it relates to oil and gas. I don’t see that being 

a promise that is helping my constituents one thin dime, not at 

all. It’s a promise totally ignored. It’s something that is just . . . 

The silence is deafening on that relief, that that was a great idea 

when the Sask Party were in opposition, but when they’re in 

government and can actually implement some of their great 

ideas, well what a difference a day makes when that day is an 

election day, and they move from opposition seats to 

government seats. What a difference a day makes. 

 

So no tax relief on gas prices for consumers, whether it be gas 

for your vehicles, or diesel fuel for your vehicles, or propane for 

your vehicles, or also no relief if it comes to natural gas for 

your home heating needs and other needs. No relief at all. And 

yet in Bill 157, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Act, we see a headlong rush to make it ever easier for the oil 

and gas industry. 

 

Now you might get the notion that I’m opposed to the oil and 

gas industry, and that is absolutely false. We need industry, but 

we need things in balance. We need a government that will look 

after the people of Saskatchewan as well as the industry. And 

you can’t have just everything for industry and nothing but cost 

increases for people. People eventually come to realize that the 

government is not on their side. 

 

If we’re in a boom time, a time of great prosperity, well you 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6675 

know, seniors on largely fixed incomes aren’t seeing that when 

their rents go from 500 to $800 a month in the apartments, the 

modest apartments that they can rent in the north end of Regina. 

This is a $300 grab out of their fixed incomes. And that means 

$300 less to spend on food, food which is going up at a higher 

rate today than it has at . . . at a higher percentage rate today, 

food getting more expensive by the week. I don’t want to 

overstate the reality of food costs, but food costs worldwide are 

just escalating at a unprecedented, high rate. 

 

We have natural disasters. We’ve had unprecedented flooding 

in Australia that has really affected their food production and 

their ability to add food into the food chain, if you like, to 

export to much of the rest of the world. Now we have a 

situation in Japan that is less about food production and more 

about just a devastating, actually unprecedented, loss. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve never seen anything like it. And indeed in 

members’ statements, both sides of the Assembly recognized 

that with our lead statements that Japan is in crisis, well they 

claim the worst crisis they’ve had since the Second World War. 

 

So we’ve got food prices escalating. We’ve got rents escalating 

at an unprecedented rate in Saskatchewan. And we have 

giveaways for the oil and gas industry just so that they can do 

business even better, even easier. I’m not opposed to making 

things more seamless and better for the oil and gas industry, but 

things should be seamless and better equally for my 

constituents, for the people of Saskatchewan. Things should be 

improving for them. 

 

Earlier today in question period, we had some questions around 

wait-list times in health care. And you know, some pretty 

legitimate questions because it seems that wait-lists, what the 

government touts as a great success, isn’t all such a great 

success. 

 

The doctor retention, physician retention program is not the 

success that the government is touting it to be either. There is, 

well by way of explanation, out of the colleges, the universities 

that graduate doctors, there’s 17 such universities in Canada, 

and the U of S is 16th out of 17 — second last. That doesn’t 

seem to me that for physician retention that we have a lot to 

crow about yet in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Oil and Gas Conservation Act has 

amendments that will develop more efficient, transparent, and 

consistent compliance assurance and enforcement processes. 

And what does that mean? It means that in this legislation, the 

government is recognizing that there is a difference between 

enforcement and inspection. And that shows up in the 

explanatory notes many, many times, but what it means is we’ll 

develop more efficient, transparent, and consistent compliance 

assurance and enforcement processes. Mostly what it means is 

we will issue blanket licences without too much checking to the 

oil and gas industry and what they’re doing. Why? Because we 

are in this headlong rush to have more, more, more oil and gas 

wells drilled at any cost. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that there’s a couple of 

reasons why the oil and gas industry is fairly excited and fairly 

happy to be doing business in Saskatchewan. One of the reasons 

is that if we were to set up an oil company, we’d drill and we 

hit either oil or gas, but let’s go with natural gas. You drill and 

you find natural gas, and it’s in a producible amount. When we 

were in government, we guaranteed eight weeks we’d have you 

hooked up and your gas producing. We would have the pipeline 

to you. 

 

In Alberta, the times of that same time was more like eight 

months and beyond. You were very lucky if you were able to 

drill a gas well and get it producing in anything under eight 

months in Alberta versus eight weeks in Saskatchewan. Huge 

difference. If I were part owner of — and I’m not — but if I 

was part owner of an oil company and I wanted to get into 

production, I would want my . . . I’d punch the hole, get the 

hole drilled, and get it tested. I would want it producing so I 

could get some of my cost of drilling back at the earliest 

opportunity. And that tells me Saskatchewan will be a great 

place to do business. 

 

I want to just contrast that with a country that I had the honour 

of visiting some nearly four years ago now, and that was 

Nigeria, where at that time — and I don’t know if it’s still 

happening — but most of the oil and gas was produced on the 

delta area. And people were actually cutting into the pipeline 

and stealing the oil because the royalties were all taken to 

Abuja, the capital of Nigeria, and spent hugely on the military 

which was very well financed as opposed to program spending 

for people, Mr. Speaker. And there was this huge sense of 

desperation in an incredibly oil and gas rich part of the world, 

an incredibly oil rich area. 

 

But the oil and gas industry were very concerned about it, 

naturally, because they would have their people out drilling and 

building pipelines and so on only to have pipelines damaged so 

that somebody could steal some of the oil and gas and then 

presumably resell it on their own. But the oil and gas industry 

was responsible for the environmental degradation in that area. 

 

And I invite you just to go onto Google Earth, and there’s a part 

of Google Earth where it talks about light pollution. I’m talking 

flares from gas, flares from oil, as well as cities give off a 

significant amount of light pollution. That light makes the area 

lighter. But if you go onto Google Earth, you will see that one 

of the areas of the world that has the greatest concentration of 

flaring of gas and oil is in Nigeria in the delta region. 

 

We deal with it in a little different manner here. In the southeast 

part of the province, when we started really producing, finding 

ever larger barrels — well the Williston Basin, once we started 

tapping into that and started finding some gas, there was 

relatively short-term flaring that really bothered a fair number 

of us when we saw it happening. But what did the province of 

Saskatchewan do is try to, through SaskEnergy, through 

TransGas, build pipelines so that they could stop flaring and 

burning — that is burning off the gas and products — and bring 

them through a pipeline, produce them so that we could use that 

natural gas for industrial use and home heating and those sorts 

of things. So rather than flaring the gas, we used it. 

 

And this was a situation where we had a Crown corporation that 

was at the ready, so to speak, to help make that gas collection 

system pay. It wasn’t a case of one small gas producer having to 

build the entire line. It was a case of, you’ve got a product; 

others have product that is being flared, we can collect that and 

make it commercially viable with a series of collector pipelines 



6676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

that get to an ever bigger pipeline, until we could produce that 

gas. That, Mr. Speaker, is really what gas conservation is about 

and its best utilization of the product that we produce here in 

Saskatchewan. And incidentally it’s the best economic use of 

the product as well. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So in addition to the problem of pipelines being cut in Nigeria, 

Mr. Speaker, there was also an issue of workers being held for 

ransom. I’m talking oil and gas workers being held for ransom. 

Indeed while I was in Nigeria, there were two Canadian 

legislators that had gone, rented a car, and tried to go into the 

oil and gas producing area and wound up in significant trouble. 

And the Canadian Embassy just practically stood on its head to 

get those two legislators safely back in their hotel in Abuja. The 

embassy had advised them not to do what they were doing, but 

they were insistent in any event, but I understand it involved the 

Canadian Embassy chartering a special plane to go and pick 

these legislators up, and who knows what happened to the rental 

car. I didn’t have to deal with it and nor was I asked to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, oil and gas companies can deal in places like 

Nigeria that are wealthy in oil and wealthy in gas, but tend to 

have lawlessness and corruption as part of the regime. This is 

not something that we would use to characterize dealing with 

Saskatchewan. We would not characterize the government nor 

the department or ministry as lawless or somehow corrupt. 

Those are not terms that we use in Saskatchewan. I’m positive 

that the oil and gas industry and other industry would appreciate 

that. And I can guarantee you that, from my perspective, I 

absolutely cherish the fact that we do try and value laws. 

 

We try and pass legislation that is good. We have a system, we 

have a system that allows us to . . . Typically a government 

proposed legislation, and typically an opposition asks questions 

around what that legislation does. And part of our job is to point 

out part of how a government makes choices, and that’s really 

what governance is all about. 

 

And in this case, the government has chosen to give to the oil 

and gas industry amendments that make drilling seamless, that 

make it very easy to drill for oil and gas. And while they’ve 

chosen, the government’s chosen to do that, they have by 

definition chosen not to deal with the people of Saskatchewan, 

not to deal with rents that are escalating or a housing crisis 

where in Regina for at least three years now the rental rate has 

been at 1 per cent or less, which is essentially a full . . . every 

place is rented. One per cent is, that really is housing that 

absolutely needs to be dealt with on an emergency basis and 

fixed up before it could be rented again. 

 

So the choices are fairly stark — choose to give everything to 

the oil and gas industry and, by definition, choose to do nothing 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is fairly complex, and I want to point out 

a couple of things about the oil and gas industry that I have not 

mentioned yet. One of the things I wanted to point out is that — 

certainly in the first two years that we have production 

numbers, first two years of the Sask Party government — oil 

and gas production actually fell from where it was when the 

NDP, under Lorne Calvert as premier, what the gas and oil 

production was in our tenure. 

 

Rents were lower in our tenure. I’m talking housing and 

apartment rents. Food costs were lower. Gasoline costs were 

significantly lower — well under two-thirds what they are today 

to buy a litre of gas at the pump. Many, many things were 

different. 

 

And the world changes. That’s just one of the realities of it. But 

I know in the second reading speeches the member for 

Kindersley, the minister responsible for this legislation, said 

that part of Saskatchewan being a have province is our regime 

of royalties and our ability to help the oil and gas and other 

industries work. But I want to remind people through you, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan became a have province not in 

2008, the first full year of the Sask Party government. It became 

a have province not in 2008 but in 2005. In 2005 Saskatchewan 

was a have province and has been, has enjoyed that ever, has 

enjoyed that ever since. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud that in our time in government, 

our 16 years in government, not only did we cut the frills and 

pay the bills, but we gave our Saskatchewan back to the people. 

We eliminated deficit and debt accumulation every single year 

once we attained a balanced budget, which was our second full 

year of government. In every single year, we paid down the 

debt to some degree. Some years it wasn’t a lot of debt 

paydown. But every single year, if you add the Crown 

corporation debt and the General Revenue Fund, those debts, 

add them together, and the debt was consistently down for 

13-plus years under the NDP. We were really, really in a 

situation of huge expansion. 

 

And people do what people will. And the election put us in 

opposition and the Sask Party in government, and that’s the way 

a democracy works. But we had the economy going, firing on 

all cylinders, and I’m very proud of that. 

 

There’s one other thing I wanted to say that we did at that time. 

In 1992-93, which was our first year of our own budget — and 

this was still a deficit budget; it was our first year that was ours 

alone after the Devine Conservatives — I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that the percentage of program spending that we spent 

on Agriculture was 6.2 per cent of our total program spending, 

6.2 per cent. The Sask Party government is very proud of its 

Agriculture budget, but I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

6.2 per cent of the total program spending. This year it was 3.9 

per cent — roughly two-thirds of the Agriculture budget. If you 

want to compare an apple and an apple — I’m going per cent; 

I’m not taking into account inflation — but 6.2 per cent under 

the NDP for Agriculture, 3.9 per cent under the Sask Party for 

Agriculture, that is quite a difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hear the question, and it’s a good question: what 

does that have to do with the Bill 157, An Act to amend The Oil 

and Gas Conservation Act? And, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly 

what it has to do with it. This Bill is about giving away 

everything to the oil industry so that the oil and gas industry can 

drill in a seamless manner. But they get everything they asked 

for in this Bill, everything that they asked for, for the oil and 

gas industry, and nothing for farmers — farmers that, mark my 

words, two months from now when they’re out in the fields, 

diesel fuel costs are going to be higher than they are today. 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6677 

When farmers are desperate to fill their tanks, diesel fuel costs 

are going to do nothing but go up in the short term. 

 

And I predict this government, that government there, the Sask 

Party government is going to sit on its hands and say, well it’s 

the world economy and by gosh, Saskatchewan is prosperous, it 

is so prosperous that well it just doesn’t matter that you’re 

going to have some trouble getting your crop in, you’re going to 

have some trouble filling your tractor with fuel so that you can 

seed your farm land. 

 

It’s not going to matter that your rent, for seniors in the cities or 

in the country, your rents have gone from 500 to 700 to $800 a 

month. That doesn’t matter. What matters is that the oil and gas 

industry get to do whatever it is they want to do, and they get to 

charge a buck twenty a litre for the gas. Now I see some of the 

government members are smiling at this, and it’s good. I always 

try to be a little bit entertaining in my speeches, Mr. Speaker. 

But I tell you, it doesn’t bring much joy on any of my 

constituents when they pull up to a gas pump and it’s a buck 

twenty a litre. Three years ago it was what, 67, 68 cents a litre? 

It’s a buck twenty now, buck twenty. 

 

No joy in that, and the government sits on its hands. Even when 

they had a proposal when they were in opposition of how they 

were going to fix it, they had the proposal of how they would 

provide some help to my constituents and the people of 

Saskatchewan, but that was in opposition. Now they’re in 

government. Now they’re realizing, oh by gosh, being in 

government means it’s about choices. 

 

And we should choose to do things we can to make it better for 

the oil and gas industry to deal in a more effective way, 

environmentally sound, paying proper royalties, paying proper 

taxes, not only to the provincial government but to the 

municipalities, for heaven’s sakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I haven’t even talked about the municipalities that want to make 

sure that they are heard. When an oil or gas company decides 

it’s going to drill in their municipality, they want the 

opportunity to make comment on it. They want the opportunity 

to make sure that that oil and gas . . . They want to make sure 

that they are heard when it comes to local sensitivities, when it 

comes to environmental sensitivities, when it comes to making 

sure that we do it properly, to make sure that every bit of every 

unit of energy that’s extracted from the ground in Saskatchewan 

is done as efficiently, as effectively — cost-effectively — and 

for the greatest benefit of Saskatchewan people and the industry 

as well. 

 

We want to be partners with them, but we don’t want to always 

have to turn the other cheek. We don’t want oil and gas to get a 

Bill that takes 44 pages of explanatory notes alone and try and 

explain what we’ve done, what the Sask Party government has 

done for renters. Explain what you’ve done for renters in 

Regina Coronation Park. I can tell you . . . [inaudible] . . . 

nothing, Mr. Speaker. What have they done for people in 

Regina Coronation Park that fill up their vehicle with gasoline 

or diesel fuel? I can tell you . . . [inaudible] . . . nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say shame on the government that is everything 

for one industry and nothing for the people of Saskatchewan. 

The people deserve to come along and get some of the benefits 

of the prosperity that’s happening. They deserve to get some of 

the joy out of things that seem to be happening in 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan people deserve to have a 

government that’s on their side, that will stand up for them and 

with them, not just for them, but with them, arm in arm. Share 

the good times. Share the bad times, but be of the people. That 

what’s Saskatchewan people want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have some concerns around this Bill 157, An Act to amend The 

Oil and Gas Conservation Act . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour, being now 5 p.m., this 

Assembly will recess until tonight at 7. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6647 

  Furber ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6647, 6649 

  Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................... 6647, 6649 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6647, 6648 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6647 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6648 

  Wilson ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 6648 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 6648, 6649 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6648 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6648 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6648 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6649 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6649 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6649 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6650 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6650 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Earthquake in Japan 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6650 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6650 

 Agricultural Safety Week 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6651 

 Canadian Red Cross Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6651 

 Wait Times for Cancer Patients Reduced 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6651 

 Psychologist’s Concerns 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6651 

 Congratulations to Junior Curlers 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6652 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for Catholic School Divisions 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6652 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6652 

 Relationship Between Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6653 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6653 

 Investments in Health Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6655 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6655 

 Contract Negotiations with Resident Physicians 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6655 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6656 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 164 — The Police Amendment Act, 2011 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6657 

 Bill No. 165 — The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Amendment Act, 2011 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6658 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6658 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6658 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6658 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6658 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6659 



 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6660 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6663 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6667 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6670 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6672 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6673 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


