




















































Hansard: May 17, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 63A  TUESDAY, MAY 17, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7645 

 May 17, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with a request to all members 

for an extended leave, for a leave for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for extended leave. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you’ll understand in a 

moment why I’m a little bit lost for words today. I had the 

privilege to have lunch with some extraordinary men a moment 

ago, and I’d like to introduce them to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly today. They have joined us in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, and in no particular order: Warrant 

Officer Jeff Dickson, 10th Field Regiment, regular force, 

Regina, Saskatchewan. If maybe we’ll get our guests to just 

stand and give us a quick wave. Captain Rob Haroldson, deputy 

commanding officer of the Royal Regina Rifles, reservist, 

Regina; Corporal Jim Sinclair, Royal Regina Rifles, reservist, 

Regina Beach; Sergeant Peter Gustafson, Royal Regina Rifles, 

regular force, originally from Kamloops, British Columbia, now 

happy to be, well I hope happy to be living in our capital city, 

the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these four men have received the 

Commander-in-Chief Unit Commendation, which is presented 

by the Governor General. It is awarded to, and I quote, “a unit 

or subunit of the Canadian Forces that has performed an 

extraordinary deed or activity of a rare high standard in 

extremely hazardous circumstances.” 

 

Warrant Officer Dickson, Captain Haroldson, and Corporal 

Sinclair were members of the 1st Battalion, Princess Patricia’s 

Canadian Light Infantry. Their battle group was awarded the 

Commander-in- Chief’s commendation for their combat role on 

the ground in Afghanistan in the very important time period of 

January to August 2006. They were the first Canadian battle 

group on the ground to take the hand-off from US [United 

States] forces when the changeover from the US-led operation, 

Enduring Freedom, to the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty 

Organization]-led mission occurred in 2006. 

 

Their battle group, task force Orion, or the Hunters, were 

engaged in almost continuous fighting with insurgents on the 

ground. They were engaged in 29 major operations. They saw 

more than 100 firefights with the Taliban. They mastered the 

very difficult task of dispatching attack helicopters and fighter 

jets while firing live artillery. They clocked over 1.7 million 

kilometres of driving. Their efforts secured coalition forces’ 

ability to deliver humanitarian assistance throughout Kandahar 

province. 

 

Sergeant Gustafson was attached to the 1st Battalion, Royal 

Canadian Regiment when his unit, A Company, 2nd Battalion, 

Princess Patricia’s Canadian Light Infantry, was shipped over to 

support the 1st Royal Canadian Regiment. His battalion 

received the Commander-in-Chief Commendation for 

“courageous and professional execution [and I’m quoting] of 

duty in Afghanistan during August and September 2006 that 

prevented the capture of Kandahar City by insurgents.” 

 

Sergeant Gustafson’s unit participated in Operation Medusa, 

which was conducted to clear insurgents from Panjwaii district 

of Kandahar province. This operation was conducted alongside 

our US, Dutch, and UK [United Kingdom] allies as well as the 

Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police. 

Fighting in extremely difficult terrain and succeeding where 

other larger forces had failed, the 1st Battalion, Royal Canadian 

Regiment managed to defeat a well-coordinated insurgent force. 

All of these soldiers were actively engaged in some of the most 

sustained fighting of the entire NATO mission in Afghanistan, 

and some of them the most intense combat the forces had seen 

in some 50 years. 

 

Other Saskatchewan regular and reserve forces who served in 

Task Force Orion and received the Commander-in-Chief 

Commendation include Chief Warrant Officer Allan 

Rishchynski, Bombardier Nathan Betz, Master Corporal Sean 

Wooley, Major Gwen Bourque, Captain Brendan Clancy, 

Master Corporal Brian Mollison; Bombardier Tyrel Braaten, 

retired; Sergeant Rob Crane, retired. 

 

Sadly, five Canadian Forces members from our province who 

served in the units receiving this commendation were killed 

during active duty: Captain Nichola Goddard, who grew up in 

Black Lake and Lac La Ronge, Corporal Bryce Keller of 

Regina, Master Corporal Jeffrey Walsh of Regina, Corporal 

David Braun of Raymore, Corporal Shane Keating of Dalmeny. 

All received this commendation posthumously. 

 

To say thank you to these men seems hardly enough. There’s 

really not anything that we can say except that, and mean it very 

sincerely as we do, for their willingness to serve their country, 

to serve freedom, to make us freer and to make us safer, and 

significantly, to build a better life for the people of Afghanistan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, lest there be any doubt about the result of the 

actions of these men and their comrades, I want to leave you, if 

I can, Mr. Speaker, and all members, with a poem that was 

written by Jeffrey Walsh who, as I just mentioned, lost his life. 

He wrote this poem for his little girl before he left. He said: 

 

I know that they are out there: 

I’ll not be ignorant any more: 

Pulling the blanket over my head will not keep them 

from coming ashore; 

Instead I choose to confront them 

as afraid as I might be; 

Because if I don’t stop the monsters 

our children can never be free. 

 



7646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, it is, as I say, a small thing to pay tribute to these 

men and through them to the many that they represent, but we 

do that today with a great sense of pride and an even greater 

sense of gratitude. Mr. Speaker, we welcome these men to their 

Legislative Assembly today in Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of Her 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

join the Premier in the comments that he made welcoming these 

four gentlemen, Captain Rob Haroldson, Warrant Officer Jeff 

Dickson, Sergeant Peter Gustafson, and Corporal Jim Sinclair, 

and to congratulate them and recognize the commendation that 

they received, the Commander-in-Chief Unit Commendation. 

 

The Premier went into detail on the reasons for the 

commendation, but I have to say, as a Saskatchewan resident, I 

think for many of us we feel that we are somehow removed 

from conflicts ongoing throughout the world, and especially in 

Afghanistan because of the distance. But when we see regular 

force members and reservists from our communities that have 

gone to serve in these conflicts and served with great bravery 

and distinction, it really does bring home to us the importance 

of being involved in these conflicts and to making sure that 

Canada’s presence is felt throughout the world because Canada 

does carry with it a great reputation throughout the world, not 

only as peacekeepers but of being involved in these conflicts 

with great distinction. And these four gentlemen really do 

signify that I think to each and every one of us. 

 

So to join with the Premier and on behalf of the official 

opposition, welcome to the legislature, and also thank you for 

the contributions that you have made and carried with you with 

distinction throughout the world, and I’m sure you will continue 

to in the careers that lie ahead of you. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you I’d like to introduce three new, exciting 

Saskatoon-based Saskatchewan Party candidates in the west 

gallery. And these individuals are Ms. Jennifer Campeau who is 

currently an instructor at the University of Saskatchewan, just 

completing her Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] in the department 

of Native studies. She also works with the Saskatoon Tribal 

Council and with Junior Achievement out of Saskatoon. 

 

As well I’d like to introduce Zoria Broughton. Zoria is also a 

graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. She has experience 

as a teacher and community coordinator. She’s been an active 

volunteer with the Saskatchewan literacy, the northern 

Saskatchewan children’s festival, the Saskatoon Correctional 

Centre, and the Kidney Foundation of Canada. 

 

And I’d also like to introduce Mr. Ali Muzaffar, and with him, 

his father, Muzaffar Zafar, his brother, Shahzad, as well as their 

dear friend, Musaddaq. And he’s the owner of a construction 

company and certainly new to Saskatchewan over the course of 

the last three years. Came here with his family to ensure that 

they could enjoy the fruits of growth that are under way and 

contribute to it. 

Mr. Speaker, Jennifer’s running in Saskatoon Fairview, Zoria in 

Saskatoon Nutana, and Ali in Saskatoon Massey Place. I ask all 

members of the Assembly to welcome these three from their 

vantage point today — and ideally from a slightly different 

vantage point just after the next election — all these three to 

their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join the Premier and the Deputy Leader of the New Democratic 

Party in adding a personal welcome to Warrant Officer 

Dickson, Captain Haroldson, Corporal Sinclair, and Sergeant 

Gustafson to the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier indicated the province’s pride and 

gratitude to these four individuals, Mr. Speaker. But I wanted to 

add, my late father, William David Taylor, was a member of 

Regina Rifles out of World War II. When he came home and 

after he retired, he was an active member of the Regina Rifles 

reunion organization. He attended numerous meetings and 

spread the word about the great history of the Rifles throughout 

the world, Mr. Speaker. When I think of my late father today, I 

often think of the Regina Rifles at the same time. 

 

I thank these men for their current and personal contributions, 

Mr. Speaker, but I want the public to know and recognize and 

remember, they are part — three of them anyway — are part of 

an organization, a military organization that has served our 

province and our country with respect, Mr. Speaker, for 

generations. I simply wanted to say, I add my personal voice to 

that of the Premier in thanks and gratitude. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly, 

the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Minister of Finance. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very honoured today to do two 

introductions. I’d like to begin by introducing a young lady 

seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in your 

gallery is Meagan Barabash. Meagan is the young lady who was 

crowned Miss Teen Saskatchewan-World 2011 on April the 

10th in Saskatoon. 

 

Meagan is currently attending grade 11 school at Preeceville. 

And in addition to achieving excellent marks and receiving 

honours throughout each school year, she’s involved in the SRC 

[student representative council], participating and coaching 

sports, and participating in the band program. She has advanced 

to the provincial level many times with cross-country and track, 

and has received many awards for her musical talents. In her 

spare time, Meagan volunteers with her school and in the 

community, most recently with Telemiracle 2011. With all this, 

Meagan also finds time to have a part-time job. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to have all members join me in congratulating Meagan 

Barabash on her first achievement, that being crowned Miss 

Teen Saskatchewan-World here in Saskatchewan, but also 

wishing her well in Toronto when she will attend the Miss Teen 

Canada-World. 

 

Also joining her, I have to mention of course, the driving force 

behind the family and that’s Mrs. Shelley Barabash, Meagan’s 

mother. So I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating this 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7647 

young lady. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also my pleasure to introduce, seated in the 

west gallery, a group of grade 5 and 6 students. I understand 15 

of them have made the journey from Springside School to the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’ll recognize maybe the teacher seated in the 

front row, Mr. Dean Turchinetz. Dean was a teacher here with 

the Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute, I think last year, the 

SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 

Parliamentary Democracy]. And Dean has also been involved 

with explaining to students all about democracy and the role of 

the government and the role of this Legislative Assembly. So 

I’m very encouraged that he continues to bring students here to 

indeed show them what this building is all about. 

 

Also with the group of students and Dean is Ms. Bev Bergman, 

who is the chaperone as well. So I’d ask all members to join me 

in welcoming these students and two adults to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the other members of the Assembly, it gives me pleasure 

to introduce to the Assembly Cathy Dickson who is the Health 

Sciences Association president from Prince Albert Northcote. 

And in addition to the tremendous work that she’s doing with 

health sciences, she has been a tremendous asset to the 

community of Prince Albert, having worked as a gambling 

addictions worker in the community for many years. So I’d like 

to have all members join with me in welcoming her to her 

Assembly today. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce three guests 

in the west gallery: Chris Hudyma, Métis Elder Doug 

Witherow, and Samantha Humchitt. If you give us a wave, 

please. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Chris is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Nipawin Oasis Community Centre which is unique in 

Saskatchewan. It has collective kitchens, both adult and youth, 

a mental health support program, a vocational program, a 

bridging to employment program, a child support program, an 

outreach program, and a tenant support program. Truly a great 

organization, and I can attest to that as I have seen what their 

accomplishments have been. 

 

Now Samantha is a member of the Heiltsuk First Nation and 

comes to us from Bella on Vancouver Island. Samantha, her 

two children, and her husband, Rod, have moved to Nipawin 

where she is completing her social work diploma and also 

working with the Oasis Centre. 

 

Elder Doug Witherow also works with the Oasis Centre, and 

basically Doug and I have known one another forever as his 

family farmed close to my grandparents’ place. He’s also from 

Nipawin and helps with the Oasis Centre. I’d like all members 

of the Assembly to welcome these good people to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to do an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

asked for leave to do an extended introduction. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today in the gallery are over 40 

people who have taken the bus to the legislature to talk about 

health care in their communities. And they would like to be 

recognized, and I apologize to any one of them who I 

mispronounce their name. 

 

In the gallery today is Shannon Parks . . . And these people are 

from, Mr. Speaker, from Duck Lake, Big River, Wakaw, Swift 

Current, Saskatoon, and Qu’Appelle. 

 

Shannon Parks, Susan Prosofsky, Himy Falcon, Cindy Pilon, 

Brittany Pilon, Chris Wicks, Lorna Reynaud, Ron Mamchur, 

Shirley Mamchur, Jocelyn Dennis, Linda Caron, Donna Balone, 

Hennie Boschman, Natasha Danke, Daidyn Danke, Rita Gallon, 

Annette Scheidl, Joan Parenteau, Barb Hretsina, Janice Platzke, 

Cliff Palchinski, Renny Woytowich, Sabrina Warner, Irene 

Abrook, Caroline Frechette, Marcel Sentees, Chris Timm, 

Margaret Timm, Joan Cunningham, Anne Horachek, Edward 

Palchinski, Vickie Stoski, Natalie Zakreski, Paul Danis, Anne 

Dickin, Cliff Schmidt, Marianne Hilderbrandt, Bob Darcey, 

Carolyn Darcey, Tom Howe, and Barb Cape, president of SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union] West. Welcome them 

to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I’d like to make a special thank you and 

introduction to Musaddaq Hayat who is a constituent of mine 

who I met many years ago. Welcome to your legislature from 

your MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], and it’s nice 

to see you here. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members, I would like to introduce an individual 

seated in the east gallery and that individual is Mr. Catlin 

Hogan. Catlin keenly observes politics here in Saskatchewan 

and he’s very active in his community, and he’s decided to take 



7648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

his interest to the next level as he seeks the nomination in the 

constituency of Martensville for the Saskatchewan New 

Democrats. So I would ask all members to welcome Catlin to 

the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I’d like to take this opportunity to 

welcome and to introduce a former member of this Assembly, 

Mr. Lindy Kasperski, sitting behind the bar. He served in this 

Assembly for a number of years and I would ask that all 

members welcome him to our Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 

legislature, a woman that is seated in our gallery today. Her 

name is Janice Bernier and she is working very, very hard in the 

constituency of Batoche. She is going to be the NDP candidate 

in the fall election in the constituency of Batoche. She’s doing 

her very best as a candidate to represent the concerns and the 

voices of those individuals in that constituency. And if it’s any 

example of how hard she is working now, she is going to be 

very well . . . She’ll well represent the constituency of Batoche. 

So I’d like all members to welcome her to the legislature today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

welcome Corporal Jim Sinclair to the legislature today. Jim 

Sinclair is not only someone that we are very proud of for the 

commendation that he has received today and for all the 

wonderful work that he is doing on behalf of Canadian citizens, 

but we are also very proud of him as a seasonal resident of 

Regina Beach. And I know the other residents of Regina Beach 

feel the same way and would feel proud of making the 

statement publicly as well. 

 

Jim is not just a wonderful representative of Canada, but he is 

also a business entrepreneur and a very successful one, and 

someone that I know and have seen, Mr. Speaker, is one of the 

hardest working individuals that I have witnessed. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d also like to welcome Corporal Jim Sinclair to the 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also 

welcome Mr. Lindy Kasperski to the legislature today. I know 

that he’s specifically come today because it’s Syttende Mai, and 

he is another one of our proud Saskatchewan Norwegian 

descendants. So I’m very pleased to welcome here. 

 

But I’m also welcoming, on behalf of the member for Regina 

Douglas Park, all of the students in the east gallery from Regina 

Christian School. We have 48 grade 7 and 8 students who have 

come here today to observe the proceedings. They’re 

accompanied by their teachers, Geoff Glasspell and Tanya 

Foster. And many people might recognize the name Geoff 

Glasspell because he was a very good basketball player when 

he played for the University of Regina Cougars, and he 

continues to be an excellent basketball coach as well as 

coaching other sports throughout Saskatchewan. So I’d ask all 

members to welcome all of these students and their teachers to 

the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last but not 

least, I hope, Mr. Speaker, and probably the longest 

introductions in our Assembly history, I’d like to introduce 21 

grade 5 students from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Deb Bresciani, and two chaperones, Lori and Mike 

Romanski. They’re here to see the proceedings today, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ll have the opportunity to meet with them a little 

bit later. And I want all the members to welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — And members, as well joining us today seated 

in the Speaker’s gallery — and I’ll ask them to give a wave — 

from the Saskatchewan Motor Safety Association, Mr. Ryan 

Bast from Montmartre, and Kevin Mooney from Regina. 

 

I would just like to make one reminder before we move on. All 

the guests, we certainly want to welcome you to this Chamber, 

your Chamber, and as guests here. And from now on in, I would 

ask that members no longer participate in the debate through 

clapping or any other means. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan, that 

for too many of these residents that are facing surging rental 

increases that are simply making living in Saskatchewan 

unaffordable. Mr. Speaker, the petition speaks to the issue that 

since 2007 far too many tenants have suffered monthly rent 

increases of hundreds of dollars with the average rent increase 

of over 35 per cent in Regina and Saskatoon, meaning tenants 

in many cases are paying well over $3,000 more each year, and 

that a majority of Canadian residents now live in provinces with 

rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, BC [British 

Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: cause the government to immediately 

enact rent control legislation that protects Saskatchewan 

tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed on behalf of residents in 

Kamsack, Veregin, Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, Ituna, and 

Melville. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7649 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of citizens who support maintaining quality 

health care services. 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding area, and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding areas will not serve the needs of the residents, 

and 

 

That the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority budgetary 

reductions ought not to impede the provision of valuable, 

compassionate, and appropriate health care services to all 

citizens within the geographic boundary requiring acute 

care, community and home care, long-term care, and 

public health care, and 

 

That the Government of Saskatchewan realize that the 

utilization and value of the full range of professional skills 

offered by health care providers is promoted through the 

address of critical retention and recruitment issues and by 

ensuring safe staffing levels, and 

 

That such promotion can only be achieved through the 

commitment of adequate public funding to publicly 

administered, publicly accessible health care. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from Big 

River, Wakaw, Prud’homme, and Cudworth. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that freedom from poverty is an enshrined human 

right by the United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to 

social and economic security, and we know that 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. 

 

We also know that citizens living in poverty have long 

identified affordable solutions. Recent national provincial 

initiatives include the Saskatoon health disparities report and 

the Canada Without Poverty Dignity for All campaign. They all 

call for a comprehensive poverty elimination strategy. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And the petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property tax; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the people of Saskatchewan are the owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic world resource and, as the owners of that resource, 

deserve to receive the maximum benefit of the resource. 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, the CEO of the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan has said recently that there is a new norm for 

potash moving forward on the world markets, and their $732 

million first quarter profit will certainly speak to that fact. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 



7650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from the 

city of Regina and from Rouleau. I so present. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

again today to present a petition to restore funding equity to 

Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools receive $275 

less per pupil than Regina public schools, amounting to a 

funding inequity of $2.7 million for the fiscal year of 

2009-2010. Mr. Speaker, that inequity is growing of course 

because it’s not yet been corrected. This inequity affects the 

Catholic school systems all across the province, Mr. Speaker, 

and the funding inequity places program delivery and staffing 

levels at risk. The Government of Saskatchewan has denied 

Catholic school boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at risk 

in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, immediately 

restore funding equity to ensure that every student in 

Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic or public 

school, receives equitable resources to ensure every 

student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents across the 

province as it affects the residents across the province, and 

they’re signed by residents of Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince 

Albert, Saskatoon, and Arcola. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of personal care home funding. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan residents require different levels of care in their 

senior years, and personal care homes play a vital role in 

providing seniors who live in them an appropriate level of care. 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Ministry of Health currently 

does not fund personal care homes although it does fund special 

care homes, which provide services to seniors requiring higher 

levels of care: 

Therefore we, in the prayer that reads as follows, 

respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan cause the government to provide a subsidy 

to personal care homes, permitting the seniors who rely on 

them to live in dignity and independence without bearing 

an undue financial burden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by constituents of 

Saskatoon Fairview and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of 

our finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to the 

fact that this record includes the running of deficits and the 

increasing of debt at times of record highs in revenues, 

increasing debt for three consecutive years to well over the tune 

of $1.3 billion, and this year alone increasing debt by $548 

million, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Kindersley, and Esterhazy. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Charity Royale Supports North Central Family Centre 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House today 

to tell you and the honourable members of this Assembly about 

an amazing charity event that took place this past weekend. On 

Saturday, May 14th, Casino Regina hosted its inaugural Charity 

Royale black tie benefit in support of the North Central Family 

Centre. 

 

I am proud to announce that this event raised $50,610. This 

amount was then matched by Sask Gaming, bringing the total 

donation $101,220. This generous donation will go a long way 

to supporting the important programs and services provided by 

the North Central Family Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to being an important employer and 

business partner in Saskatchewan, Sask Gaming is proud to 

invest in organizations that make our community a great place 

to live, work, and raise a family. Last year Sask Gaming 

contributed more than $750,000 to organizations across this 

province. The North Central Family Centre is a great example 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7651 

of organizations that receive this support. The organizations and 

especially the volunteers and other people involved in their 

day-to-day operations are addressing very real needs in our 

community on a daily basis. 

 

I’d like to congratulate the Charity Royale organizing 

committee and all of the staff at Casino Regina on a job well 

done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Martin Collegiate Cultural Community Celebration Day 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it was my honour to join 

with students, staff, parents, businesses, and the community on 

Friday, May 13th at Martin Collegiate for its Cultural 

Community Celebration Day. I want to recognize the leadership 

that organized this day — the students, the administration, the 

teachers, and community. It was extremely well done. 

 

I want to specifically thank Mr. Perry Leitner for all his work to 

bring this very important day together. And I would also like to 

thank all of the organizations and individuals that led sessions 

for students and the community. I had the opportunity to sit in 

many of the sessions myself and found them engaging and 

enjoyable. 

 

The Martin student body and community is diverse by ethnicity, 

backgrounds, and traditions. It is enriched and made stronger by 

this diversity. In many ways it epitomizes our province’s 

multiculturalism and our province’s story — a proud foundation 

of First Nations and Métis people and the continued waves of 

immigration from countries around the world that continues to 

shape, evolve, and contribute to our fine province. I am 

encouraged by the students’ pride of and the desire to embrace 

the diversity of their school community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me to thank the organizers of this special day and to commend 

the students and the community for demonstrating our 

province’s motto, “from many peoples, strength.” Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Relay For Life 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, May 13th, 2011, the 

communities of La Ronge, Air Ronge, and Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band sponsored the first Relay For Life fundraising 

event. The Relay For Life is an achievement of the Canadian 

Cancer Society geared to raise funds for and awareness about 

cancer research. 

 

The Relay for Life consisted of 26 teams that had a total of 300 

participants walking continuously from 7 p.m. Friday evening 

till 7 a.m. Saturday morning. Even the outlying communities 

such as Sucker River, Stanley Mission sponsored a team 

walking in that event. 

 

Throughout the evening, participants shared amazing stories of 

struggle, survival, and hope. Mr. Speaker, there is hope. As my 

wife is also a cancer survivor, it was an honour for my wife and 

I to take part in this touching event. 

 

The organization ensured support from Prince Albert Canadian 

Tire. The company pledged to match fundraising monies up 

50,000. Mr. Speaker, in total the event raised over 140,000. Deb 

Thome and Chandra McDougald co-chaired the Relay for Life 

along with their committee and other volunteers. A total of 75 

workers worked tirelessly to make this event a success. Deb and 

Chandra, mother and daughter, also lost their husband, father to 

cancer just a few short weeks ago. 

 

Seven-year-old Karis Oscienny lost an eye to cancer in 2009. In 

the fall of 2010, she lost the majority of her vision in her 

remaining eye due to a detachment retina. Karis, a resident of 

La Ronge, was appointed as honorary Chair to the relay and 

attended most of the activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

good work of the Co-Chairs, volunteers, and relay teams. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Students Awarded Agriculture Scholarships 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

recognizes that the youth are the future of our agricultural 

industry. Mr. Speaker, we are taking steps to encourage young 

people to pursue careers in farming, ranching, and other areas of 

the industry. One of those initiatives is a Saskatchewan 

agriculture student scholarship. This morning the minister 

announced the first-ever winners of this new scholarship. Ten 

grade 12 students from across Saskatchewan will be awarded 

$1,000 each to go towards their agriculture-related 

post-secondary education. Applicants submitted either a 

500-word essay or a three-minute video essay on one of the two 

topics: the future of agriculture in Saskatchewan over the next 

10 to 15 years or agriculture as a way to solve problems facing 

the world. 

 

The winners of the 2011 Saskatchewan agriculture student 

scholarship are Taylor Bohay from Regina, Chelsea Hebert 

from Moosomin, Traci Henderson from Gainsborough, Jessica 

Hextall from Grenfell, Jennifer Klaassen from Rosthern, Danica 

Lucyshyn from Saskatoon, Kelsey Richardson from Delisle, 

Blake Tebbutt from Nipawin, Melissa Turner, Springside, and 

Erica Yaskowich from Wynyard. Young people such as these 

10 students remind us that the future of our agriculture industry 

will be in good hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the provincial government, I want to 

congratulate these 10 scholarship winners and wish them every 

success in their studies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Norwegian Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Norwegian.] 

 



7652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

Today is Constitution Day in Norway. A constitution was 

brought in in 1814, so it’s almost the 200th anniversary, and 

people around the world with Norwegian heritage celebrate this 

day. 

 

In Saskatchewan there’ll be a children’s parade this evening 

from the Bessborough Park to Parktown Hotel, and anybody in 

Saskatoon area is encouraged to join along. In Saskatchewan 

we have a number of institutions that celebrate this event in 

various ways. They include the Scandinavian Club of Regina, 

Saskatoon’s Scandinavian Club, the Saskatoon Norwegian 

Cultural Society, Sons of Norway, and the Association for the 

Advancement of Scandinavian Studies in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Norwegians have brought many gifts to 

Saskatchewan. We’re looking forward, in the next century, that 

they may also bring forward gifts like prudent royalty policy 

and perhaps a resource fund. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with all of the members of the legislature, 

which include the member from Regina Coronation Park, from 

The Battlefords, Saskatoon Massey Place, Saltcoats, 

Saskatchewan Rivers, and also the former member from Walsh 

Acres, I ask all members to help celebrate Norwegian 

Constitution Day. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m proud 

to announce Sask’s health care system and government’s efforts 

to provide sooner, safer, and smarter surgical care is translating 

into shorter waiting times for patients. 

 

Since the surgical initiative was launched in April of 2010, the 

number of patients waiting for more than 18 months has 

dropped by 57 per cent. The number waiting for more than 12 

months has declined by 37 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I am 

encouraged by the progress made by health regions in reducing 

the numbers on wait-lists. The overall provincial surgical 

wait-list is currently at its lowest level since the current data 

measurement system was put in place in 2004. 

 

Since 2007 the number of patients waiting longer than 18 

months for surgery has dropped 75 per cent, and the number 

waiting more than 12 months has dropped 55 per cent. The goal 

of the surgical initiative is that all patients have the opportunity 

to have surgery within 12 months. I would like this Assembly to 

recognize the inroads made by the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative in assuring that the people of Saskatchewan have 

access to safe and timely surgeries. It is reassuring for patients 

to see everyone, including patients and families, working 

together to improve surgical care. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, this morning members of the 

Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan rallied outside 

the Legislative Building to bring attention to their stalled 

contract talks. These workers, health professionals such as 

paramedics, physical therapists, psychologists, respiratory 

therapists, and occupational therapists, tell us that they would 

much rather be at work providing the medical services they’ve 

been educated and trained to deliver. Instead they find 

themselves here at the legislature, calling on the Sask Party 

government to act in a reasonable and respectful manner in 

reaching a new agreement with their valuable health 

professionals. 

 

[14:15] 

 

At the same time, we find this government hiding behind 

SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] 

while limiting workers’ rights under the harsh dictates of Bills 5 

and 6. Again this is becoming a trend. They are allowing 

taxpayers’ money to attack their employees through a 

provincial media campaign, all the while undermining our 

health delivery system. These 3,000 specialized health care 

professionals earn an average of 25 per cent less than their 

Alberta counterparts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has no problem providing big 

raises and expensive new benefits for health care managers, and 

yet they have nothing for the health care professionals who 

actually serve the patients of Saskatchewan. It’s time to bring 

respect back to the workplace and the bargaining table. This 

government has the responsibility and the ability to begin this 

process now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Sask Party 

government was provided a window of opportunity to step back 

and re-evaluate its position. The Sask Party was offered a 

chance to send the Health Sciences Association contract dispute 

to independent binding arbitration. Instead the government 

chose to ignore the request and continues to offer the over 3,000 

professional health care workers a contract that is less than the 

cost of living. Today 120 of those health science workers were 

striking here in front of the Legislative Building. 

 

To the minister: Bill 5 has corrupted the bargaining process and 

Bill 6 allows the government to intimidate and threaten workers 

in public. Taking into account the complete change in the 

bargaining atmosphere, will the government agree to send this 

contract dispute to independent binding arbitration? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much for the question, 

Mr. Speaker. In labour law when you pass this type of 

legislation, there are invariably trade-offs and decisions to be 

made. In some jurisdictions they chose to allow for binding 

arbitration. In some they chose to allow for designated workers 

to be designated as essential, and those workers would continue 

to work. That is done in the vast majority of jurisdictions in our 

province. 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7653 

We chose to go with the more moderate approach where we did 

not take away the right of workers to collectively bargain. And 

also, Mr. Speaker, we did not take away their right to strike. 

There are designated workers that will continue to work and, 

Mr. Speaker, we think that was a fair and appropriate choice. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can add to that it’s similar to what is done 

in the vast majority of jurisdictions throughout our country. It 

was modelled on the Manitoba legislation, Mr. Speaker. And 

what I would like to do is urge both parties, all of the parties to 

go back to the bargaining table. It is clearly the best situation 

where a negotiated settlement is the final resolution. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that every 

possible avenue should be exhausted at the bargaining table, 

and that has happened. Health science professionals have been 

without a contract for over two years. The government is 

offering a contract for less than the cost of living and obviously 

has nothing new to offer. SAHO admits that there is quite a 

distance between these two sides. 

 

To the minister: the negotiations have come to a dead end. 

Health science professionals are taking job action around the 

province, and the government refuses to send the contract to 

independent binding arbitration. So what is the government’s 

solution? What is it, Mr. Speaker? What do they plan to do to 

settle this dispute? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the Assembly 

that virtually every jurisdiction in our country has now adopted 

some form of essential services legislation. The vast majority of 

those maintain some limited form of strike ability, as have we. 

The jurisdictions that have imposed by legislation binding 

arbitration are limited to Alberta, Nova Scotia, and Prince 

Edward Island. Some other provinces such as Manitoba and 

New Brunswick do this for firefighters or some designatings. 

We have other methods of resolving labour disputes with 

firefighters. So, Mr. Speaker, it is only Alberta, Nova Scotia, 

and Prince Edward Island who have chosen to use binding 

arbitration as a tool within their legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our position and should be the position of the 

members opposite that we do not negotiate labour contracts on 

the floor of the Assembly. We urge everybody to get back to the 

negotiating table and make the best possible effort that they can 

to try and resolve the labour disruption, Mr. Speaker. It is the 

appropriate way of dealing with things. And we feel that to take 

it to another decision where we impose settlement on them is 

not fair or appropriate and would rather not go down that road. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, some have said that this 

essential services legislation is like negotiating with one arm 

tied behind your back, Mr. Speaker. These are from 

professional negotiators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the government has money to pay health 

region CEOs up to 60 per cent wage increases, a contract that 

offers front-line care professionals less than the cost of living is 

disrespectful and undervalued of their work. Last week the 

minister admitted that he had concerns about the financial 

impact of an independent arbitrator’s decision. 

 

To the minister: if the Sask Party government believes the deal 

they are offering to over 3,000 health science professionals is 

fair and reasonable, why are they scared of the financial impact 

of sending the dispute to independent binding arbitration? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say at the outset, as I’ve said before, that we 

value all health care providers, Mr. Speaker, throughout the 

system. Mr. Speaker, and I think it is shown, it is shown 

because 90 per cent of all the health care providers in this 

province have received a contract through a negotiated . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

to allow the minister to respond to the question presented. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, 90 per cent of all the 

health care providers in the province have received a contract 

that has been negotiated at the bargaining table. That is by far 

the best place. And I’ve heard through SAHO that they want to 

get back to the bargaining table. There’s still more to talk about. 

There’s still more to do, Mr. Speaker, and so I would engage 

both parties or encourage both parties to get back to the 

bargaining table. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because only about nine years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, when the same situation took place, the member 

from Regina Lakeview said that the best place for a contract 

was at the bargaining table. In fact the premier of the province 

at that time said the best place to get an agreement was at the 

bargaining table, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s the position 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of Health 

may finish his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the position of our 

government that we would ask both sides to hammer out an 

agreement because, as was said by the former premier and the 

former minister of Health, that is the best place to determine an 

agreement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder it’s taking over 

two years to negotiate the contract with that member’s 

understanding. Mr. Speaker, the government won’t send this 

dispute to arbitration because they know the deal they are 

offering is undervaluing the work these professionals do. 

 



7654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, there’s chronic understaffing issues in the health 

science professions that are putting Saskatchewan families’ 

health at risk. Major surgeries have been cancelled due to lack 

of perfusionists, and we have the lowest respiratory therapists 

per capita in Canada. Understaffed ambulance services fail to 

reach patients daily within national standards for safety. And 

four infants were given the wrong medication at the Royal 

University Hospital because of an understaffed hospital 

pharmacy. 

 

To the minister: how is he putting people’s health safety first by 

trying to bully health science professionals into accepting a 

contract that is unfair and disrespectful? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the negotiations 

between SAHO and, I hope, the health sciences will begin very 

soon so that they can continue to look at finding a common 

ground, a contract that is good for both sides, Mr. Speaker. I 

will say though, the last time they were at the bargaining table 

the health sciences were very concerned at the level of pay for 

paramedics. That was addressed at the bargaining table, Mr. 

Speaker, the last time that they met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the number of employees 

through this union, we’ve seen a 20 per cent increase in the 

number of employees, Mr. Speaker, that have been attracted to 

this province. If there is one thing that this government has 

done and has done extremely well, is make sure that we work 

hard so we have the proper complement of health care providers 

throughout the province, be it registered nurses, be it doctors. 

More work to do there and also health sciences. We’ve seen a 

20 per cent increase in that area, Mr. Speaker. Certainly more 

work to be done, but we believe and SAHO believes that the 

contract that has been offered to the health sciences when you 

compare it to other provinces, three other provinces in Western 

Canada, is fair and competitive. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Provision of Health Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as usual the minister has never let 

the facts cloud the debate. Mr. Speaker, in the gallery today are 

people from Wakaw, Big River, Saskatoon, Duck Lake, 

Cudworth, Swift Current, and Qu’Appelle. And they’ve come 

with one common goal and one common concern, and that is 

their deteriorating health services in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, they’re tired of not getting any answers in their 

communities, so they’ve come to the legislature today to ask the 

person who should have the answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what does he have to say to the 

people in the gallery today that are concerned for rural health 

care services and for their own health because of doctor 

shortages in their communities, acute care closures, ambulance 

cutbacks, and long-term care bed closures? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working hard with 

all communities within the province, Mr. Speaker. We know 

there are issues. We know there are pressures in certain 

communities, in certain rural communities. That’s why we’re 

working with those communities. For example in the 

community of Wakaw, I had the opportunity to meet with 

individuals from that community on February 1st, 2011; March 

3rd, 2011; April 7th, 2011; heard their concerns and said, Mr. 

Speaker, we are absolutely committed to the opening of that 

acute care centre when we can guarantee we have the proper 

complement of physicians, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can’t have in-patient services unless you have the proper 

complement of physicians. We’re working hard to make sure 

that we have that proper complement so that this facility can 

reopen. In the meantime we’ve got nurse practitioners, two 

part-time nurse practitioners, as well as an opening for a 

full-time nurse practitioner in Wakaw, as well as we’ve got 

itinerant services by a GP [general practitioner], Mr. Speaker, 

that’s in that community two days a week. So there are services 

provided. We want to open the acute care centre, but we can’t 

until we have the proper complement of doctors. I hope that 

issue is addressed very soon. 

 

The Speaker: — Just a reminder to our guests that, as I 

indicated before, I’d request that guests not participate in any 

form, whether clapping or other forms. Thank you very much. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it would be good if the minister 

was as committed to having the hospitals not close as he was 

committed to having them reopen. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no provincial direction. The minister is providing no 

leadership and communities across the province are being left to 

fend for themselves. The minister’s doctor recruitment agency 

is nothing but smoke and mirrors. There’s a lot of hype and 

some nice furniture, but no results. These communities are not 

seeing any doctors come. The recruitment agency has done 

nothing for any of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he admit today that the 

recruitment agency is a failure and has done nothing for the 

communities represented by the people in the gallery today 

except provide them with some false hope and empty promises? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 

from the truth. Mr. Speaker, when we came to government we 

knew there was a shortage of physicians. That’s why we’ve 

done everything in the last three years, number one, to ensure 

that the College of Medicine is not under probation that we saw 

under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. We have increased the 

number of medical seats from 55 under the NDP to 100 in this 

government, Mr. Speaker. We’ve increased, doubled the 

number of residency positions from 60, Mr. Speaker, to 120. 

More work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The recruitment agency not only is working with the physicians 

in the College of Medicine and the residents to ensure that they 

stay in the province, but they’re working with colleges of 

medicine across the world, Mr. Speaker. In fact I received an 

email from a medical student that was down in the Grand 

Caymans who was attracted back, going to be attracted back to 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7655 

Saskatchewan because the only people that talked to him was 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, through the 

recruitment agency, Mr. Speaker. Success is happening through 

that agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it really hypocritical for that member to talk 

about hospital closure when under their watch they closed 52 of 

them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — This minister’s racking up his own number of 

hospitals that he’s closing, and I hope he’s proud of that. Last 

year when asked about the five long-term care beds that were 

closed in Wawota, the member from Cannington was quoted as 

saying, which do they want, highways or health care? Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve both. 

 

The Sask Party has left communities on their own to find their 

own doctors so they can keep their hospitals open. Instead of 

spending money on infrastructure like water systems and road 

repairs, communities and municipalities are spending as much 

as 15 per cent of their tax base in bidding wars to get doctors to 

their communities. They’re bidding against each other. And if 

they don’t have any money, it can’t end up in the bid. Yes, this 

is the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is he making communities 

decide between highways and health care? Why is he making 

them choose between maintaining their roads or getting a 

doctor? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we worked hard, as I 

said, over the last three and a half years to attract all health care 

providers into this province. Mr. Speaker, 800 more nurses, 20 

per cent more health sciences, 228 more doctors are working in 

Saskatchewan under this government than under the NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s been our physician recruitment 

strategy; that’s been the strategy that we put into place over the 

last three and a half years. I can understand they don’t like it, 

Mr. Speaker, but for 16 years, they did nothing. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to ask the member opposite: we’re only a few 

months away from the next election, what is her plan? We 

haven’t heard a word from the NDP on physician recruitment in 

four years, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t believe they have any 

ideas. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Low-Income People 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Regina’s Welfare Rights Centre provided a much-needed 

service to low-income people here in Regina. This help in areas 

such as housing, advocacy, and family support was vital to 

people on social assistance in the capital city. This centre 

helped about 250 people a year with things they normally 

couldn’t do on their own, but that help is long gone. The centre 

closed on February 25th because the provincial government cut 

its entire budget. Since then there’s been nothing to fill the void. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this government neglecting a vulnerable 

segment of our society by not ensuring there was something to 

take the place of Welfare Rights Centre? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start by thanking 

all the volunteers that we had at the Welfare Rights Centre. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there was good work that was 

being done, and I understand also that there are vulnerable 

people that are going ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s work to be done, and our goal 

is to not only make sure there’s an advocacy but also make sure 

that there are fewer people on welfare. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased that the number of people that are on welfare, that the 

caseload numbers are going down. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

continue to work with the people that need our help. And that’s 

why we’ve put 114,000 fewer people off the tax rolls this year 

because they don’t have to pay tax, and that’ll give them an 

opportunity to make sure they can be in the Saskatchewan 

advantage. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work for people, 

with the people in our province that need us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, that’s cold comfort for people in 

North Central today. People who are on social assistance who 

are in need of advocacy support don’t have anywhere to turn 

right now. Just last week, someone called the Ministry of Social 

Services, and it directed that person to call the Welfare Rights 

Centre for help. Of course when they called the welfare rights 

office, they found the number was out of service.  

 

Clearly the government has no other ideas of where to send 

people for help. And as for former clients, they are left out, left 

to fend for themselves, even if the centre was not finished 

helping them with their issues. Why has this government 

allowed three months to pass without offering people any 

alternative to help them with the issues that that centre dealt 

with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there is a number of work 

that the government has to do. And one of them is make sure 

that the money that we spend as government is accountable. We 

had to make sure that public funds were spent in the manner 

that they were supposed to be spent. We had to ensure there was 

fiscal accountability of the Welfare Rights Centre. So, Mr. 

Speaker, there was significant financial irregularity shown 

within the Welfare Rights Centre and there had to be additional 

financial oversight. 

 

So the number one priority, Mr. Speaker, was to make sure that 

the clients’ needs were provided, and that’s why right now 



7656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

those services are provided within Social Services. There’s a 

transition plan right now that’s being worked out with the 

Welfare Rights Centre and each client was contacted 

individually. There’s a further assessment of their needs going 

on, Mr. Speaker. And I assure you, like I said earlier, every one 

of the people that work with us within Social Services is 

important to us, and we make sure that we talk to them on an 

individual basis. And I assure you the staff within my ministry 

cares about these people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, today we have in the 

gallery former workers of the Welfare Rights Centre, and they 

provided important assistance to people on social assistance, 

helping the government, that it was not able to do. But now that 

the government has shut down this centre, its former clients are 

left with nowhere to turn. Will the minister promise to 

immediately put something in place to ensure the former clients 

of the Welfare Rights Centre are no longer neglected and have 

the assistance they really need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the member 

opposite isn’t saying that the people that work within the 

ministry aren’t giving assistance to the people that are on 

welfare. We know that each one of them cares deeply about 

what’s happening. We know that the services are being 

provided now by the ministry. We know that there are 

individuals that are being contacted by our ministry, and we are 

looking into the next steps of what we can be doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Our number one concern is the clients and making sure their 

needs are met, but the second one is accountability. And I’m 

sure the people of the province want to make sure that the 

money is being spent in a way that it was meant to be spent. Mr. 

Speaker, I have updated information on it, and I ask about this 

to make sure that people are working with our . . . with people 

on social services continue to receive their cheques and their 

rights, Mr. Speaker. Welfare Rights Centre was important, but 

the rights of the people are being looked after right now, and 

that is our concern. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Electoral System Issues 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 

of Justice and Attorney General. Over two years ago, the Chief 

Electoral Officer came to the government with dozens of 

recommendations to improve elections and election process in 

Saskatchewan, all of which arose from actual concerns and 

problems with the conduct of elections. 

 

One example is the need for important improvements to help 

voters with disabilities. No voter should be prevented from 

voting because polls are inaccessible, but it does happen, 

according to many members of the community who raised these 

concerns with the Chief Electoral Officer. The Chief Electoral 

Officer’s recommendations would help eliminate this barrier to 

voting, but nothing has been done. 

 

While this government did nothing with those important 

recommendations for changes to The Election Act, it happily 

pushed through changes to The Election Act forcing people to 

produce photo ID [identification]. These changes no one, 

including the Chief Electoral Officer, requested for, and there is 

no need. Why is the government ignoring the voting needs of 

disabled Saskatchewan people while ramming though 

unnecessary and uncalled for changes to The Election Act? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not the desire of this 

government to have anybody precluded from voting because of 

accessibility issues. We’ve worked with the Chief Electoral 

Officer and we work through regulations to try and ensure, Mr. 

Speaker, that we do everything we possibly can so that those 

that have needs, special needs, are able to vote by way of 

having special doorways, by having things done at one level. 

 

We had saw earlier, Mr. Speaker, that Robin East was in the 

legislature raising issues regarding visually impaired. We are 

having ongoing discussions with the Chief Electoral Officer as 

to what the appropriate type of technology is to try and address 

that issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns that are raised by our citizens are 

valid concerns, and we want to work with them to try and 

ensure that those concerns are addressed, Mr. Speaker. They are 

appropriate, they’re valid, and the discussions are ongoing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The disabled are not the only people whose 

right to vote has been affected. The Chief Electoral Officer has 

also made recommendations about needed improvements for 

voting in hospitals. In 2007 and in the by-election 2009, the 

health region tried to prevent hospital patients from voting, 

arguing that the health privacy legislation trumped The Election 

Act. The elections office had to fight the health region from 

preventing people from voting, and eventually it succeeded. 

However, to prevent this problem from coming up again, the 

Chief Electoral Officer recommended The Election Act be 

amended to formally indicate that it supersedes health privacy 

law.  

 

This Assembly has had two years to move on those 

recommendations. Why is the government putting the voting of 

hospital patients at risk by not implementing this simple change 

and focusing instead on unnecessary election Act changes that 

puts the right to vote of even more people in jeopardy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is the desire of this 

government to try and maintain the integrity of the electoral 

system as best as possibly can. Mr. Speaker, I can advise that 

the Government of Canada, the three largest provinces in the 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7657 

country — British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec — have all 

adopted situations where they now require voter ID. Mr. 

Speaker, it is the intention of this government to act on that. 

The legislation received committee approval last night. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, during the last federal election, I can advise 

you that the voter turnout increased from the 2008 election from 

58.7 per cent to some 64.1 per cent. So it would appear, Mr. 

Speaker, that the requirement of voter ID does not impede voter 

turnout. 

 

We will in fact address the issue of hospitals by allowing the 

hospital bracelet to be used as voter ID. Mr. Speaker, we think 

that people in hospitals, as elsewhere in the province, should be 

entitled to vote, and we will ensure that we take appropriate 

steps so that that does happen. And we will work to have as 

broad and all-encompassing system of regulations and various 

types of ID for that purpose. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The government should be trying to make it 

easier for people to vote, not more difficult. The minister 

himself last evening told a very amusing story about how he 

could not get his own identity papers in order to vote in the 

federal election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Chief Electoral Officer also recommended voting in 

Saskatchewan could be improved by creating a permanent 

voters list and by allowing for early enumeration. These are 

steps the government has been called upon to take. It has not 

done anything. The government was able to put in the changes 

that it wanted, forcing photo ID on Saskatchewan voters despite 

the lack of need for it and the roadblocks it will create. But it 

hasn’t sought any, it hasn’t made any of the important changes, 

none of them, that were sought by the Chief Electoral Officer in 

his report. Why did the minister reject the important 

recommendations on enumeration made by the Chief Electoral 

Officer when it’s obvious they could’ve easily been made in 

this session of the Legislative Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Chief Electoral Officer 

has made a request regarding early enumeration. We’ll have 

discussions in the Board of Internal Economy that will address 

that once we’ve dealt with issues of the rest of the regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m always willing to use myself as an example of 

how to do or not to do things. Mr. Speaker, I’m one of the 

people that went out, but did not have ID with me for my . . . an 

address. Mr. Speaker, I would urge all citizens, because this is 

another layer of process that they have to go through, should 

check their ID before they go, to make sure that they have the 

two required pieces: one that identifies who they are, and the 

secondary piece that shows where they live. It will speed up the 

process. It will make their life simpler and easier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask for the members opposite to participate in 

that process. I heard the member from Regina Walsh Acres say 

that she was choosing not to, that she was going to boycott the 

process. She does so at the peril of putting her own constituents 

at risk. Mr. Speaker, all members should participate in trying to 

ensure that we have a broad and complete list of things that can 

be used for identification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Joint Task Force on Education and Employment 

Established 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to acknowledge the signing 

of a document that represents a significant step in the evolving 

relationship between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

 

Discussions began quite some time ago, Mr. Speaker, between 

the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and our 

government on the challenges and opportunities associated with 

closing the current and historical gaps in both education and 

employment outcomes for First Nations and Métis peoples 

across the province. 

 

I’m pleased to announce the Government of Saskatchewan and 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations have signed 

today in this building an agreement to establish a joint task 

force on improving education employment outcomes in 

Saskatchewan. The task force will consult widely on practical 

solutions for improved education and employment outcomes for 

First Nations and Métis peoples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for months officials from the FSIN and various 

government ministries have been working diligently on details 

for this joint task force. That work is reflected in the document 

that was signed this very morning by our Premier and Chief 

Guy Lonechild. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the joint task force will be mandated to undertake 

the following tasks: identify evidence-based public policy, 

program, and practical approaches that have the greatest 

potential for positive impact on educational and employment 

outcomes; policy, programs, and practices that are not having 

the desired effect and offer proposed changes or revisions or 

elimination if necessary to some of those initiatives; and 

investments, costs, and the potential reallocation of spending 

priorities to ensure that we’re maximizing those public dollars. 

 

This is a historic opportunity to engage in a dialogue and 

consult with citizens of Saskatchewan in determining what next 

steps will lead to the successful educational and employment 

outcomes for First Nations and Métis peoples in our province. 

The signing this morning reflects a shared vision of a 

prosperous Saskatchewan, a prosperous province where 

everyone has access to a high quality of life, both on- and 

off-reserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we make progress in this area, we know 

there’s more to do. And our commitment is to work in 

partnership with the FSIN and others across the province to 

ensure that we can help eliminate these historic gaps, Mr. 

Speaker, and ensure that people across the province are enabled 



7658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

to meet their full potential because we know that’s the way that 

our province is going to meet its full potential. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the minister 

for sending across a copy of his remarks in advance, in advance 

of giving them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the issue of Aboriginal education 

and employment, clearly it’s an issue that affects everyone in 

Saskatchewan, and it’s a key factor to consider when looking at 

the long-term health and prosperity of our province. It’s clearly 

something that’s very important. 

 

When we look at recent statistics that point to many of the 

challenges in the province with respect to First Nations and 

Métis employment levels, latest figures show that the First 

Nations unemployment rate has increased 5.3 per cent points 

over the last year. It is now at 26 per cent. In just the last year, 

the Métis unemployment rate has increased by 5 percentage 

points to 14.8 per cent unemployment. So we certainly see, Mr. 

Speaker, that in recent years under the Sask Party government, 

we have seen a trend going in the wrong direction. We have 

seen steps backwards with respect to properly engaging First 

Nations and Métis individuals in the province in meaningful 

employment. 

 

It’s fine, Mr. Speaker, to have a signing ceremony, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s fine to have a signing ceremony, and it’s a good 

day, Mr. Speaker, when First Nations leaders are here in the 

Assembly and when they are constructively engaged in 

discussing the future of our province. My concern, Mr. Speaker, 

is we’ve seen signing ceremonies in the past. And we’ve seen 

signing ceremonies engaged in by this Sask Party government 

that have not brought fruit, that have not been constructive. 

 

We’ve also seen actions, Mr. Speaker, by the Sask Party 

government where they have unilaterally ended programs that 

have had a negative effect on Aboriginal employment in 

Saskatchewan. The prime example, Mr. Speaker, is the 

Aboriginal employment development program that was 

unilaterally scrapped by the Sask Party government. 

 

So while it’s fine to have a signing ceremony, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’s good to engage leadership in the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Mr. Speaker, the real test of the 

signing ceremony today will be to see what the results are in the 

long run. The results to date under the Sask Party government 

have been Aboriginal employment moving in the wrong 

direction. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that it will go in . . . I hope 

that this task force, Mr. Speaker, will bring positive results. 

That’s my true hope because that’s what’s truly needed for the 

well-being of Saskatchewan’s future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 161, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 161, The Election Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:49 until 15:16.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 161, 

The Election Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment be now 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7659 

read the third time. Those in favour of the motion, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 36] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

McMillan Harpauer D’Autremont 

Harrison Hickie Reiter 

Hutchinson Brkich Hart 

Schriemer Stewart Allchurch 

Weekes Ross Wilson 

Gantefoer Michelson Wyant 

Ottenbreit Chisholm Kirsch 

Bradshaw Tell Heppner 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 18] 

 

McCall Harper Trew 

Higgins Junor Atkinson 

Nilson Forbes Vermette 

Broten Furber Morin 

Yates Iwanchuk Taylor 

Quennell Wotherspoon Chartier 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 36; those 

opposed, 18. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Bills No. 629 and 630 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a statement to 

make to the Assembly. 

 

It is the practice of this Assembly and the Speaker’s duty to 

review all Bills in regard to rule 65 of the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. This rule states in 

part that any Bill which proposes: 

 

. . . any new or additional charge upon the public revenue 

or upon the people . . . shall be recommended to the 

Assembly by Message of the Lieutenant Governor before 

it is considered by the Assembly. 

 

Speakers have consistently upheld the constitutional principle 

of the financial initiative of the Crown, including accountability 

for all public expenditures and initiating legislation that 

imposes additional charges upon the public. Members of 

Executive Council are held strictly accountable for all public 

expenditures and, accordingly, only they may initiate legislation 

involving the imposition of new or additional charges upon the 

public revenue or upon the people. 

 

The practice in this Assembly is for Bills to be introduced and 

read . . . Order. Read the first time with their further progress 

being contingent upon the Speaker affirming that they are in 

order pursuant to rule 65 of the Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ve now had the opportunity to review a number of Bills that 

have been introduced, and wish to draw to the attention of the 

Assembly Bill No. 629, The Independent Budget Officer Act 

and Bill No. 630, The Health Document Storage Act. Both Bills 

are presently standing on the order paper for second reading 

under private members’ public Bills and orders, items 9 and 10 

respectively. 

 

Pursuant to rule 23(3), these Bills could be designated for 

priority consideration today and considered on Thursday. 

Therefore, to prevent consideration of Bills that may not be 

procedurally acceptable, I must now rule whether these Bills are 

in order. 

 

On May 12th, 2011, Bill No. 629, The Independent Budget 

Officer Act was introduced by the member for Regina 

Rosemont. The issue that I must address is whether the Bill No. 

629 contravenes the principle of the Crown initiative in 

financial matters. 

 

Clause 2 of this Bill establishes the independent budget officer 

as an officer of the Legislative Assembly. Clause 5 details the 

mandate of the independent budget officer, and clauses 8 and 9 

provide the legislative authority to enter into contracts and 

obtain services. The establishment of a new officer of the 

Assembly would create a charge upon the public revenue. 

 

It is stated in Erskine May, 23rd edition at pages 881 and 882 

that a particular legislative proposal requires to be authorized by 

a money resolution when a proposal involves a new expenditure 

or charge upon the public revenue that is not already covered by 

legislative authority. Further on page 883, “the expenses 

connected with the establishment of a new department” require 

a Royal Recommendation. The establishment of a new 

independent officer of the Assembly would be similar to the 

establishment of a new department. 

 

I would also refer members to the ruling of Speaker Hagel on 

April 7th, 1997. In his ruling, Speaker Hagel found that the 

creation of a health ombudsman as an officer of the Assembly 

and the associated office created a charge on public monies. 

Further, Speaker Brockelbank ruled on March 11th, 1980 that 

the establishment of an information commissioner required a 

Royal Recommendation. Similarly rulings on May 6th, 1998 by 

Speaker Hagel and June 12th, 2001 by Speaker Kowalsky 

found Bills seeking to create a commission constituted an 

expenditure of public funds and required a Royal 

Recommendation. 

 

For these reasons, I find that Bill 629 requires a Royal 

Recommendation. The member from Regina Rosemont is not a 

member of Executive Council. Therefore I must rule that the 

said Bill is out of order and be removed from the order paper. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

With respect to the second Bill in question, on May 12th, 2011, 



7660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2011 

Bill No. 630, The Health Document Storage Act was introduced 

by the member for Saskatoon Eastview. The issue that I must 

address is whether Bill No. 630 requires an expenditure of 

public funds and thus contravenes the principle of the Crown 

initiative in financial matters. 

 

Upon review, clause 3 requires the Ministry of Health to 

establish a medical file storage facility for both paper and 

electronic documents. The establishment of a medical file 

storage facility would require a financial expenditure by the 

Ministry of Health. Erskine May, 23rd edition at page 884 

clearly states that “The authorization of a single payment out of 

the Consolidated Fund requires a recommendation.” Further, 

Bill No. 630 provides the Office of the Saskatchewan 

Information and Privacy Commissioner the additional 

legislative authority to maintain and organize the medical file 

storage facility. 

 

I would refer members to Erskine May, 23rd edition at page 

883 which states, “expenses arising out of the imposition of 

new duties on an existing department or authority” require a 

Royal Recommendation. 

 

The Bill imposes new duties on the Office of the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner and the Ministry of Health. I refer 

members to similar rulings by Speaker Brockelbank on May 

20th, 1980 and Speaker Tusa on May 1st, 1990 where they 

ruled that a Bill that imposed new duties on existing 

independent officers required a Royal Recommendation. 

 

Order. It is for these reasons I find that Bill No. 630, The Health 

Document Storage Act contravenes the principle of the Crown 

initiative in financial matters. Bill No. 630 requires a Royal 

Recommendation. The member from Saskatoon Eastview is not 

a member of Executive Council and not entitled to obtain such a 

recommendation. Accordingly, I must rule that said Bill is out 

of order and be removed from the order paper May 17th, 2011. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — Ready? Okay. We’re now in Committee of 

Finance. The business before the committee are three 

resolutions. I call on the minister to move his resolutions. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, I move resolution no. 1. No. 

1: 

 

Be it resolved that towards making good the supply 

granted to Her Majesty on account of certain charges and 

expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 2011, the sum of $484,018,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Thank you. It has been moved by the Minister of 

Finance that resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

2011, the sum of $484,018,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move resolution no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

2012, the sum of $9,945,632,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that the resolution no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

2012, the sum of $9,945,632,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, I move resolution no. 3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

2012, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31st, 2013, the sum of $285,300,000 be granted 

out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that resolution no. 3: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 

2012, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31st, 2013, the sum of $285,300,000 be granted 

out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 



May 17, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7661 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I move that the committee rise and that 

the Chair report that the committee has agreed to certain 

resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance to 

report, the Chair report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 175 — The Appropriation Act, 2011 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 175, 

The Appropriation Act, 2011 (No. 1) be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 175, The Appropriation Act, 2011 (No. 1) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, under Rule 72(2), I move 

that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 175, The Appropriation Act, 2011 (No. 1) be now 

read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn for committee this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn for the working of committees. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Just a reminder to the members, there 

will be a short CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association] annual meeting immediately following the 

adjournment of the Assembly. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:34.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7645 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7646 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7646 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7646 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7646 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7647 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7647 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7647 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7647 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7647 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7648 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7648 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7648 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7648 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7648 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7648 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7649 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7649 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7649 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7649 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7650 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7650 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7650 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Charity Royale Supports North Central Family Centre 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7650 

 Martin Collegiate Cultural Community Celebration Day 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 

 Relay For Life 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7651 

 Students Awarded Agriculture Scholarships 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 

 Norwegian Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7651 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7652 

 Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Negotiations with Health Care Workers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7652 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7652 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7653 

 Provision of Health Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7654 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7654 

 Support for Low-Income People 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7655 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7655 

 Electoral System Issues 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7656 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7656 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Joint Task Force on Education and Employment Established 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7657 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7658 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7658 

 



 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7658 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 7659 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on Bills No. 629 and 630 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7659 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Supply 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7660 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7661 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 175 — The Appropriation Act, 2011 (No. 1) 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7661 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


