




















































Hansard: March 24, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 37A  THURSDAY, MARCH 24, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6881 

 March 24, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I’m very pleased today to introduce 32 

students from my hometown of Kelvington. They’re in the west 

gallery. And with them today is their teacher, Jim Lissinna, and 

Kim Nichols. The grade 8 students are studying a unit that 

includes governance and citizenship, and every year I have the 

opportunity to talk to them at the legislature and then go back to 

the school and find out if they have further questions. 

 

I look forward to having a chat with you later on. Welcome to 

your legislature. And I ask all my colleagues to help me 

welcome them to their Legislative Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, 

it’s my privilege to introduce two people that are seated in your 

gallery: John Hyshka, who is the chief financial and operating 

officer for Phenomenome Discoveries, as well as Zeba Ahmad, 

who’s the manager of corporate development for 

Phenomenome Discoveries Inc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say just a quick word about the 

company. They really are at the leading edge, cutting edge of 

some discoveries as far as markers in blood that will show 

whether a person is predisposed to contract colorectal cancer, 

for example. This is Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month, Mr. 

Speaker, and I just want to thank on behalf of the government 

and the people of the province for the great work that 

Phenomenome does. And I think this company will be well 

known around the world very shortly for some of the work that 

it’s doing right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add my 

welcome to Zeba and John today, and thank you for coming. I 

had a brother-in-law die last year of rectal cancer, so I’m really 

very pleased to see that they will be leading discoveries to help 

men and others, men and women, defeat this disease. So 

welcome to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 

gallery, I would like to introduce some very special people in 

my life. Firstly my companion of 30 years and wife of almost 

25 years, Leone. Beside her is my daughter’s boyfriend, Brad 

Tzupa from Yorkton, a SecurTek employee, and become a very 

close member of our family. And beside him is my daughter 

Katelin, who is trained as a care assistant, worked in travel for 

some time, but is going back into health care, taking her nursing 

in the fall. And she’ll be coming to Regina to take that through 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] and the U of R [University of Regina]. So I’d ask 

all members to welcome these three special people to this 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services, the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 

friend in the gallery today. I have an opportunity to introduce to 

you, and to all the members, Kaitlyn Wilchynski, who works at 

the University of Regina, and with her is a student, Cathleen 

Ouyang, who also is in Regina. I had the opportunity last 

summer to work with Kaitlyn, and we worked on an FASD 

[fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] project. She did a tremendous 

amount of work and I want to publicly thank her for all the 

work she did for people who have the FAS [fetal alcohol 

syndrome] condition. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of renters who are facing a 

combination of rising rents and extremely low vacancy rates in 

many communities. Mr. Speaker, it also recognizes that a 

majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control 

guidelines, including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, 

Quebec, and Prince Edward Island, and that the argument that 

the private market would deliver sufficient affordable housing 

in the absence of rent control has proven to be false. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw 

and Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. We know Saskatchewan’s income gap between 

the rich and poor continues to grow, and now one in five 

children in Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. We also 

know that citizens living in poverty have long identified 

affordable solutions. Recent national and provincial initiatives 

include the Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada 



6882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

Without Poverty, Dignity for All campaign. They all call for a 

comprehensive elimination strategy. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I do so present on behalf of the people signing this petition 

from Regina, Saskatoon, The Battlefords, and Melfort. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village in my constituency, and it’s 

about the need for a new school for this growing 

neighbourhood: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes, including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to neighbouring 

communities to attend schools that are typically already 

reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that follows, respectfully request that the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the 

provincial government to devote the necessary resources 

for the construction of an elementary school in Hampton 

Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live 

in Hampton Village and are constituents of Saskatoon Massey 

Place. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition calling for community-based worker wage equity. Mr. 

Speaker, community-based organizations in Saskatchewan have 

traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages. Mr. Speaker, the CBO [community-based 

organization] workers care for and provide valuable services to 

some of our most vulnerable members of our society, and the 

low wages earned by the CBO workers result in high staff 

turnover and the subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a 

negative impact on the quality of care clients receive: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan to 

implement and act as quickly as possible a multi-year 

funding plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage 

equity with employees who perform work of equal value 

in government ministries, agencies, and offices. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

with petitions signed by residents of Saskatchewan concerned 

about the introduction of Bill 160 and the detrimental effect that 

it would have on human rights law in the province if indeed Bill 

160 became law. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper, before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina and 

Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They reference the record that includes tabling of deficits 

at times of revenue highs, increasing debt over the past three 

years to the tune of $1.3 billion, despite having unprecedented 

highs in revenues. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Estevan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Purple Day for Epilepsy 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Purple Day for 

epilepsy is held each year on March 26th and is dedicated to 

raising awareness about epilepsy by reducing stigma and 

empowering individuals living with epilepsy to take action in 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6883 

their communities. Epilepsy affects 300,000 in Canada and 50 

million people worldwide, which is more than multiple 

sclerosis, cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, and Parkinson’s 

disease combined. 

 

Despite its prevalence, epilepsy isn’t well understood, and 

people with epilepsy continue to face social stigma and 

discrimination, Mr. Speaker. When people know more about 

different kinds of seizures and how to help someone having a 

seizure, they immediately become more receptive to seeing the 

person as just an ordinary individual. Purple Day reminds 

Canadians that people living with epilepsy need understanding 

and acceptance and deserve comprehensive care and access to 

innovative treatments to effectively manage their disorder. 

Purple Day increases awareness, reduces stigma, and empowers 

individuals living with epilepsy to take action in their 

communities. 

 

Canadians are encouraged to learn more about epilepsy 

throughout the month of March, culminating with Purple Day 

on March 26th. Fifteen countries will be participating in the 

2011 Purple Day activities, with participants around the world 

supporting epilepsy by wearing purple or getting involved in a 

Purple Day awareness or fundraising event. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

The Saskatchewan Advantage 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday our 

government tabled a budget that is good for families, good for 

business, and good for the future of our province. The 

Saskatchewan Advantage 2011-12 budget is balanced, lower 

taxes for families, homeowners, farmers, and businesses, 

reduces the provincial debt, and improves government services. 

 

Because of this budget, Saskatchewan families with dependent 

children will earn more tax-free income than anywhere else in 

Canada. A family of four can now make up to 45,550 before 

starting to pay provincial income tax because of increases to the 

basic and spousal exemption amounts and to the child tax 

credit. 

 

We are cutting the small-business tax rate by more than half 

from 4.5 to 2 per cent, and education property taxes on farm 

land, residential and commercial property are being reduced by 

a further 55.6 million. 

 

Lower taxes make life more affordable, put more money back 

in the economy, and create jobs. It is our government’s fourth 

consecutive balanced budget and reduces the provincial debt by 

325 million to 3.81 billion. With Saskatchewan’s economy 

expected to lead the nation this year, our government’s goal is 

to build on that momentum and assure that all Saskatchewan 

people share in the benefits. 

 

Lower taxes, a better quality of life, balanced budget, reduced 

debt: that, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

Social Workers Support Human Rights 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week we have 

marked . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

just ask members to allow the member from Saskatoon Centre 

. . . We won’t take that off the clock. We will allow the 10 

minutes. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week we have 

marked Social Work Week. It gives all social workers an 

opportunity to celebrate and share their social ideals and values. 

Their theme this year: Social Workers for Dignity and 

Inclusion: Upholding Human Rights. 

 

It began on Monday at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

with a presentation on human rights by Ailsa Watkinson, a 

social work professor from the University of Regina sponsored 

by the Saskatoon Social Work Students’ Society. In the same 

day, The StarPhoenix and the Leader-Post published a 

viewpoint of Ms. Watkinson, co-authored by Alex Neve of 

Amnesty International Canada, entitled, “Backward step in 

human rights.” They write, and I quote: 

 

Saskatchewan has a proud history of human rights. 

 

. . . Under Premier Tommy Douglas in 1947, 

Saskatchewan became Canada’s first province to adopt a 

bill of rights . . . It was a principled step forward, and all 

other Canadian provinces followed. 

 

Saskatchewan is poised to again lead Canada when it 

comes to human rights. But this time it would be a sad 

step backward. Bill 160, the government’s proposed 

changes to provincial human rights legislation needs 

urgently to be withdrawn. 

 

They go on. I quote: 

 

Systems for protecting human rights should be constantly 

improved . . . The changes were developed first and then 

taken to the people. That’s the wrong order. When it 

involves human rights, people must come first. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we close out Social Work Week, I ask all 

members to join with me in recognizing the outstanding 

contribution social workers make in our communities by 

helping those who find themselves in vulnerable circumstances 

with an ethical human rights foundation. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Population Growth 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news 

for our province. According to the latest figures released today 

by Stats Canada, Saskatchewan’s population has hit an all-time 



6884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

high of 1,052,050 as of January . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Our strong economy and great quality of life are attracting more 

and more people to Saskatchewan. More people are choosing to 

stay in Saskatchewan and more people from outside of our 

borders are discovering the Saskatchewan advantage. 

Saskatchewan grew by over 15,000 people in 2010. This was 

the fastest growth rate of any Western province and the second 

highest rate of any province in Canada. 

 

Our strong population growth has become the new normal in 

the new Saskatchewan as this province has grown by nearly 

45,000 people in the last three years. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 

highest population growth in any three-year period since 1928 

to 1931, 80 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have seen incredible growth in my own 

constituency. Warman, as an example, is one of the fastest 

growing communities in all of Canada. And just last year, 

Martensville became one of Saskatchewan’s newest cities. And 

so as the NDP [New Democratic Party] continue to have its 

negative trajectory of doom and gloom in this time of boom, 

this side of the House asks them to take their head out of the 

sand and enjoy the success of this province. 

 

Saskatchewan is moving forward and yesterday’s budget will 

continue to help us move forward. Saskatchewan does have the 

advantage. It is the people who call this province home and, 

Mr. Speaker, there are more and more of them every day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Sexual Assault Centre Celebrates 30 Years 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The Battlefords and Area 

Sexual Assault Centre just celebrated its 30th anniversary, and I 

rise today to recognize and pay tribute to all those who over the 

past 30 years have dealt with crisis and improved the quality of 

life for hundreds of women in northwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Speaking at the anniversary dinner recently, the centre’s first 

director and 30-year supporter, Peggy Westwood, said, “We’ve 

come a long way.” And she documented the journey from 

working off a dining room table in February 1980 to owning 

their own facility, employing four full-time staff, and engaging 

eight phone volunteers by 2010. 

 

Guest speaker at the anniversary dinner, Melissa McCormick, 

an Ontario woman who was a victim of a horrific kidnapping 

and sexual assault in the late 1970s and the author of the book, 

The Queen’s Daughter, says the way society responds to 

victims of sexual assault has changed dramatically over the past 

30 years but argues passionately that more needs to be done. 

She also praised the supporters of The Battlefords centre 

saying, and I quote, “Thank goodness for all those strong 

women who made this happen.” 

 

I call on all members to join me in congratulating The 

Battlefords and Area Sexual Assault Centre on their 30 years of 

service. And I ask all members of the legislature to dedicate 

themselves to supporting those who are helping women deal 

with sexual violence in their lives. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Dinner Supports Restorative Action Program 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

to announce that last night held the 14th annual Badge Shield 

Star Recognition Dinner to celebrate the unique contributions 

made to our province by the courageous men and women that 

provide these services. 

 

The proceeds from the dinner enable the Rotary Club of 

Saskatoon to continue to support and grow the Rotary 

Restorative Action Program, also known as RAP. It is a unique 

program and a successful program that is currently operating at 

Mount Royal, Bedford Road, and E.D. Feehan collegiates. 

 

Programs like this give our young people the tools to deal with 

their issues in a productive way. Young people mediate issues 

like violence and bullying. Our government has provided the 

Rotary Club with a grant of $50,000 for this very important 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last night’s dinner was the chance for the people 

of Saskatchewan to say thank you to the men and women who 

keep our communities safe. In turn, police, fire, and EMS 

[emergency medical services] each presented their own awards 

to citizens who volunteer and work in and with the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these workers are an essential part of building a 

safer, healthier, and happier Saskatchewan. We thank all men 

and women who wear the badge, shield, and star. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Earth Hour 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this Saturday is Earth Hour and 

it’s clear that Canadians are engaged in environmental action. 

They are choosing hope for a clean energy future. This year’s 

theme for Earth Hour is 60-plus, and it’s only fair that 

Saskatchewan residents demand that the Sask Party government 

do its part as well. New Democrats will continue to fight on 

their behalf to make sure we bestow a healthy, sustainable, and 

prosperous Canada for future generations. 

 

Earth Hour was launched in 2007 to raise awareness about 

action needed to combat dangerous climate change. 

Participation in Earth Hour has grown from just over 2 million 

in its first year to over 1 billion in 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 60-plus theme encourages people to go 

beyond the goal of one hour of energy conservation and carry 

the movement beyond the day and into everyday life. We know 

that Canada is ranked last among the G8 countries on climate 

action as the Harper Conservative government has continued to 

lower the bar on greenhouse gas reduction. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, the Sask Party government has also 

shown their disregard for climate action, breaking their election 

promise to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6885 

Mr. Speaker, we encourage all citizens to use this weekend as 

an opportunity to make simple and effective changes to energy 

conservation in Saskatchewan. The overwhelming participation 

in this World Wildlife Federation initiative that began in 2007 

is evidence that action on climate change is a must. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Security of Health Information 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Privacy 

Commissioner was called to a site on Albert Street, south 

Albert near a medical centre, to deal with thousands of medical 

files of individuals that were left in a dumpster or dumped in a 

dumpster. The Privacy Commissioner is becoming very, very 

frustrated with the government and the Minister of Health, and 

in a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] report he said, 

and I quote, “Dickson said he was especially concerned because 

he had recently published a lengthy report on the management 

of old medical records and provided recommendations for 

health care providers on how to safeguard patient files.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that thousands if not tens of 

thousands of files, family members who have their medical files 

released and dumped in a dumpster open to anyone to see, can 

the minister tell me, and the people of Saskatchewan more 

importantly, what has been done to implement the 

recommendations of the Privacy Commissioner? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I learned early last 

evening that there had been a breach of HIPA [The Health 

Information Protection Act]. There had been some files found 

in a dumpster, Mr. Speaker. Our government takes the issue of 

privacy and health records very seriously. This is absolutely 

unacceptable. 

 

We know that someone who had the possession of those has 

breached the Act, Mr. Speaker, so we have asked the Privacy 

Commissioner, Gary Dickson, who has full powers of 

investigation, to do whatever he needs to do to find out how 

this has happened, Mr. Speaker, because it is absolutely 

unacceptable. He has the full co-operation of government, of 

the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, to find out how this could 

happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, we want to deal with this issue, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, as we move forward, we’re going to look at how 

we can strengthen the legislation or other policies so that this 

does not happen again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time this 

has been raised here in the Assembly, nor is it the first time 

we’ve had this kind of infraction and the misguided approach to 

the disposal of health care records of individual and family 

members in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan really believe that the minister and 

the government are responsible for protecting their health files. 

I know the minister will now try to remediate the damage done 

by the release of these thousands of medical records. But my 

question to the minister is this: what has the government done 

in light of the recommendations from the Privacy 

Commissioner, what has been done at this point to make sure 

this isn’t repeated as it has been time and time again under his 

administration? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, this 

government takes this breach very seriously. This has happened 

in the past, Mr. Speaker, but in the past dating back since HIPA 

was implemented under the former NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker. It was unacceptable under their government, Mr. 

Speaker, it is unacceptable under our government. 

 

I had a conference call this morning, earlier this morning, very 

early this morning, Mr. Speaker, with the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association, with the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, as well as the Health ministry. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re looking at what can be done on this situation as far as 

after the Privacy Commissioner does his work. What are the 

legal actions that could be implemented, Mr. Speaker? Some 

can be implemented through the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. 

Speaker. Others may be through the Department of Justice 

because the legislation is there and a breach like this is 

unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. I’ve also asked that group to 

quickly come up with further recommendations that will 

strengthen either possibly legislation or policy as we move 

forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not for lack of 

recommendations. The Privacy Commissioner says that he has 

given to the minister recommendations that should be 

implemented to protect the records. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year at this time in this Assembly, we were 

debating the issue that the minister was recommending that 

health records should be released for fundraising purposes. 

Doesn’t he feel responsible for the fact that his own attitude and 

the attitude of the government about privacy as it relates to 

medical records, where he was suggesting they be released for 

fundraising purposes, isn’t part of the problem is the cavalier 

attitude of this minister about family health records? That’s the 

issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a very long bow to 

try and stretch the fact that a patient’s name and address could 

be passed on to a foundation, compared to health records 

dumped in a dumpster, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely two different 

things completely. Mr. Speaker, our government, as I said, 

takes very seriously the privacy of people’s health information, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s why this government in this budget put 

$2.4 million into furthering the electronic medical health 

records. 

 



6886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, currently we have about 33 per cent of our 

physicians, fee-for-service physicians using electronic medical 

records. And with this $2.4 million in this year’s budget, we’re 

going to see that bounce up close to 50 per cent, which will 

help alleviate some of these situations well into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The fact of the matter is that yesterday 

yet again the breach of health records and the filing, 

containment, and protection of family records as it relates to 

their health was broken, and this government has to accept 

responsibility. They have recommendations. We don’t need any 

more studies, we need action. And that’s the problem. 

 

To the minister: can he guarantee that proper legislation will be 

brought before this Assembly in this session to allow for proper 

money for the Privacy Commissioner so he can do his work? 

They have to contact now thousands of families over the next 

few weeks. We need to have in place strong legislation that 

includes how the protocols work along with penalties when 

they’re broken. Can the minister guarantee that that legislation 

will be forthcoming before this session adjourns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I had a 

conference call with the College of Physicians and Surgeons as 

well as the Saskatchewan Medical Association and the Ministry 

of Health and have asked them to come forward with 

recommendations that will strengthen the legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is there, and there has been a 

breach of legislation as it exists right now. It isn’t that the 

legislation isn’t there. There has been a breach of it. We need to 

get to the bottom of that, make sure that we find out who that 

was, and proper penalties sanctioned against that individual, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not acceptable. The government doesn’t 

accept it. The public doesn’t accept it. Mr. Speaker, that’s why 

the Privacy Commissioner has full rights of investigation. Once 

he’s completed his investigation, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be turned 

over to the proper sources, Mr. Speaker. And as we move 

forward, we’re looking at how we can prevent this from 

happening into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in order for the Provincial 

Auditor to immediately look into the failed college merger 

mess, he needs instruction from elected members of this 

Assembly. The Minister of Advanced Education has been 

flip-flopping repeatedly on whether or not the government will 

agree to speed up this process. 

 

Yesterday in a two-minute media interview, the minister gave 

two different answers. At the 23-second mark, he said he’s not 

opposed to asking the auditor to speed up the investigation. But 

at the 1 minute 44 second mark, he said he would leave it to the 

auditor to determine his own timeline. In a short two-minute 

interview, the minister had two opposite positions, Mr. Speaker. 

Will the minister stop his flip-flopping and agree that the 

auditor needs to look into this mess immediately? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, directly what we’re doing is we’ve had initial 

conversations with the Provincial Auditor. Those conversations 

are going to continue, Mr. Speaker. And what we’ve said is we 

pledge to work co-operatively with the Provincial Auditor. 

We’ll take advice from the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well isn’t that a typical response, Mr. Speaker, 

from this minister on this file. On any occasion that this 

minister has the opportunity to cast the blame on someone else 

— not stand up, not take clear action, Mr. Speaker — he’s more 

than happy to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m receiving many calls from the Humboldt area. 

These people are very frustrated by the way that the minister 

and the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from 

Humboldt have handled this file. People keep bringing up a 

very suspicious fire that occurred at St. Peter’s College this past 

fall. Many people believe that this fire was linked to the 

attempted takeover of Carlton Trail and involved destroying 

evidence of some sort. Whatever the case with the suspicious 

fire, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that questions have been 

swirling in the community for months. People want answers, 

and they are very worried about evidence being destroyed, 

especially in light of the fact that the acting president of the 

college is Glen Kobussen’s nephew. 

 

To the minister: how can he not recognize the urgent need for a 

forensic audit of this mess to commence right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal was submitted 

last June. Mr. Speaker, from there what we said is we would 

work with Meyers Norris Penny. They came forward with a 

report and recommendation, Mr. Speaker. Based on that, Mr. 

Speaker, we acted and said, no, the merger is not going to go 

forward, Mr. Speaker. Since then there have been a number of 

allegations. We continue to hear allegations today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are actions being taken, Mr. Speaker. By all means, the 

administrator is on the ground, Mr. Speaker. Discussion and 

dialogue is under way, Mr. Speaker. Dialogue is under way 

with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. As well, Meyers 

Norris Penny is also on the ground. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

continue to be in touch with Justice on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make sure that every, every cent is 

accounted for, Mr. Speaker, so that the students and 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6887 

stakeholders and citizens of Saskatchewan can trust in the 

post-secondary educational system of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, seven people have lost their jobs 

over this mess. Hundreds of thousands of dollars have been 

wasted. There are serious concerns in the community about 

evidence being destroyed, especially in light of a suspicious fire 

a few months ago. And yet the government refuses to ask the 

auditor to investigate now, immediately. The minister has said 

to the media at least twice that he is not opposed to speeding up 

the process, but then once again we hear him flip-flopping and 

not taking a clear stand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is: who is opposed to getting to the bottom of this 

mess on this side? Is the minister opposed to getting to the 

bottom? Is it the member from Humboldt who is opposed to 

getting to the bottom? Is it the Premier who’s opposed to 

getting to the bottom? Why is there a reluctance from members 

on that front bench and beyond to not begin a forensic audit 

immediately? Let’s get on it. Come on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on March 17th we came out with a clear decision 

based on recommendations from Meyers Norris and Penny. The 

recommendations were two-fold. First and foremost, not to let 

the merger proceed, and we acted on that. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

went to Humboldt and spoke to local stakeholders specifically. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, Mr. 

Speaker, there were other recommendations from Meyers 

Norris Penny, and those recommendations related to 

outstanding questions. Mr. Speaker, we approached Justice, Mr. 

Speaker. Justice then said what we would advise is to get 

Meyers Norris and Penny to go and investigate those questions 

and queries and concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since that time a number of other actions, 

including a letter . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Since that time, we have written to the Provincial Auditor 

pledging our full co-operation. We have engaged Meyers Norris 

and Penny. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also had an administrator, not 

simply appointed, but already under way with work on the 

ground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our priority is to ensure, our priority, Mr. Speaker, 

is to ensure that post-secondary educational students know that 

they have among the best systems in the country, Mr. Speaker, 

and that taxpayers will be assured that those dollars are spent 

appropriately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. Mr. Speaker, when my colleague asked 

questions to the Minister of Advanced Education regarding the 

Carlton Trail and St. Peter’s College merger, the minister seems 

to indicate at least two referrals, two sets of referrals to the 

Minister of Justice: one that inspired the ministry to ask for the 

Meyers Norris Penny report, and one for matters arising from 

the Meyers Norris Penny report. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: has he received one or two or more 

referrals from the Minister of Advanced Education regarding 

the Carlton Trail merger? When did he receive them, and what 

matters were referred to him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I’ve just said and explained, Mr. Speaker, last June 

a proposal was submitted, mister proposal . As we had 

promised, Mr. Speaker, we undertook an independent review. 

That was done by Meyers Norris Penny, Mr. Speaker. That 

review concluded two key elements, Mr. Speaker, not to move 

forward . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 

was saying, two key aspects of the report and recommendation, 

Mr. Speaker, two key aspects. First and foremost, not to move 

forward with the merger, Mr. Speaker. We respected that. Last 

week I went out to Humboldt. I informed the stakeholders of 

that. 

 

There was a second component. There were questions that 

came up — only questions and allegations, Mr. Speaker. What 

we’ve then said, Mr. Speaker, is we have been in touch with 

Justice. Justice then recommended we get Meyers Norris Penny 

to go back out and actually investigate into these questions, Mr. 

Speaker. That work is under way. 

 

In addition to that since then, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that the 

Provincial Auditor is now engaged, and we have pledged our 

full co-operation in this. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make sure 

those dollars are fully accounted for to the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Membership in the Enterprise Club 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question again 

is for the Minister of Justice. When I asked yesterday about the 

tax credit Glen Kobussen received for his undisclosed and 

secret donation to the Enterprise Club, the Minister of Energy 

and Resources came nowhere near answering the question. 



6888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

Perhaps he caught the wrong bus. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: Mr. Kobussen appeared eligible in 

2009 to receive a tax credit of $558 on a $1,000 undisclosed 

donation paid with public money to the Saskatchewan Party. Is 

this one of the matters that has been referred to the Minister of 

Justice by the Minister of Advanced Education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there was a cheque . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

understand from party officials that there was cheque cut in 

September for a 2010 membership donation which will be fully 

disclosed in our 2010 annual return as in normal course of 

business. Anything in excess of $250 donations to the Sask 

Party has to be disclosed. They are done in regular, normal 

course as has always been the case and always will be the case 

under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter when Mr. 

Kobussen gets his free toaster or his golf game with the 

Premier. The donation is made in the tax year 2009; it is to be 

disclosed in the tax year 2009. And there was an eligibility for a 

tax receipt for 2009, Mr. Speaker. And that matter raises 

matters of criminal nature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There appears to be a number of issues that are coming to a 

matter that are issues of a criminal nature. There are donations 

to a political party that are made with public dollars. There 

appears to be tax credits paid to an individual on at least one 

donation to a political party that was made with public dollars. 

And there are allegations of double charging for mileage, a 

52-inch TV purchased by St. Peter’s being unaccounted for, and 

a $60,000 increase in Carlton Trail’s operating grant going to 

St. Peter’s without proper documentation. 

 

In light of a donation to the governing party with public funds, 

the eligibility for a tax credit which is not yet accounted for, the 

involvement of a minister of the Crown in all these matters, will 

the matters referred to the Minister of Justice — whatever they 

were, Mr. Speaker, seems to be a secret — whatever those 

matters were referred to the Minister of Justice, will the 

Minister of Justice undertake today that they will be reviewed 

by outside Crown prosecutors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, this was a 

2010 donation. It will be released in our 2010 annual return in 

normal course of business, is always the case. There’s nothing 

untoward being done here as the member is suggesting. 

And I would go on to add that there’s only one party, there’s 

only one party currently that has anything, any issues before the 

courts of this province. And that’s this . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask members to 

come to order and allow the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I would go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that that 

will go through the normal course of action over a period of 

time. All donations to the Sask Party have been fully disclosed, 

always have been, always will be, in normal course of business. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, rather outrageous that a 

Minister of Justice has been prevented from taking the floor and 

speaking to allegations of this nature and to put the political 

minister up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But yesterday’s budget, Mr. Speaker, missed the mark for 

Saskatchewan people. We have a time of unprecedented 

revenues here in this province, almost $11 billion flowing to 

government coffers, but many Saskatchewan families, the 

backbone of this province, are left to struggle looking for 

housing, left out in the cold, Mr. Speaker, renters and 

homeowners. 

 

Interesting priorities were revealed yesterday in yesterday’s 

budget. We’ve got $5 million going to off-sale retailers, $1.7 

million to housing, Mr. Speaker. At times of record revenues, 

why is this minister forcing Saskatchewan families to struggle 

rather than meaningfully investing in this province’s dire 

housing situation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I was very proud to 

present yesterday’s budget. A budget of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — that’s what this budget is. It is a 

budget for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there have been many comments, 

there’ve been many comments from leaders right across this 

province who have looked at this budget and said it is a great 

budget. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from Steve 

McLellan who’s the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

CEO [chief executive officer], and he says, “I’m a very happy 

man. I think this is a decent budget.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from CBC Radio this morning 

or actually yesterday. And it’s Murray Mandryk who says this, 

and I quote: 

 

You’re paying down debt, you really are, to the tune of 

$325 million. You’re basically giving $200 million in tax 

cuts that’s going directly to the poorest of the poor and to 

everybody — of course, the working poor anyway. 

 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6889 

Mr. Speaker, I will put this budget up in front of the people of 

Saskatchewan, and they will decide whether or not this is a 

great budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the rest of the 

quote from McLellan was, no long-term plan. Mr. Speaker, that 

was the rest of the quote from McLellan. 

 

Not only, Mr. Speaker, has housing not been addressed, Mr. 

Speaker, but the Sask Party has put education in this province 

on the back burner. Educational assistants have been cut 

province wide. It has failed to provide an adequate, sustainable 

funding model that it promised. That promise broken. 

 

The school boards called yesterday’s budget status quo. The 

Teachers’ Federation decried its lack of imagination and said, I 

quote, “Teachers have been left out of this budget.” And it was 

confirmed yesterday, shamefully, that is correct as this faulty 

budget does not have a single cent for the settlement of the 

teachers’ contract, who have been without a contract for the 

better part of a year. At this time of prosperity for this 

government, why is the minister failing education in this 

province? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, normally I would begin 

by talking about how the NDP failed, the NDP failed education 

for years, but I’m not going to, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to talk 

about the fact of what we have done since we have become 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the first four years of our government, we have 

implemented over $400 million into education capital, Mr. 

Speaker — 400 million. What’s that allowed school boards to 

do, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I know the minister’s voice 

carries well, but sometimes it gets difficult to hear the 

responses. The member from Athabasca will come to order and 

allow the minister to respond to the question. I recognize the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, even for members from 

the two northern constituencies, we are building 38 major 

capital projects, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . 38. And in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a new school being constructed in La 

Ronge right now, a new Churchill high school. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I was pleased to announce nine additional major 

projects taking us to 38 projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There will be need for more projects, absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 

The NDP left a horrible deficit infrastructure and we’re going 

to catch up. It’s going to take us a while to catch up, Mr. 

Speaker, because there are hundreds of projects in front of the 

Minister of Education. But we’re going to tackle that because 

this is a growing province. We have more people today, Mr. 

Speaker, 1,052,000 people in this province. And we’re proud of 

it. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If the members want extra questions, 

then the members will make sure that they’re not interfering 

with the members responding. The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, are you questioning the . . . [inaudible] . . . of the 

Speaker? Order. Order. Once more. Order. Order. Order. Order. 

 

Why is the member from Saskatoon Massey Place on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — To ask leave to move a motion under rule 59: 

 

That this Assembly mandate the Provincial Auditor to 

immediately conduct a special investigation and forensic 

audit of the governance . . . 

 

The Speaker: — One second. One second. The member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place is asking leave. I would ask the 

member to give us the purpose for his request for leave. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Audit of Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — To ask leave to move a motion under rule 59 in 

light of comments that the minister has made stating that he’s 

happy to speed up the process of the Provincial Auditor 

examining the mess at the college merger: 

 

That this Assembly mandate the Provincial Auditor to 

immediately conduct a special investigation and forensic 

audit of the governance, financial management, and 

leadership of Carlton Trail Regional College and St. 

Peter’s College for the period covering January 1st, 2009 

to the present; direct the government to provide the 

auditor sufficient resources and authority to complete the 

investigation and audit and table a report with this 

Assembly no later than May 12, 2011; and further to 

accomplish these goals, empower the Provincial Auditor 

to extend his investigation to the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Immigration, the office of the 

minister and to the minister himself, the member of the 

Legislative Assembly for Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has asked for leave and given us his arguments for his 

request for leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 



6890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to join back into budget debate here today. It’s 

troubling, though, Mr. Speaker, to see a circumstance that we 

just witnessed here again with a very reasonable motion put 

forward to account for public dollars, Mr. Speaker, that have 

been placed at risk and that all reports show have been wasted, 

Mr. Speaker. Those are taxpayers’ dollars that relate directly to 

the budget here, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a shame to see the Sask 

Party government not be willing to shed a light by way of the 

independent auditor, Mr. Speaker, who . . . That’s their role, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it speaks, Mr. Speaker, to a government that has a 

reputation of government waste, Mr. Speaker, and a reputation, 

Mr. Speaker, of not meeting the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. And I think as individuals watch little displays such as 

that, where we may be talking about hundreds of thousands of 

taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, that have been wasted in a 

fashion that may have been corrupt, Mr. Speaker, I think it hits 

the heart of Saskatchewan people in a very unsettling way to 

realize that their tax dollars, their hard-earned tax dollars, are 

not being protected by their government, Mr. Speaker. So I 

commend the member from Massey Place for putting forward 

the motion, and I condemn the government for not supporting 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had the opportunity to highlight some general comments 

yesterday with respect to a budget that truly misses the mark for 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. The question that I posed 

was, a boom for whom, Mr. Speaker? And what we recognize 

that yes, it’s a boom and prosperous times for government, Mr. 

Speaker, for this Sask Party government — more money in 

government coffers than ever before, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

been the case for this government throughout its record — but 

the fact, Mr. Speaker, is that this is in complete disconnect to 

the reality that Saskatchewan people and families are facing, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to cost of living increases that have 

directly burdened their quality of life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we look at the massive increases to housing, both for 

homeowners but also for renters, Mr. Speaker, and not a plan, 

not sufficient resources, not a strategy in this budget to address 

those priorities. In fact, Mr. Speaker, on the topic of housing 

specifically, what we did see was $1.7 million, Mr. Speaker, 

that is intended, I recognize, to, as they’ve referenced, to build 

300 affordable housing units or rental housing units across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now that number sounds all right 

if you were just watching the debate, Mr. Speaker. But if you 

look at the thousands and thousands and thousands of housing 

units required to do something meaningful on housing, Mr. 

Speaker, it falls far, far short; it’s entirely inadequate. And it 

shows a huge display of misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker. Here 

we have a Sask Party Premier, Mr. Speaker, who’s giving $5 

million to off-salers of beer, Mr. Speaker, but $1.7 million to 

address the dire situation of housing in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That has a direct strain and impact on individuals all across this 

province, whether that be middle-class individuals, 

working-class people all across this province, Mr. Speaker, or 

whether that be young individuals just starting out, Mr. 

Speaker. And of course we recognize the other side of this 

Saskatchewan disadvantage, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s 

marginalizing so many, Mr. Speaker, and pushing so many into 

the margins of our society. 

 

And we can reference the numbers that don’t speak to a positive 

side of a boom, Mr. Speaker. They speak to a darker side of a 

boom, and they speak to a government that fails So when we 

look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, it not only misses the mark for 

Saskatchewan families, but it fails to provide the financial 

responsibility that Saskatchewan people expect and deserve, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe that Saskatchewan people are of the most 

financial responsible individuals across Canada. They expect 

the same to be true with their tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

been incredibly disappointed with the display of this Sask Party 

government to date, Mr. Speaker, on this front, that has been 

provided unprecedented resources and unprecedented 

opportunity but has failed to advance our position, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s unfortunate, and it has consequences for future 

generations. 

 

So we have a budget that fails people’s priorities of 

Saskatchewan. We have a budget that fails to deliver the 

financial responsibility that it should, that’s expected of a 

government, Mr. Speaker, and we see a budget that fails to plan 

and be ready for a bright future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the unprecedented opportunities that 

we’ve been provided from a fiscal perspective, these windfall 

revenues that this government’s been blessed to manage, Mr. 

Speaker, what we see is that that opportunity has not been 

seized, Mr. Speaker. And we see a disappointing legacy of this 

government, one where, at a time where revenues have 

exceeded previous budgets by as many as 2 and 3 and $4 billion 

a year, Mr. Speaker, what we don’t see is an advance of the 

position of our province or an advance for the people of our 

province, Mr. Speaker, on those two very separate pieces, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Specifically with respect to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, we in fact see a debt burden that’s growing at twice 

the rate of the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker, highlighted by the 

chartered accountants, Mr. Speaker, that in fact here in 

Saskatchewan, troubling information that Saskatchewan people 

and families are forced to be taking on debt at a rate twice that 

of any other . . . of the rest of Canada, the national average, Mr. 

Speaker. And highlighted specifically to that, Mr. Speaker, that 

was a report from the chartered accountants. 

 

A report from the certified general accountants, Mr. Speaker, 

highlights specifically in that report titled A Survey of 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6891 

Household Attitudes to Debt and Consumption, Mr. Speaker, 

highlights that the primary driver of this increased debt here in 

Saskatchewan that’s outstripping that of the national average by 

two times, Mr. Speaker, is day-to-day living expenses, Mr. 

Speaker, the very kind of items that we’re talking about in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We recognize the pressure of affordability on Saskatchewan 

households, and we recognize, Mr. Speaker, and in 

Saskatchewan, people recognize — and I hear it all of the time, 

Mr. Speaker — that while the government has more money 

than ever before, that’s not the case for households across 

Saskatchewan. They’re not in a better position than they were 

just a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, despite this historic windfall 

of money that — public money, their money — that this 

government is managing, and in their case, the case of the Sask 

Party, mismanaging, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we saw a budget that entirely failed to address affordability 

for Saskatchewan people. It failed to provide fairness to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. We saw no response as it 

relates to housing to provide any sort of a meaningful address to 

the priorities of Saskatchewan people. And we continue to see 

Saskatchewan people burdened by one of the highest cost of 

living indexes and increases across the nation, Mr. Speaker. 

And it goes across the piece, whether it be a senior, Mr. 

Speaker, who’s looking for . . . in transitioning to senior care 

that should be quality and dignified and also accessible and 

affordable, Mr. Speaker. But it also relates to those young 

students, Mr. Speaker, that are moving to the city and trying to 

rent a place and trying to access education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So whether we’re talking the utilities, whether we’re talking 

gas, whether we’re talking food, whether we’re talking child 

care, post-secondary, or senior care, what we’re seeing is stress 

and burden for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And those 

are the highlights of sort of hitting everyday people across this 

province, and the great strain and pressure and quality of life 

for the middle class across Saskatchewan, working people 

across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But on the other side of this, we see a very dark side of the 

boom, Mr. Speaker. And despite the four, you know, four years 

of record revenues for this government, what we see on that 

dark side of that boom, Mr. Speaker, is we see social assistance 

recipients skyrocketing, Mr. Speaker — more people than for 

many, many years, Mr. Speaker, and a trend that was on a nice 

decline, Mr. Speaker, that’s been reversed. And now we see 

thousands of families back onto, and families that have never 

been there before, back onto a circumstance of receiving social 

assistance that have been displaced from the workplace, Mr. 

Speaker. Now that certainly doesn’t speak to a prosperous 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to see massive increases to the 

caseload of those individuals receiving social assistance. 

 

We can look specifically to other dark sides of this boom, Mr. 

Speaker, and we can look to food bank numbers across 

Saskatchewan. The minister from Social Services is weighing 

in on this discussion and choosing to heckle from her seat, Mr. 

Speaker, at the same time as she’s failing to address and 

respond to the needs of Saskatchewan families. We see food 

banks specifically, Mr. Speaker, in one year alone, the 

increased usage of food banks up by 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

And yet we have a Minister of Social Services that’s content 

and willing to see her budget increase, one of the largest 

increases actually we see here this year, and primarily due to 

the cost of the higher number of individuals receiving social 

assistance in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

We can look at the simply inadequate access to accessible and 

affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. And certainly this impacts all 

people across this province, but it particularly hits hard those 

individuals with lower incomes. And we see many people that 

in fact have been completely displaced from their home, Mr. 

Speaker, and circumstances of young people trying to raise a 

family, young mothers, young families that have nowhere to go, 

Mr. Speaker, and in fact are now of no fixed address, often 

bunking in with relatives or individuals who will offer up some 

goodwill for a period of time. But the problem, Mr. Speaker, is 

with the current planning and failure to plan of this government. 

They’re not making headway towards a better time where they 

can access housing, whether that be rent and home ownership, 

Mr. Speaker. So we condemn the government on that front, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we look specifically as well at a time of prosperity for 

government here in this province, unprecedented revenues and 

an economy that’s performing reasonably well by some 

indicators, Mr. Speaker, but then on the other side of that, a real 

hollow side of that economy, Mr. Speaker, and aspects that are 

not serving us well into the future. 

 

We can highlight specifically the massive shedding of jobs as it 

relates to Aboriginal adults in this province, Mr. Speaker. In 

2009 alone, Mr. Speaker, and I find this incredibly troubling, is 

that the year previous we had 60 per cent of Aboriginal adults 

employed in this province. The year following, through 2009, 

we had 50 per cent. And that’s a statistic, Mr. Speaker, a fact 

that we shed a full 10 per cent of Aboriginal adults from the 

workplace, Mr. Speaker, one in seven Aboriginal workers 

losing their jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at the demographics of this province and 

also the proud legacy of First Nations and Métis people, Mr. 

Speaker, to not be advancing on these fronts at a time of 

historic opportunity and a time where an economy should be 

enabling this sort of circumstance to move forward, Mr. 

Speaker, is jeopardizing of our province’s future — not just 

jeopardizing of the lost opportunities for these thousands and 

thousands of First Nations and Métis across our province, Mr. 

Speaker, but jeopardizing our actual economy, Mr. Speaker, 

jeopardizing us socially, jeopardizing how well we are as a 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know this was highlighted specifically by University of 

Saskatchewan professor of economics Eric Howe, who actually 

is a self-described fiscal conservative, who took the Sask Party 

to task directly for their failed policies on this front and directly 

attributed the policies of this government to the massive 

shedding of First Nations and Métis jobs in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And he also highlighted specifically that that sort of 

activity and these sorts of numbers and this sort of lost ground, 

Mr. Speaker, will spell — if we can’t correct it, Mr. Speaker — 

economic disaster for our province. 



6892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

And if you look at the demographics, Mr. Speaker, I would 

certainly share the concern that Mr. Howe puts forward. And I 

think that when we look at our economy and we look at the 

opportunity, what we’ve failed to do is to capture this 

wonderful opportunity to advance the lot of First Nations and 

Métis people, the first people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

who are ready and waiting and looking forward to entering the 

workforce, entering prosperity in this province, and doing well 

socially and economically, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This speaks to a hollowing out of our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

This government touts global GDP [gross domestic product] 

numbers, and in fact those numbers themselves don’t speak to a 

real proud record of this government. In fact it has been 

basically flat since 2008, Mr. Speaker. But what we do see is a 

real hollowing at that same period of time where thousands of 

individuals across this province can barely make ends meet, Mr. 

Speaker — very different than the wealth that government has, 

Mr. Speaker, of their tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a 

real disconnect between the two. 

 

I find it absolutely ignorant and unacceptable that we have a 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, who continues to tout the number of 

working poor, those below the poverty line that, as he says, 

have come off the tax rolls. But he fails to explain to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, as he brags about it in an 

arrogant fashion, Mr. Speaker, is that many of these individuals 

may have just been bumped off the rolls and maybe been saved 

5 or 6 or $7, Mr. Speaker. And in many cases, even on the 

upper end of that threshold, we might be talking 100 or $300, 

Mr. Speaker. And if we put that in context, that’s $10 a month, 

Mr. Speaker, $25 a month in this budget here this year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the Premier can smirk if he wishes, but what he should 

recognize, Mr. Speaker, is that individuals who have faced 

increases of rent in some ways of $400 a year, Mr. Speaker, 

equate to about $5,000 a year. And what’s offered up as an 

adequate response from this Premier, from this Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, is a $10 cut in their taxes on a 

monthly basis, Mr. Speaker. And that simply doesn’t cut it. 

 

And we don’t see the comprehensive plan to address . . . With 

all the other pressures that our economy and that our province is 

experiencing, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see a comprehensive 

response on housing. We don’t see a comprehensive response 

on child care. We don’t see a piece that is there to ensure that 

seniors and baby boomers, Mr. Speaker, as they move along, 

are going to have the protection and dignity that they deserve as 

they move into their senior years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that has lived well beyond its means for 

the last few years, despite this opportunity with unprecedented 

revenues, and has failed to move the province forward in the 

sort of substantive way that we should, Mr. Speaker, and has 

failed to move forward the circumstance of households across 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I say, unlike households across this province, this 

government has more money than ever before. I think that 

households across this province would absolutely adore to have 

the circumstance of this government where they’ve had an 

increase of, you know, revenues to the tune that this 

government has. This budget here, representing an increase 

over the previous budget, revenues over the past budget of the 

NDP of 38 per cent in just four years, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan workers would appreciate 

those kinds of dollars. 

 

But their circumstance has been one very different. What we 

see is we see individuals across this province, many of them in 

fixed incomes, Mr. Speaker, with incomes not increasing but 

costs outstripping that in a significant way. We see that same to 

be true for many of the working poor across this province. We 

see that for individuals working for minimum wage in many 

jobs, Mr. Speaker, that just simply can’t get ahead. Mr. 

Speaker, we see a government that’s unwilling to move that 

minimum wage forward and allow us to make some progress 

for those workers, for those families on those fronts, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then we see this whole cast of individuals, workers in our 

health care sectors, in education sectors, Mr. Speaker, that have 

been receiving contracts that are well below inflation, well 

below the increases to their cost of living, Mr. Speaker. And all 

of this is unfortunate. 

 

When we do look at this budget, we certainly recognize the 

failure of meeting Saskatchewan people and families’ priorities, 

but we also recognize the failed fiscal opportunity that’s been 

provided to government, Mr. Speaker, a government that’s been 

blessed with an unprecedented opportunity to move 

Saskatchewan forward but has failed to be able to seize that 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Through this time of record revenues — as I’ve cited in some 

years, outstripping the previous budgets by 2 and 3 and $4 

billion — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is a 

government that has a shameful legacy, a legacy not of debt 

reduction but of actual debt increase, Mr. Speaker. Not a legacy 

of building a fund for the bright future of Saskatchewan and 

leaving Saskatchewan stronger as we move forward, but one 

that drains the equity and reserves we have here today, at a time 

when it has more money than ever before, Mr. Speaker, and 

simply not addressing the priorities of Saskatchewan families 

who are under more pressure than ever before. 

 

So in all three measures there, Mr. Speaker, we see a 

government that hasn’t been able to move us forward from a 

position of public debt, from a position of advancing the 

priorities of Saskatchewan families or a position of being able 

to make sure we’re ready and strong for the future, building a 

fund to ensure a bright future, Mr. Speaker, something that 

Saskatchewan people expect out of their government at times of 

plenty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here we have a government, Mr. Speaker, that’s had record 

revenues over these past few years but in fact has run deficits 

and has also increased debt, Mr. Speaker. For the past three 

years, this is a government that’s increased debt by more than 

$1.3 billion, and this all comes at a consequence to 

Saskatchewan people, both now but also well into the future. 

And the shameful part about adding debt like this, Mr. Speaker, 

is that in many ways it’s so short-sighted that it gets passed 

onto the next generation and the children of that generation, Mr. 

Speaker, to pay for the reckless legacy of this Sask Party 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6893 

government at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see the opportunity to advance our lot and to ready us for 

the future, Mr. Speaker. We see a government that’s put 

forward projections again this year that are rosier and beyond 

the recommendations of private sector forecasters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And from a budgeting perspective, Mr. Speaker, we would 

always advise caution on these fronts, Mr. Speaker, to plan 

prudently and responsibly, Mr. Speaker, something that this 

government’s failed to do on so many fronts from the time it’s 

come to power, Mr. Speaker — a government that’s failed to 

project revenues and expenses and have been wildly off in 

many circumstances. A revenue line just a couple of years ago 

where the minister and the Premier didn’t understand what was 

going on from a global perspective in one of our most important 

industries and also didn’t understand their own royalty 

structure, Mr. Speaker, and in fact impacted Saskatchewan 

negatively by $2 billion. They had planned for revenues of $1.9 

billion from one industry, Mr. Speaker, and ended up having to 

cut cheques back to the same very industry with taxpayers’ 

money to the tune of a couple hundred million dollars, Mr. 

Speaker — an entire miss of well over 100 per cent and a real 

hit on Saskatchewan people. 

 

But it hasn’t just been revenue projections that this 

government’s been off on as it relates to economic forecasts 

and realities, how we connect to the global economy, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s been to the detriment of Saskatchewan people. 

And that’s where, when we see this government putting 

forward forecasts again this year that far exceed private sector 

averages, Mr. Speaker, we would caution that we err on the side 

of caution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see them moving forward with this forecast despite the 

challenges that we see from an agricultural perspective across 

this province. We have a late thaw, Mr. Speaker, here this year. 

We have a lot of snowpack out there. We had a wet fall, 

incredibly wet summer, Mr. Speaker — 11 million acres of land 

was flooded, Mr. Speaker. And in fact going into the fall, that 

situation just never improved for many areas of the province. 

We have parts of the province where individuals couldn’t even 

get into the fields to take feed off throughout the winter because 

of the water below the snowpack that continued to run, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And here we are into a spring that’s going to be an incredible 

challenge for producers who are both burdened by the 

circumstance of the water in their fields but also by the credit 

that they have incurred, Mr. Speaker, to try to ready themselves 

for another year, despite a real disaster last year for many, Mr. 

Speaker. So we would argue that we should stay on the side of 

caution as it relates to forecasts, economic forecasts, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see this government again being on the rosy 

side of that equation, Mr. Speaker. And when the government 

misses on these sorts of forecasts, Mr. Speaker, it’s a miss for 

Saskatchewan people, and it directly impacts Saskatchewan 

people and comes at a consequence. And that’s where we 

would urge this government to improve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We made comments yesterday with respect to the fact that this 

government still remains to comply with public sector 

accounting standards, Mr. Speaker. This is unfortunate because 

it prevents Saskatchewan people from having the true picture of 

their finances. It prevents any sort of meaningful or thoughtful 

comparison to our jurisdictional neighbours and provinces 

across Canada, Mr. Speaker. And so we’re very concerned that 

this government fails to comply and is in fact the only province 

that is out of line with accounting standards, Mr. Speaker, that 

are expected of governments. They failed to comply with the 

recommendation of the auditor on this front, Mr. Speaker, and 

have continually been brought to task by the chartered 

accountants across Canada and certainly within our province. 

 

I would just highlight on page 7 of their Estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, that they actually make specific reference there that 

highlights that they comply with public sector accounting 

standards except for in the two circumstances that they 

highlight. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s non-compliance, and it’s 

what the auditor speaks to. And it’s about providing the 

transparency required of Saskatchewan people and about 

providing the true picture that Saskatchewan people rightfully 

deserve, Mr. Speaker. So we would continue to call for 

Saskatchewan to move forward on this front, provide 

transparency to Saskatchewan people, and to no longer be out 

of line with something that’s expected of all jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We would continue to highlight the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have a government that’s outspent the historic revenues that it’s 

been provided. And this sort of spending and lack of balance 

comes at consequences to Saskatchewan people — spending in 

this budget up 38.4 per cent up over the previous budget of just 

four years ago of our administration, Mr. Speaker. And this sort 

of circumstance where this government can’t balance revenues 

and expenditures, Mr. Speaker, and where their runaway 

spending has outstripped the revenues that they’ve sought for 

the province, Mr. Speaker, puts us in that position where we’re 

adding debt to this province. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And it’s absolutely astonishing, Mr. Speaker, when you look 

back and start adding up some of the numbers over the past few 

years, a time of historic prosperity to this province where we’ve 

in fact drained from our reserves, specifically as it relates to the 

rainy day fund or growth and fiscal stabilization financial 

security fund, Mr. Speaker, we see that over the past few years, 

$2 billion have been drained from that fund. Time of historic 

highs, a time of supposed boom times, Mr. Speaker, at a time of 

unprecedented prosperity for government — this government 

needs to draw on its rainy day fund. That’s simply not 

sustainable, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn’t leave any sort of legacy 

or security for future generations, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 

ensure the bright future that we should be providing. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that as governments experience 

non-renewable resource revenues that are massive windfalls, 

that a good part of those dollars should be dedicated for the 

future, Mr. Speaker, not there to be siphoned off by a 

government that can’t manage its books, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve 

seen over the past few years. And this is where this government 

again has truly failed to move Saskatchewan forward in a 

significant way. It’s burnt off the reserves and equity and rainy 

day funds that were in place and has failed to provide for the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 



6894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

So we highlight the $2 billion that this government has 

siphoned from the rainy day fund at a time of historic highs in 

revenues to cover off for its mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. But 

I’d also highlight the tap that’s been on the Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, and, you know, specifically that over a three-year 

period, this government — a time of unprecedented highs in 

revenues — averaged a take from the Crowns of $533 million a 

year, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely unsustainable, absolutely not 

fair, absolutely not appropriate, and absolutely not serving the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people now or into the future. 

 

The direct consequence of draining all of this money from the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, is one of causing those 

Crown corporations to lever up in a fashion that goes beyond 

any sort of appropriate business model and passing the direct 

cost back to consumers and families and businesses now, Mr. 

Speaker, by way of increases to utilities. But it also puts 

Saskatchewan taxpayers on the hook for public debt, Mr. 

Speaker, that has to be paid for by a future generation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I know this government kind of lives in the now and burns 

every dollar that it receives, Mr. Speaker, but it’s truly failing 

those future generations, not only to not improve our lot 

financially now, and not only in failing the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people, but not leaving us in a fiscally improved 

circumstance when we’ve had this blessed opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, by the beautiful resources and incredible entrepreneurs 

and exceptional workers of this province, that they’ve provided 

to this province. And we’ve seen a government that’s failed to 

capture that opportunity, a government that’s failed a vision and 

a plan and an ability to manage a prosperous Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And really this is what it comes down to, so this government 

can be prosperous; a few companies are prosperous. We’d like 

to see companies very prosperous, Mr. Speaker. But where we 

see that disconnect is the prosperity is simply not felt by 

Saskatchewan people, and that’s where this government’s been 

short-sighted and wrong. 

 

We see a government that rejects the call of business leaders 

and economics leaders across Saskatchewan and across Canada, 

calling for an independent review of our potash royalty 

structure, Mr. Speaker, so that we can maximize the benefit for 

Saskatchewan people both now and well into the future, Mr. 

Speaker, making sure we can take care of priorities today, but 

investing that back to make sure that we’re in improved 

circumstance tomorrow, putting away dollars for the future 

generations that provide the sort of security and bright futures 

that all deserve, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see that happening, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We continue to call for the fairness that Saskatchewan people 

deserve as it relates to their potash royalties, Mr. Speaker, and 

the investment that we should and could be making back into 

Saskatchewan people and communities and the legacy that we 

could be leaving for the people of the province who deserve to 

benefit from the prosperity that’s occurring within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see in this budget, we see many, many 

aspects that are of concern. We’ve seen that highlighted as well 

by the very stakeholders that have weighed in. We’ve read a 

concern that was highlighted in newspapers here today, Mr. 

Speaker, sort of addressing the living for the now and burning 

every dollar here today, Mr. Speaker, and leaving a burden of 

debt for future generations, Mr. Speaker. I highlight from the 

Leader-Post. I see concerns being highlighted in here 

specifically to the significant revenue stripping that’s occurred 

from those Crown corporations — the equity stripping, I should 

say, Mr. Speaker — that’s occurred, the consequences that that 

has for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I recognize the major concerns that are being highlighted with 

the absolute meagre and non-response to the housing pressures 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. I recognize the concerns as it 

relates to the projections that are well beyond the private sector, 

Mr. Speaker, that, you know, sort of holding to form of this 

reckless government to be above private sector forecasters 

instead of recognizing that in our own backyard. 

 

I believe we had a school class here today from Kelvington, Mr. 

Speaker. And those individuals up in that region, Mr. Speaker, 

are under one thick snowpack and a lot of stress, Mr. Speaker, 

because they were entirely saturated in the fall, Mr. Speaker. 

And we should know that information here in Saskatchewan 

better than, better than the private sector forecasters, yet we fail 

to heed the advice, not only of the private sector forecasters; we 

fail to heed the advice of and have the information of what we 

should in our own backyard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve also seen in the paper general concerns about the 

failure to move forward as it relates to debt in the out years, Mr. 

Speaker. No plan to reduce debt, and in fact you know that the 

total public debt over the past few years, from a government 

that’s been blessed with exceptional opportunities on the 

revenue side of the equation, has failed to reduce debt, Mr. 

Speaker. But they’ve done the opposite. They’ve increased debt 

over the last three years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve got other information here, I know, from, you know, Sask 

Trends Monitor that highlights just how unsustainable the 

management of our finances is and how dangerous the draws 

have been on the Crown corporations and the impact on 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And as I look further 

through the information, Mr. Speaker, I have an entire pack of 

concerns as it relates to cuts, Mr. Speaker. And I have pages 

and pages and pages of cuts in ministries across government, 

Mr. Speaker. And in the coming days and weeks, we’re going 

to be meeting with stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be 

sitting in committees, and we’re going to be understanding 

what these cuts are for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Because all we hear from this government is political spin, Mr. 

Speaker. What we don’t hear is a government that can be 

forthright and to explain the impact of their management. And 

we saw that in Health last year, Mr. Speaker, when this 

government had starved regions of their dollars and failed, both 

through committee and question period in this Assembly, to be 

forthright and straightforward about what the impact was going 

to be for Saskatchewan families. 

 

And we’ve seen what that has come to be throughout this 

province. And many communities have certainly felt that 

impact through reduced services, Mr. Speaker, or cuts, 

specifically in long-term care and other areas, Mr. Speaker. We 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6895 

would call on the government to be forthright about what these 

cuts are at this point in time and what the direct impact is for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

But at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am concerned 

with a budget that lacks vision, a budget that’s built and 

language that’s built about political spin, Mr. Speaker, and 

about communication that sounds nice but really fails to bring 

the meaningful response required to Saskatchewan people that 

are quite simply, are feeling great stresses as it relates to the 

affordability of life here in Saskatchewan, the quality of life, 

and what it costs to achieve that quality of life here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the expectations, and rightfully so, 

of the levels of medical services and health services across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we reject this budget outright on its lack of response and 

failure to address the priorities of Saskatchewan people. But we 

reject it on another front as well: from a complete financial 

perspective of the further display of unsustainable budgets 

being put forward; again not moving our lot forward, Mr. 

Speaker; of not having responsible financial management, of 

failing to seize the beautiful opportunity that this government 

was blessed to have by way of Saskatchewan people, and that 

was to preside over an incredibly prosperous time; failing to 

move our position forward fiscally and in fact load debt to the 

people’s books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see a government that’s failed Saskatchewan people’s 

priorities. We see a government that’s failed us from a financial 

perspective, and we see a government as a result that lacks a 

vision and certainly lacks the plan for the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan people deserve to live in a prosperous 

Saskatchewan. And in that prosperous Saskatchewan, they need 

to be a part of it where in fact they feel that same prosperity and 

the improvements to their way of life, their quality of life. And 

that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I certainly won’t be 

supporting this budget that fails Saskatchewan people. And I’m 

going to move an amendment to the motion that was put 

forward by the Finance minister yesterday and put forward an 

amendment, specifically: 

 

That the motion be amended by removing all words 

following the word “Assembly” and adding: 

 

condemns this government for a budget that ignores 

Saskatchewan people and families; and furthermore, 

 

that this government no longer has the confidence of this 

Assembly and of the people of Saskatchewan because, 

despite a record level of revenue, this budget is doing 

nothing to help people and families deal with rising cost of 

housing, does nothing to implement rent control, does 

nothing to help struggling families deal with the growing 

cost of living. It does nothing to improve the province’s 

education system. It fails to get a fair potash royalty deal 

for Saskatchewan people. And it is not telling 

Saskatchewan people that this government is actually 

increasing the province’s debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this point in time, I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by Regina Rosemont, seconded by the 

member from Regina Coronation Park. Will the members take 

the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 

an honour for me to rise in what is almost certain to be my last 

budget speech, but to follow such an eloquent response by the 

hon. member for Regina Rosemont, our opposition critic to 

Finance, and his very thoughtful, well laid out remarks and this 

very thoughtful amendment that really speaks to New Democrat 

values and speaks to what we feel should be and needs to be 

done with the resources, the vast resources that are under the 

control right now of the governing Sask Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re witnessing in Saskatchewan a boom, but 

it’s a boom for the government. It is a boom of revenue for the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And we are asking, a boom for 

whom? And what we mean by that is simply, this leaves aside 

seniors; it leaves aside persons with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s shameful. The only reference I’ve seen to persons with 

disabilities is nearly 6 million was cut from the Saskatchewan 

assured income for disability program. One million dollars was 

cut from the seniors’ income program; 800,000 was cut from 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement, 200,000 cut from 

income assistance community services, 400,000 cut from 

housing program delivery — and 300,000 of that is a result of 

salary reductions. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on, but that 

very short list that I’ve read early in my speech highlights what 

we mean when we say, a boom for whom? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government is very proud of the income tax 

break. And you know what? I thank you. At my level of 

income, I thank you for that. I will get some benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’ll tell you, the 60 residents of Huston Heights in 

Argyle Park, most of them will not see $10 a month benefit 

from that income tax break. And I say, shame, because those 

very people that I have represented and continue to proudly 

represent, those very great people in Huston Heights are left 

behind yet again, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a shame. 

 

Many of the people in Huston Heights . . . And there’s literally 

thousands across the province. I single out an area in my 

constituency, Huston Heights, because it’s a place that I have 

always felt a special kinship with and have always enjoyed 

when I have the opportunity to go in and meet and talk with the 

residents one on one. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve always felt that 

when we were in government, we didn’t do enough to help give 

these people a leg up, a hand up, and certainly this budget by 

the Sask Party is even more dismal for them. 

 

Many of the 60 people in Huston Heights, Mr. Speaker, are 

there because, as one of them recently said to me, life happens. 

Life happens, was her words. This relatively young woman had 

been training to be an RN [registered nurse] and had a four 

point grade average, and then disability happened. Life 



6896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

happened, as she describes it. She was so looking forward to a 

pretty decent life, you know, with a good income, helping other 

people, with an ability to do lots of good in our Saskatchewan, 

in our province, and to raise a family, you know, to enjoy the 

things that most of us take for granted. And then life happened. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And now she has no ability to earn income on her own. She’s 

receiving social service benefits. She’s in subsidized housing 

and there’s too much month at the end of the money, too much 

month at the end of the money, Mr. Speaker. The last two times 

I spoke to her, she wasn’t certain if she was going to have 

groceries come the end of this month. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

tragedy. Life happened through no fault of her own. Life 

happened. And this is the situation with far too many people in 

our great province. 

 

And yet there’s a boom. For whom? A boom for whom? 

Certainly not for people with disabilities. Certainly not for 

seniors. Certainly not for renters, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen rent 

go up nearly 40 per cent in the last three years in Regina and 

Saskatoon. I was speaking to someone from Weyburn and 

they’ve a similar situation. And I’m sure it’s similar in every 

city in Saskatchewan where rents have just skyrocketed. And 

yet we have a government that refuses to introduce a new 

generation of rent controls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re saying that rent controls stifle investment in housing. 

Well I’ll tell you what stifles investment in housing — a $1.7 

million investment in low-cost housing in this budget, a total of 

$1.7 million, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine? How is that going 

to put a dent into the housing situation? How is that going to 

help the people who cannot find reasonable accommodation at 

any reasonable price? Mr. Speaker, it just is not going to be 

helpful for those people, and I say that is a tragedy and a shame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Peter Gilmer of Regina — he’s an advocate for 

housing and for affordable housing — says, and I quote from 

yesterday: 

 

“We’re in the midst of an economic boom and we have 

massive resource wealth,” said Gilmer. “We can afford to 

reinvest in terms of both income security programs and 

affordability when it comes to housing.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to fast forward to something that our Social 

Services critic, how he described the budget. And he described 

it in one word for those very people. The word is 

“embarrassing.” $1.7 million for affordable housing in this 

budget, it’s embarrassing, Mr. Speaker. A time when the 

provincial government has absolutely record revenue — $10.8 

billion this year, ten point eight, $10.8 billion revenue — 

unprecedented revenue, and there’s $1.7 million for low-cost 

housing, for social housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance critic, the member for Regina 

Rosemont pointed out debt is going up. And this troubles me, 

having been here. By the time the election rolls around, I will 

have served 25 years as an MLA, assuming I’m still alive, and I 

have no reason to think I won’t be. Mr. Speaker, the debt is 

going up according to the government’s own book, the budget 

summary for ’11-12. And I’m looking at page 61 where it 

shows the public . . . well it shows the General Revenue Fund 

debt going down. And it shows the government business 

enterprise debt going up at a sharper rate, at a faster rate. 

 

The public is responsible for all of this debt, Mr. Speaker. This 

is debt that, in government, New Democrats drove both down 

year after year after year after year. We drove the debt down in 

both of those areas year after year after year. We took 

Saskatchewan — thank you, Roy Romanow; thank you, Lorne 

Calvert — we took Saskatchewan from a junk bond record 

rating, junk bond rating where we couldn’t invest 

Saskatchewan’s public service pension fund into any 

Saskatchewan investment because we were rated as junk bond. 

 

And there’s laws that the federal government appropriately has 

that protect public pensions, that protect pension funds, not just 

public but pension funds. And they said, you can’t invest in 

junk bonds because it’s too risky. Today we have brought from 

junk bond to AA and in some cases AAA credit rating, Mr. 

Speaker — ratings that continue today, that continue today on 

the backs of huge, huge revenue, most of it or much of it 

coming from non-renewable resources, Mr. Speaker. Huge 

revenue enables the Sask Party to maintain its credit rating 

because the revenues, the revenues continue to expand as we 

get to $100-and-above oil, as we get to record potash prices, 

Mr. Speaker, as we see the pressure ever upward on many of 

our resources. So it’s a boom for the Saskatchewan 

government, but it is not a boom for people of low or no 

income. And if you are at low or no income, Mr. Speaker, a tax 

break doesn’t mean much; a tax break on nothing is still 

nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a report released — what? — 10 days ago 

roughly that described Aboriginal employment in 

Saskatchewan as sharply down in the last two years, in the two 

years of the Sask Party government. Employment down, 

according to a university professor who did the study. Down at 

a time when we should be more inclusive, not exclusive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where in this 

budget we have a reduction in First Nations and Métis Affairs 

from 10.43 million to 9.365, a loss of $900,000. Treaty land 

entitlement loses 600,000. First Nations and Métis Consultation 

Participation Fund drops from 3 million to 2.1. That’s again 

another $900,000 loss. Lands and consultation drops from 

1.014 million to 959,000, a $55,000 reduction. There’s a 

$23,000 loss to northern economic development year over year. 

 

So at a time of boom, at a time of boom and at a time when the 

employment record is, I’ll describe it as dismal, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s going so entirely in the wrong way, and we have a 

Sask Party government that is so blinded to tax cuts that they 

don’t see the reality of how their decisions are affecting the 

people of Saskatchewan every day in so many ways, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And in so many ways, there is much more that could be done. 

There is much that the Government of Saskatchewan has a 

responsibility to do. It certainly has the financial, the fiscal 

tools to be able to do it. It has its hand on the brake. We wish 

they’d take it off the brake and put their hand on the throttle, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a boom for wealthy maybe, maybe, certainly a 

boom for the provincial treasury, but it is a bust for low and no 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6897 

income people. It is a bust for people with disabilities. It is a 

bust for seniors. It is a bust for the very people that the 

Government of Saskatchewan has the most responsibility for. It 

is a bust for Aboriginal people, Indian, and Métis individuals. It 

is a bust on all of those counts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s predicated on smoke and mirrors. This is the real sad 

part, is they’re driving the total debt up at a time of 

unbelievable revenues. And yet the total debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan goes up according to their own numbers. And 

again, if debt goes up at a time of unprecedented revenue for 

the provincial government, what on earth would you folks do in 

a time of difficulty? What on earth would you do when things 

go south? When things go sour? What on earth would you do? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget lets down the people of Saskatchewan 

in so many ways. It is silent, it is silent when it comes to potash 

royalty review that New Democrats have asked for. And I want 

to tell you part of why we’ve asked for it. I’ll get to the money 

in a minute, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan enjoys roughly 40 

per cent — some, you can argue up and down — of the potash. 

We have 40 per cent of the potash that is established, the 

reserves in the world. It is a low-cost producer because our 

grade of potash is very high, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a situation where potash . . . There was an offer to take 

over a potash corporation that was in the $36 billion range, and 

that was turned down by shareholders and, appropriately, they 

can do whatever they like. I’m not a shareholder in the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. I didn’t get a vote on it. So it’s 

moot. It doesn’t matter how I might have voted, Mr. Speaker, if 

I were a shareholder. The fact is, not a shareholder of Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan and for most years, that would 

have not served me well. But I’m not. But the shareholders, as 

is their legal right, turned down a $36 billion offer. Why? 

Because in their financial interest, they said they’re better to 

hold their shares, better to keep their ownership of Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

It tells me, Mr. Speaker, that the potential earning of Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan is huge, unbelievably huge. This 

is a potash corporation that in its previous iteration — the now 

Premier was part of the government that sold Potash 

Corporation — it was a Crown corporation. Sold it, and it 

became publicly shared. Previously all of the earnings would 

stay in Saskatchewan and could be used to pay for education, 

maybe a little bit for teachers’ salary increases and pensions, 

maybe a little bit for people with disabilities, maybe a little bit 

for low-cost housing, maybe a little bit for seniors, maybe a 

little bit for education property tax relief, maybe a lot for health 

care. You know, Mr. Speaker, we had it all, and then they gave 

it away, gave it away. The people of Saskatchewan kept the 

debt and the new company kept the mines. We got the shaft. 

They got the mines. And the rest, as we say, is history. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the clear value of potash and potash 

production, the royalty that is estimated for the coming year is 

$381 million. This, out of a company where . . . Saskatchewan 

people have 40 per cent of the known potash in the world. We 

are bigger than the Saudi Arabia of oil when it comes to potash. 

With respect to oil, we are just over one-half of one per cent of 

the total world production. With respect to potash, we’re more 

than one-third of the total world production. We are bigger in 

potash, relative to the rest of the world, than Saudi Arabia is to 

oil. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can demand an appropriate result from our 

resource in the ground. We can demand more than 5 cents on 

every dollar of earnings that the potash corporations are 

making. We can get a fairer response for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we can use and we would dedicate that 

money to renters, to people with disabilities, to teachers so they 

can get a fair contract offer instead of the contract negotiations 

breaking down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much that we would do, but first there’s 

some low-hanging grapes, if I can describe it that way. And I 

can see the quotes now. We need a review just to make sure, 

just to make sure that Saskatchewan is in fact getting a fair 

potash royalty, that in fact we’re not giving away a 

non-renewable resource too cheaply. We should get a fair tariff 

off of that potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one part of the budget that I absolutely am 

determined to cover too is Saskatchewan’s public service. What 

a proud — once proud anyway — group of women and men. 

The public servants of Saskatchewan deliver programs day after 

day after day. They’re put under increasing stress year over 

year over year. We have now technology, and I’ve seen it in 

action. I’ve seen civil servants that take their BlackBerry home, 

that work on their computers at home, work away from the 

office, Mr. Speaker. There’s ever more demanded of civil 

servants, and they’re not alone in this in our world. 

 

Civil servants aren’t alone in the increasing demands that are 

put on people. But the fact of the matter is that civil servants 

are, by and large, working harder and harder and harder and 

taking on more and more responsibilities, and an eight-hour 

workday is essentially a thing of the past for far too many of 

them. The demands of the workforce are growing exponentially 

and, at the same time, we are seeing a shrinkage — two 

hundred and seventy-three and a half full-time equivalent jobs, 

273 jobs that are gone, Mr. Speaker, gone and eliminated from 

this budget. Now many of these full-time equivalents were 

people that were working. I know the government’s fond of 

saying no layoffs. You don’t have to lay off someone that 

you’ve put under a temporary contract. And government has 

long been famous for this, for putting people on temporary 

contract, and then at budget time just don’t renew the contract 

or discontinue it at the end of a month. 

 

Well whether a worker is working on a contract with an 

expectation that it would be renewed repeatedly, but it protects 

the numbers, whether they’re working on that contract or 

whether they’re working in the civil service proper, that is, with 

an absolute, with the certainty of a job, barring an inadequate 

performance at that job . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have is 

a huge number, 273 people now looking for work, now looking 

for work. People that a month ago or yesterday were working, 

and they know that they are right up against the end of their 

work time. 

 

Most of the nature of Saskatchewan is that something like a 

third of the jobs in the civil service are in the capital city, in 



6898 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

Regina, and so the hurt will be disproportionately felt in 

Regina, in our great city. Mr. Speaker, I say it is a shame that 

this is going on with respect to our civil service. The drop in the 

civil service is the biggest in three years. In fact last year there 

was hiring, modest hiring, and this year it’s roughly a two and a 

half per cent cut in the number of civil servants. And that is 

shown on page 24 of the very same budget summary document. 

 

So much pain. There’s a boom for the provincial government, 

but pain for Saskatchewan’s public servants, pain for people 

with disabilities, pain for renters, pain for seniors, pain for low- 

and no-income earners, pain galore for the very people that the 

provincial government is responsible to help elevate their 

station in life, to help them do better, to inspire these people to 

do better. Mr. Speaker, this budget is, at best, for the 

Government of Saskatchewan and, at second best, it’s for 

wealthy people, but it is a boom for those only. It is a bust for 

everyone in the lower income strata. It is a bust for people that 

have no other means to help themselves. I say shame on the 

government for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my honour to once again stand on 

behalf of my constituents, the great people of Regina 

Coronation Park, and I want to close by thanking them for the 

support they have shown me personally in so many ways for 25 

years now, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had more support from the people 

of Coronation Park than anyone could possibly deserve, 

certainly far more than I deserve. But I am so grateful for that 

support. I have tried my best to honour that support and do 

what I can. 

 

I’ve tried today to outline the wrong parts of this budget, and 

indeed there are many things that are wrong. There are things 

that are welcome at higher levels of income and even at 

medium levels of income, but for low- and no-income people, 

for those who have no means of helping themselves, this budget 

is a bust. So, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to second the motion 

from the honourable member for Regina Rosemont, that motion 

being that all words following the word “Assembly” and adding 

. . . pardon me, that we remove all the words following 

“Assembly” and adding: 

 

condemns this government for a budget that ignores 

Saskatchewan people and families; and furthermore, 

 

that this government no longer has the confidence of this 

Assembly and of the people of Saskatchewan because, 

despite a record level of revenue, this budget is doing 

nothing to help people and families deal with rising cost of 

housing. It does nothing to implement rent control. It does 

not help struggling families deal with the growing cost of 

living. It does nothing to improve the province’s education 

system. It fails to get a fair potash royalty deal for 

Saskatchewan people, and it is not telling Saskatchewan 

people that this government is actually increasing the 

province’s debt [and deficit]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to have seconded this amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 

me to stand and address our government’s budget and I want to 

thank the Finance minister for asking me to second this budget. 

Having worked on Treasury Board with him this last year, it is 

an honour. 

 

Working on Treasury Board is a lot of work. It’s time 

consuming, but it’s also very rewarding. And I would like to 

thank my colleagues on Treasury Board. We’ve had some very 

frank and full discussions over the last few months, and we 

don’t always agree. But I think at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, the good thing about our government and our party is 

that we can have those frank discussions. And I think the 

budget that was brought in yesterday by our Finance minister 

reflects the priorities of this government and the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like to thank the deputy minister at Finance, Karen 

Layng, and all of her staff. For as many hours as Treasury 

Board members put into this budget, they put in more. And we 

asked a lot of them and they delivered, and I want to thank 

them for their hard work. 

 

And I would also like to thank my constituency assistant, 

Whitney Friesen, who isn’t feeling very well right now. But 

considering the long hours that I was in Regina and not in the 

constituency, I want to thank him for keeping the office open 

and keeping things going in my absence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget continues a trend that we started in our 

very first budget. It’s a budget that keeps our promises and is 

balanced. And, Mr. Speaker, I found it interesting the Finance 

critic from the opposition talking about this not being a 

balanced budget, which is absolutely an erroneous statement, 

and also talking about the financial auditing process and 

especially when it comes to summary financial statements. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where his information comes 

from, but I have in front of me, it’s Public Accounts on the 

summary financial statements, a signed statement from the 

Provincial Auditor saying, and I quote, “I conducted my audit 

in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing 

standards.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so this is the very first budget, I understand, in our 

province where it is balanced on both the GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] basis and the summary financials. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the NDP have had such a hard time 

finding anything really wrong with this budget that they’ve 

resorted to making things up because it is absolutely not correct 

to say that this is not a balanced budget. It is balanced, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said, on both the GRF and summary financials. So 

I just wanted to clear that up at the very beginning. 

 

There were some more interesting comments made by 

opposition members already today which . . . I will address 

some of those. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I start off thanking my colleagues, and I do 

want to thank them for all of their hard work and also, Mr. 

Speaker, for recognizing the needs in my constituency. I know 

that when my dad was the MLA, it was one of the frustrations 

that he heard, that being a rural constituency that it was 

continuously overlooked by the NDP. It was also, Mr. Speaker, 

a constituency that the NDP never had any hope of winning. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s probably . . . 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6899 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I believe the 

member from Regina Rosemont already had the opportunity to 

speak. I allow the member from Martensville to continue on 

with her speech. 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I know, as I was saying, when 

my dad was the MLA, there was an ongoing frustration that the 

constituency was always overlooked. It was not a good 

opportunity for, on the election side, for the NDP. In fact the 

NDP have never, ever, ever won the seat that I represent, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think politics might have come into play a little 

bit. The constituency has been overlooked. 

 

And I have to say, when I went door knocking during the 

by-election process the beginning of 2007, there were a lot of 

things that people in my constituency wanted to see addressed. 

And those priorities, Mr. Speaker, I can say, in our first term in 

less than four years, we have addressed those concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a new water supply for Hepburn. Hepburn had been 

working on a well system. It wasn’t healthy for those folks and 

was limiting the growth potential of their community and, Mr. 

Speaker, happy that we have been able to announce, in 

conjunction with the municipality and the federal government, 

over $9 million for a water project for Hepburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also announced recently a new middle-years 

school for Warman. Again, the NDP had absolutely no vision 

for our province. They didn’t believe that we could grow. They 

have this doom and gloom attitude, and again we saw that 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say I woke up this morning in a pretty 

good mood. We had a good day yesterday, a good budget. And 

then sitting through the NDP’s speeches, man, get me a tissue. I 

don’t know what world they’re living in, but it is a sad place. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the majority in this 

province agree with them. Because the people I’ve been 

meeting every day are pretty happy about being in this 

province, and as we’ve seen from the population numbers, 

there’s more and more of them coming into this province every 

day. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of them are coming into my 

constituency. So I’m happy to see a new middle school for 

Warman. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had some pretty dire highways in my 

constituency, and I want to thank the Highways minister, past 

and present, for their work on plans to address those situations 

to ensure that the growing communities in my constituency 

have safe highways and highways that are going to be a good 

basis for them going into the future. With continued population 

growth and the economic growth in the RM [rural municipality] 

of Corman Park, we have to build for the future, Mr. Speaker, 

not just fill in a few potholes today, and I’m happy to say that 

our government is doing that. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also important with our growing 

communities, especially in my constituency — as I said they 

have some of the fastest growing communities in all of Canada 

— that we allow municipalities to plan themselves. As a 

provincial government, we have to plan but, Mr. Speaker, the 

municipalities have to have an opportunity to plan as well. And 

I was happy to see in this budget we have kept our promise for 

the revenue sharing one point of PST [provincial sales tax] to 

enable municipalities to have those revenues, that they can plan 

ahead and take care of some of the growth issues that they are 

facing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, although I don’t believe it was highlighted 

specifically in the Finance minister’s budget speech yesterday, I 

do want to thank the Minister of Municipal Affairs for a new 

program. It’s a pilot program through SIGI [Saskatchewan 

infrastructure growth initiative] which will allow communities 

to apply to borrow interest-free money, up to five years 

interest-free to address some of the recreational facility deficits 

that they have in their communities. And I know for the 

communities in my riding, that’s a huge issue. So I would like 

to thank Municipal Affairs, the minister for his work on this 

again, Mr. Speaker, allowing municipalities to plan ahead and 

make sure that the folks in their constituencies have the 

facilities and infrastructure that their people deserve and expect 

with a growing province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the NDP have this 

doom-and-gloom attitude which is really unfortunate. I think 

it’s indicative their philosophy and mindset kind of trickled 

down a little bit when they were in government. And if you 

have leadership that’s positive and has a vision for our 

province, the people are going to follow. They’re going to feel 

good about themselves and the choices that they’re making in 

living here. 

 

And I know that the Finance minister alluded to this yesterday 

in his speech, and I want to bring it up again. There was a 

survey done by the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business. The first question was asked in 2003 to their 

membership, and it asked, do you think that there’s a bright 

future for young people in Saskatchewan? And, Mr. Speaker, in 

2003, a full 83 per cent said no — 83 per cent of respondents 

said they didn’t believe there was a bright future for young 

people in this province. Mr. Speaker, only 10 per cent said yes. 

That’s really quite sad considering that our province has so very 

much to offer. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, things have turned around. In 2010 

CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] asked 

exactly the same question. And, Mr. Speaker, you know what 

their response was? Eighty-four per cent said yes. It was a 

complete turnaround from seven years ago, Mr. Speaker. I think 

the change in this attitude is absolutely staggering. I think it 

goes to the amazing spirit of the people who live in this 

province. And, Mr. Speaker, I also think it goes to the attitude 

of the government in place, that they know that their 

government is planning for the future, that we have a positive 

outlook about our province, and that we’re willing to go out and 

promote our province to others, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen 

that in the attitudes of those who responded to the survey. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think our budget has some very important 

points. I’m not going to go through every single one of them. 

Obviously my other colleagues are going to be speaking as well 



6900 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

through the next few days, but I do want to highlight a few 

things that I think are important not just to communities that I 

represent, but to the people of this province on the whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to agriculture, it’s one of the best 

budgets that our province has ever seen when it comes to 

agriculture. And again historically, the NDP have completely 

ignored that sector. We saw it during the last election when 

there was a discussion about property taxes and whose plan was 

best. The NDP actually didn’t talk about agricultural property 

taxes when it comes to education at all. It wasn’t mentioned. 

Their proposal would have done nothing to our agricultural 

sector. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say that in our budget 

yesterday, we have fulfilled yet another promise, and 

agricultural producers will see an 80 per cent reduction in their 

education property taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have an increase to the health regions. 

And I think one of the very most important things that we have 

announced in our budget is the focus on children and youth at 

risk and I do want to . . . Although this is not a silo approach — 

governments tend to do that; they operate in silos and don’t 

communicate — this really is a government-wide strategy. And 

I do want to give a shout out to our Minister of Social Services 

who was the driving force behind this, and I know, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a project that is very near and dear to her heart. 

And I want to say thank you to her for her willingness to help 

out those who need help in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it is a very worthwhile venture. There is, I believe, $34 

million government-wide going into different initiatives. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just us who think this is a good idea. 

There’s stakeholders who also are supportive of our 

government’s initiatives. Chief Guy Lonechild said, and I 

quote, “This government has put its money where its mouth is. 

This is an opportunity for us to start doing much needed work 

to roll up our sleeves and start improving educational outcomes 

for First Nations people, including early childhood 

development, K to 12, and post-secondary education,” Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And Robert Doucette who is the leader of the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan — I was quite touched actually by his interview 

on the news yesterday, post budget, as I was not aware of his 

background — but he said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Raising a family is not a cheap thing and so by having 

those increases to resources for foster children and foster 

parents, I think, is a good day. Being a former foster child 

myself growing up in the system, I know it’s really 

important to have these resources to ensure that Métis 

children are given the best opportunity to succeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what better person to be able to judge whether or 

not these programs are going be worthwhile than somebody 

who’s been through the system himself. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to thank Mr. Doucette for his leadership on this file and 

others. He is an amazing representative for the Métis people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one other quote on part of the child and 

youth strategy that’s being put forward by our government, Deb 

Davies, spokesperson for the Foster Families Association, said 

and I quote, “The child and youth agenda tells me that this 

government is prioritizing our families, and that is where we 

need to be, focusing our efforts on strengthening families.” 

And, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. That was the focus 

of this project when we went into it and when discussions 

began, is that we were going to strengthen families regardless 

of where they come from, what their social background is, what 

their ethnicity is, what their financial situation is. Mr. Speaker, 

our children deserve to have the absolute best start in life, and 

that is what we are going to be working towards with our 

stakeholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned earlier some of the erroneous 

statements that were put forward by the NDP members, and I’m 

sure there’ll be other interesting statements as they continue to 

speak on the budget. But I do want to address a few things. 

 

When it comes to helping those who need a little bit of help, the 

member from Coronation Park said that we had completely 

abandoned those with disabilities. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 

sure if he’s read our budgets or looked through what our 

ministries are doing or remembers what his government did not 

do on these issues, Mr. Speaker, but we inherited a list — 440 

people with disabilities on a waiting list, just hanging out on a 

waiting list, looking for places to live and for programming. 

What did the NDP do for these people, Mr. Speaker? 

Absolutely nothing. They were content to have 440 people with 

disabilities waiting on a list with absolutely no help from their 

government at the time. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we thought that was absolutely 

unacceptable, and we made a promise a couple of years ago to 

address that situation. And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, with 

the funding that’s available through this budget, we will 

successfully take 85 per cent of those 440 people off of that list. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to getting all of them off 

of that list. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to housing, they can pick and 

choose numbers from this page or that page, but I think you 

kind of have to look at it as a whole and what is our 

government doing when it comes to housing. And if you pick 

and choose, that’s fine. I don’t think it’s the whole story, and I 

think the people of this province deserve to know what the 

actual story is on this. And I believe it was just a few weeks ago 

that we announced over $30 million going towards affordable 

housing, Mr. Speaker, and I think the NDP should be reminding 

their folks of that as well, instead of just picking and choosing 

the numbers that they want to talk about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot about the tax breaks for 

Saskatchewan residents. We now have the highest threshold in 

all of Canada when it comes to personal income tax on 

provincial taxes. A family of four can now earn over $45,000 

without paying any provincial income tax, and I think that is 

astounding. I think that is a great start, especially for your 

young families who are starting out, that they can earn a 

combined income of $45,550 before provincial income tax 

kicks in. And so again, Mr. Speaker, while the NDP are 

focusing on doom and gloom, I think the people of this 

province — families, working mothers, seniors — they’re 

going to see that there is a savings when they do their taxes next 

year thanks to the initiatives brought in by our government. 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6901 

Mr. Speaker, like I said, there’s a lot of other issues that my 

colleagues are going to address. I do want to talk very briefly 

about funding towards universities. I think having an agenda 

that’s based on innovation is key for our province. We are more 

than just a farming community. That’s what so many people 

across this country view Saskatchewan as, and there’s nothing 

wrong with that. We have a proud tradition of farming and 

agriculture in this province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are so much more than that, and we have 

amazing universities that are centres of excellence on different 

issues. And with this budget, there is additional funding going 

towards our universities. And I would like to quote from Brett 

Fairbairn, the U of S provost. He said, and I quote: 

 

Across the country, we see other universities are suffering, 

but in Saskatchewan there are still positive investments. 

We’re fortunate to be in a province that is still investing in 

post-secondary education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, and I quote, “The government 

is providing money so universities and colleges don’t have to 

raise tuition just to balance the books.” And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that’s important. When you look at what we’re doing at 

the U of S with additional housing for students, having that 

housing on campus allows those renters to be pulled out of the 

regular rental market which frees up housing for non-students 

who are giving monies towards education for continued 

programming and keeping things affordable for our students, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s very important. It keeps our 

young people in Saskatchewan. They’ll be educated in 

Saskatchewan, and I know that so many of them are going to be 

finding jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going back to the NDP and some of the errors, 

I’ve noticed that their recent ads talk about paying more and 

getting less. Again I don’t know what province they’re living in 

because if you ask yourself the question or ask your neighbour 

the question, are you better off now than you were four years 

ago? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families are better 

off. Our province is better off as a whole. Saskatchewan 

businesses are better off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year 114,000 low-income earners will not be 

paying provincial income tax. I believe they are better off. This 

year Saskatchewan families will pay $420 million less in 

income tax. I think those families are better off. This year 

property owners will pay $165 million less in education 

property taxes. I think those folks are better off. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so folks in Saskatchewan are paying less and 

they’re getting more. They’ve seen the investments that we’ve 

made in education capital — I haven’t even really got to that 

part of it yet — education capital, infrastructure, roads, 

hospitals, long-term care homes, and all the while they’re 

paying less tax, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s education property 

tax, whether it’s income tax. They are paying less and getting 

more. 

 

The one thing that they’re getting less of, Mr. Speaker, is 

provincial debt, $3 billion less than there was when we took 

office, Mr. Speaker. So I think, Mr. Speaker, like I said, if you 

ask folks in this province if they’re better off than they were 

four years ago, the answer is a resounding yes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in our new Saskatchewan we do have the 

advantage. We have the advantage of continued growth. We 

have the advantage of continued investment, and we have the 

advantage of continued revenues which we will continue to 

invest in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so very proud to be a part of this 

government. I’m thankful for being able to be a member on 

Treasury Board that worked to put this budget together with the 

input of stakeholders and my colleagues. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud to be a resident of this province. We have a very bright 

future, and the difference between the NDP and our side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, is that we actually believe that. 

 

So again I’m happy to second this budget motion. I will be 

supporting my government’s budget, and I will not be 

supporting the NDP amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand today and enter into the budget debate. And I 

will, at the outset, tell you that I am going to be supporting the 

motion put forward and the budget put forward by our Hon. 

Minister of Finance. I will not be supporting the amendment 

that I think just came right out of the pinata, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was very noticeable yesterday when we were 

sitting in the Chambers here listening to the Finance minister 

give his presentation and delivering probably the best budget 

that this province has ever, ever seen. And I couldn’t help but 

notice, as I looked across the floor, and I saw 21 people that 

didn’t agree with the budget, 21. There was 20 sitting in the 

benches, but there was one lady sitting behind, and I saw her 

shaking her head as the minister was giving the budget, and I 

was really wondering why she was shaking her head at such a 

good budget. Then I noticed she was wearing red, and I kind of 

put the two together, and I realized that that’s why she was not 

supporting the budget. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is for the people of the province. This 

is just an outstanding budget. It’s not just us that are saying 

that, except for those 20 people on the other side that are 

against it. There is some quotes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 

today that would agree with what we are saying on this side of 

the House. For an example, well for one thing, it’s a real 

balanced budget. Now it’s very interesting that the Finance 

critic from the socialists would say that it’s not, and even the 

other member that spoke and talking about it not being a 

balanced budget. But here again is a quote: “This is a real 

balanced budget. Even the auditor would agree with that.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s interesting that this is stated in the 

paper or on the radio, some of these quotes this morning, that 

everybody seems to want to believe this except for the 20 

people sitting on that side of the House. That is a shame on 

their part, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



6902 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

I do want to talk about a number of issues where we’re going 

today and from where we came. We had 16 years of total 

neglect in rural Saskatchewan from the previous government, 

16 years. We look at what we’ve done in the last three years as 

just amazing. From agriculture, as mentioned by the member 

from Martensville, we have put more into agriculture in the last 

three years than the NDP I think did in their whole 16 years. 

 

Infrastructure, we inherited the largest infrastructure deficit in 

the province’s history. And I really like to talk a little bit about 

the infrastructure deficit, which we are fixing. It’s taking a long 

time to repair the damage created by the socialist government 

of 16 years. It’s going to take us a while to repair all of that 

damage. 

 

But I’ll give you an example. One is in highways. Our 

highways were neglected so badly in rural Saskatchewan, and I 

can suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in my constituency, we 

had 16-year-old children that had never seen a paving machine, 

16-year-old people that had never seen a paving machine in our 

constituency. That was just coincidental with 16 years of NDP 

government. Since we’ve formed government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, $2.2 billion into highways, $2.2 billion — a far cry 

from what we witnessed over the 16 years of NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot of rhetoric coming from the other 

side now on such things as rent control. I think the people of the 

province understand the damage that some of their pinata ideas 

would do to the province. The rent control will inhibit growth. 

There’s no doubt about it. It would inhibit growth in housing 

and apartments. They don’t get it over there. They just do not 

understand. 

 

I was speaking to a group the other day, and I just posed a 

question to them. I said, if you were an owner of an apartment 

and you were restricted for applying any rent increases ever and 

your apartment started to deteriorate, what would you do? They 

say, well if we couldn’t get any return on our investment, why 

would we even fix the apartment? And if they’re not going to 

fix the apartment, then it deteriorates and deteriorates. I would 

ask members opposite to probably have a little look at East 

Hastings Street in Vancouver and look what that is. That was a 

rent control try, and now it’s probably the slum of Vancouver. 

That’s what rent controls do. 

 

I also want to talk about the royalty structure that the other side 

is talking about doing a review of royalties. Again they do not 

get it. If you start tinkering with the royalty structures, how are 

you going to get people that want to come in to invest? And 

right now we’re looking at 13 to $14 billion in investment in 

this province. And if you start tinkering with the royalties, do 

you think any of that expansion in potash would take place? 

How about expansion in the oil industry? Do you think that 

would take place if their royalties were tinkered with? 

 

Just as recent as this morning, look what happened in the North 

Sea. I wonder if members opposite looked at that, looking at 

tinkering with royalties in the North Sea and companies are 

pulling out. They’re pulling out of oil exploration and 

production in the North Sea because of that. Is this what the 

socialists want? I would hope not. It would kill thousands and 

thousands of jobs should they ever, gosh forbid, ever get into a 

position where they would exercise that royalty restructure — 

thousands and thousands of jobs. Do they care? They don’t. 

They don’t care about the people of the province. They care 

about their inner little sanctity of the NDP, and that’s about all 

that they care for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about education portion of 

property tax. This was stated that, this is the most regressive tax 

there is, and we will change it once we have the resources. You 

know who said that? That was the comedian, Tommy the . . . 

you know, and that was said in 1944. 1944, there was no 

adjustment to education portion of property tax until we formed 

government. Finally, finally we got that done. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about what 

this budget’s done for my ministry. We made a promise. We 

made a promise that we were going to hire 120 new police 

officers for this province. We have 90 on board and 30 more 

coming in this budget. Promise made, promise kept. Even with 

. . . [inaudible] . . . that adds up to 120. I don’t care how they 

add or subtract; that’s still 120 police officers. It’s a little bit 

different than . . . I think some of my colleagues would 

remember the promise about 200. That was back in 1999. Two 

elections later, they never did keep that promise, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

We also fully implemented the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] national backup policy to ensure the safety of 

RCMP officers in communities by funding 29 RCMP positions 

for the backup policy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have done so much within our 

corrections system to improve the corrections system. We 

inherited a huge mess, and we have gone about fixing that 

mess. And I could give you some examples. We’ve just 

instituted a non-contact visiting in our adult facilities. This may 

not seem much to anybody, but we figured it’s reduced the drug 

trade in our institutions by 60 per cent by no-contact visiting. 

That is how a lot of the contraband was entering into our 

corrections centres, was through contact with people on 

visitations. 

 

We’ve added security cameras. We’ve had upgrades in security 

for our corrections facilities. All of these changes, and there’s 

numerous . . . We put institutional clothing in which also 

stopped the drug traffic and drug trade. All of these changes 

have been very, very well received by the employees of our 

corrections centres. It has really added to their safety. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about the provincial 

disaster assistance program. We know last year we were hit 

with some very serious disasters around the province. We 

inherited a PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] 

system that again did not work for the people. Did the people 

on the other side care? No. No. They didn’t change it. They 

didn’t change it one iota. 

 

When we go back to looking at . . . I’ve heard some of them 

say, well we haven’t had anything quite like last year. Well 

they’re right; last year was a real exception. We go back to a 

place like Vanguard. Vanguard flooded in the year 2000. We 

had people that waited two years before they got one penny of 

money. Two years. 

 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6903 

And I have in my notes here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a comment 

by the then minister, Andrew Thomson. And he said, well, 

well, we’ve had a person working on these claims for some 

time now. One person working on PDAP claims — one. And 

then he was extremely proud to say, and we’ve doubled it. Two 

people working on claims. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last week we announced that we were 

adding 30 more to deal with the issues that we are from last 

year. So we will have over 50 people working on claims. A far 

cry from what those people over there did. 

 

I also want to talk PDAP, about some of the other changes that 

we have made. We changed the deductible for private claims to 

5 per cent. Under the NDP, it was at 20 per cent. Cap on claims, 

we’ve raised to 240,000. Under the NDP, it was 100,000. 

Business claims up to $500,000; the NDP, 100,000. 

Depreciation rates on furnaces — and we know from our 

experience of flooding, and if you look at houses that are being 

flooded, most of the furnaces are in the basements — we had to 

look at depreciation rates. We had set a maximum of 35 per 

cent depreciation. The NDP, it was up to 60 per cent — totally 

unacceptable. 

 

And I’ve talked about waiting times for claims. The terrible 

case was in Vanguard waiting excess of two years. The norm 

was 12 to 18 months to get a PDAP claim processed. We have 

lowered that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a goal of three months. 

Now there’s extenuating circumstances, one might be a little bit 

longer than three months, but that’s our goal from the time all 

of the paperwork is put in, is three months. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about some things that 

are not in this budget. And this is probably why members 

opposite maybe are a little bit upset. For an example, there is 

nothing in this budget to deal with potatoes, not a word about 

potatoes in this budget. However, members opposite are well 

aware they squandered $35 million on potatoes, $35 million. 

There’s none of that in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And how about the geniuses of business on that side of the 

House. We did not have anything in this budget dealing with 

dot-coms. No, nothing in the budget on dot-coms. Nothing in 

the budget for Navigata. I wonder if that rings a bell? Navigata, 

I think it’s up to about a $70 million loss. That’s how their 

business operated when they were in government. All of the 

other dot-coms, they really thought they knew better than the 

business people. Channel Lake, another loss. Guyana, another 

loss. These proponents of big business, and just threw money 

away, threw money away. 

 

But now you look at some of the other stuff that’s not in this 

budget. There was about $800 million put into the Meadow 

Lake pulp mill, $800 million lost because they thought they 

knew better. Well it might have been there to help out a sitting 

member. It kept Sonntag maybe elected for one election. But 

$800 million, that’s a big price to pay for getting somebody 

elected. And of course we know . . . Thank goodness we 

formed government, because they were going to try that in 

Prince Albert, a $100 million, Prince Albert. Thank goodness 

we formed government and squashed that and saved the 

taxpayers of this province $100 million. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear, we want this province to go 

forward. We really want it to go forward on a positive vein. 

They had some hare-brained ideas that were just hare-brained 

ideas. And I think of one like the ethanol plant in Belle Plaine 

— big fanfare, huge fanfare. What happened? What happened 

there? The square root of nothing. 

 

And I think it’s one of my favourites, the record of the NDP 

when they . . . In essence if you look at this, they had every 

person in this province playing bingo because they wanted to 

take over the whole bingo industry in this province. So, in 

essence, they lost $8 million trying to run a bingo operation. So 

in essence, every member of this province has played bingo 

through the NDP — $8 million to try and take over a bingo 

industry. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is unconscionable. 

 

All of the losses that they have had under their watch totals well 

over $1 billion, $1 billion. And we hear some of the members 

get up and talk about, well there’s money from here you could 

have used, money from there you could have used, and you 

should have put it into this. 

 

[12:30] 

 

What about the billion dollars they lost? Can you imagine what 

that would have done? And that’s not in this year’s dollars, 

that’s in their year’s dollars. So what would that amount to 

today? It would amount to a whole pile of money that was 

totally wasted by those members on that side. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at this budget and I look at 

what it’s doing for the people of this province — lowering 

taxes. The largest income tax cuts in the province’s history 

come under this government, and I’m so proud to be part of this 

government for being able to do that. 

 

Now let’s just do a little bit of a comparison. To hear we’re 

reducing taxes, what did . . . When the Leader of the Opposition 

was in government, do you realize he raised taxes, raised taxes 

17 times — 17 times. And what are we doing? We’re lowering 

taxes. What do the people of this province really think? They 

are definitely not going to want to see taxes go up. They want 

to see them go down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we start looking at our investment in health care, 

and we have invested a lot of money in health care. And what 

did those folks on the other side do when they were in 

government? They closed 52 rural hospitals — 52 rural 

hospitals. They totally gave up on rural Saskatchewan, take 

health care out of rural Saskatchewan, cancelled GRIP [gross 

revenue insurance program]. They ignored the farming 

community and ranching community for years. Finally we’ve 

got some hope back into our agricultural sector and our 

ranching sector not because of them, but because of what we 

have been doing, and thank goodness for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder what part of this budget members 

opposite are going to vote against. They’ll probably vote 

against the whole thing. But can you imagine any one of them 

going to their constituency, standing up and saying, I voted 

against lower taxes. I would like to be there when they do that. I 

voted against having more money in health care. I really want 

to see that. I voted against having more police in this province. 



6904 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

I want to see that. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this again I will repeat, 

is probably the best budget that this province has ever seen, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I am going to be very proud to support 

the budget, but I sure will not be supporting the pinata 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to enter into this very important debate, the last 

budget of the term of this government, and we hope the very 

last one we see of the Sask Party with the kind of work they’re 

doing here. I’m very proud of the work that we’ve been doing 

on this side just at the very beginning, to scratch away at some 

of the veneer of this budget and the disappointments that lie 

within this budget. 

 

You know, this Premier often talked about hope, that he would 

focus on hope. But I’ve got to tell you, for the people in my 

riding, but when I phone around the province, people are really 

worried. And really, focus is around housing and those who 

find themselves right up against the wall. When they came or 

they thought this province at one time was an affordable 

province, and they’re finding out that’s not the case any more. 

Every day they have more expenses. And they see a 

government that lacks any vision, any vision at all, to tackle 

those issues — vision and commitment. 

 

Before we get started though, I do want to say a couple of 

thanks as tradition is with a budget speech. To my own 

constituency assistant, Leslie Bernett, who’s doing a fantastic 

job in the office. And we get a lot of calls, particularly around 

housing and social assistance, about issues that people are 

finding themselves in situations they hoped they would never 

find themselves in, and here they are today because of the lack 

of commitment, lack of government, that this government really 

shows. And so we have some real worries here when we take a 

look that if perchance this budget is passed, what this will mean 

for all people here in Saskatchewan. This is a real worry. 

 

I want to just take a moment and recognize the two previous 

speakers from our side. Regina Rosemont, the MLA from 

Regina Rosemont, has done a wonderful job in terms of talking 

about the debt and how this is the last government that’s using 

outdated methods in terms of calculating debt. It’s a shame 

when we have a government that hangs on to the old-fashioned 

ways. We all know the better way to do it and we should be 

doing it. 

 

And then as well, the member from Regina Coronation Park 

talked eloquently about royalties and how we should take a 

second look. When we’re only getting a nickel on a dollar, this 

is a sad, sad situation, a sad, sad situation. We need to open this 

up. We understand just yesterday in the UK [United Kingdom] 

that they’re talking about increasing royalties, and it’s received 

by the resource companies as a fact of the matter of doing, 

when you’re doing business — that when you have a stable 

government, that reviews are all on the board. So this is very 

important. 

 

But I do want to talk about some of the issues of this 

government in terms of its last budget. And we’re still waiting 

to see . . . They’re very proud of some of the promises they’ve 

kept in terms of the promises made on the election trail. But one 

that they still will not do is the all-party committee on children 

exploited through the sex trade. And we have not had an 

explanation of why they have cancelled that, why they have 

broken that promise, why has it fallen through the cracks. And 

we know that children are very important. And in a year that 

they are saying that they’re going to put children first, centre 

place, the first thing they’re going to do is break their promise 

upon an all-party committee. How ironic is that? The one 

promise they made about children in the last budget, in the last 

campaign, it’s the first one that they’ve broke. Here we are and 

this is an opportunity they could have changed it, but they 

didn’t. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to take a minute and talk 

about housing because clearly that’s an issue that’s number one 

and forefront on everyone’s mind. And I think this is something 

we need to take some time to talk about. 

 

Now sadly today, the Leader-Post and The StarPhoenix, when 

they listed the highlights of this budget, housing didn’t even 

make the rank of a highlight. How is it this government cannot 

make housing a priority? When the papers looked at what were 

the priorities of this government, what did they see? A lot of 

other things, but housing did not make it on the list, did not 

even make it on the list. 

 

The ordinary Joe and Jane citizen of Saskatchewan, they’re 

looking at this budget and they say, you know what? It doesn’t 

seem to be a priority of this government, not a priority of this 

government. The discount to the hoteliers made the list. That 

was a highlight. And I understand through the blogs and 

different Internet sources, that seems to be a priority, not 

housing. How is it? How is it this government can say on one 

hand it is and on the other hand it isn’t? 

 

And I know that the members opposite will say, well we’ve 

done some other things; we’re doing other things and we’re 

very proud of that. But 1.7 million, you know, I said to the 

papers and I said it was an embarrassment, and it truly is an 

embarrassment that in a province like this, a province like this, 

that we cannot do more for people who are left homeless, who 

are right up against the wall when it comes time to paying rent, 

exorbitant rent. They’re being gouged. And this government 

can’t even make it a priority. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is interesting. And I want to talk a 

bit about some of these things. You know, the government 

yesterday, the minister in his speech talked about how it was 

going to be 300 or 350 rental units that were going to be 

targeted through their $1.5 million initiative — 300 or 350. In 

fact in this budget summary, it goes on and I’ll quote because 

this is very important. I quote: 

 

More will be done to address this important need: 

 

In 2011-12, the Province will provide $1.5 million to 

assist municipalities in their efforts to increase the 

supply of affordable rental housing in the province. This 

is expected to develop up to 300 [up to 300] rental 

units.” 

 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6905 

And I’ll end the quote there. 

 

Now much has been made about this little brochure that’s 

floating around. Now it’s not quite too little, everybody can see 

it, but I want to quote from it because it’s very, very important. 

It says, and I quote: 

 

We are investing in Affordable Housing 

 

Up to $1.5 million in up-front provincial incentives to 

apartment builders to offset the cost of education property 

tax on as many as 650 new units per year. 

 

So how can it be 650 in here, and in here it’s 300? 

 

We know this is the Minister of Social Services who has a hard 

time with numbers, has a hard time with numbers — 300 in 

here; 650 in here. How does that work? Didn’t anybody check 

the numbers over there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh they 

yell out, it’s expansion. They’re looking . . . I mean so this 

really isn’t the budget document? I have some real concerns 

because we have some real issues here. We have some real 

issues. 

 

You know, as people from, MLAs, we struggle to make sure 

we’re accurate and honest. In fact this government campaigned 

on being transparent and accountable. But they can’t keep track 

of how many housing units they are making as a priority. Is it 

300, 350? Is it 600, 650? We have some real issues with that. 

We have some real issues with that. 

 

And, you know, here we have, and much has been made . . . In 

fact actually the speeches prior from the government side talked 

about the 30 or 34 million that was already announced about a 

month ago. We have some real concerns about that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because 34 million divided by 100 communities, we 

do the math, I think that’s $340,000 a community. That’s 

approximately one and a half units per community. Now clearly 

that’s not feasible. Some will be a lot smaller with maybe some 

minor renovations, that type of thing, and some will be bigger. 

 

But we have the Minister of Social Services, and she was on 

CBC last Friday, and I’ll read from the transcripts, you know, 

when they’re talking about . . . And I quote: “But I do know 

that things like 34 million were recently announced for 

affordable housing.” She goes on to say, “There is about 100. 

There is over 100 in Regina and 60 in Saskatoon.” So she’s 

talking about units, so we know that 160 units between the two 

cities are going to eat up a big chunk of the 34 million. And the 

questions are, these are units that haven’t been opened. And I 

think the broadcaster, the interviewer was trying to say, are they 

open right now? Are they new units or are they old units? What 

are they? Well again the minister was very vague, ummed and 

ahhed about this. She says, and I quote, “They’ve been under 

Sask Housing. We didn’t have the funds to fix them up. They’re 

still there structurally. On the outside they’re ready to be 

rejuvenated or remodelled so the people can move in. So they 

must be closed right now, I assume.” So we have some 

questions and we want to know which places is she talking 

about. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some real concerns about this 

government as they move forward in terms of housing and their 

commitment, you know, to housing because clearly 1.7 million 

. . . What a signal, what a signal to the people of Saskatchewan. 

This government is talking about a summit coming up in April, 

in mid-April and, you know, I’m thinking about that and I’m 

thinking that, okay, people are going to come to the summit and 

they’re going to say, so what tools, what kind of resources do 

we have? What kind of resources does this government . . . 

What kind of resources will they be able to use? 

 

And the minister’s going to say, you know what? We’ve got 

$1.7 million, $1.7 million for 300 new units, 300 new units, 

and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know, we know . . . In fact, these 

are her own words about the housing shortfall. This is what she 

said in that same interview last Friday, and I quote, “And we 

know we’re going to need closer to 7,000.” Seven thousand 

units by her own estimation, and she puts out 300 — 300. And 

we don’t even know if it’s for two years or three years, or is it 

just a one-year program. This is very sad indeed, and this is 

why I had to say to the media that this is an embarrassment for 

the people of Saskatchewan that a government would have the 

nerve to come forward with a housing program like this. This is 

absolutely shameful. 

 

And so we demand more for our government, and we need to 

see more. And so what we need to see though, Mr. Speaker, is a 

comprehensive housing strategy. And this is the type of thing 

that we’ll be debating this weekend at our policy convention. 

We’re looking forward to it. We’ll have hundreds of people 

there willing to talk about issues that matter to people in 

Saskatchewan, and of course housing’s going to be front and 

centre. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And of course our strategy really focuses around three main 

areas that we’re going to be talking about this weekend. One is 

affordable home ownership, making sure those people who 

want to own a home have that option in some way. We want to 

make sure that’s front and centre. 

 

The second thing really is about ending homelessness here in 

Saskatchewan. And this government did not even mention that 

yesterday, didn’t even mention homelessness and those folks 

who have found themselves in very difficult spots where they 

don’t even have a place to call home. Here we have a 

government that’s fighting for photo ID [identification] to make 

sure that people are limited in their ability to vote, and yet they 

do nothing around homelessness. This is a shameful situation. 

 

And of course the third thing that we think is very, very 

important is that whole issue around the rental market failure. 

And there really, truly has been a market failure when it comes 

to rental properties in Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

we know we’ve lost at least 4,000 units, and the minister will 

say it’s closer to 7,000 units in the rental market. I think that’s 

what she’s talking about. We need to pay real attention to this, 

real attention to this. And so what we’re talking about on this 

side: some real options, some real options. We need to make 

sure there are strong incentives, strong incentives for the private 

market to want to enter in to building apartment buildings. 

 

We think there’s a real opportunity. We look at Winnipeg that 

had a record year last year in terms of rental apartment starts, 



6906 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2011 

you know. And the Minister of Social Services, I’m glad she’s 

chirping in because, you know, there are ways of making 

second generation rent control work. There are ways, and one 

of them is to make exemptions. And we can do that here in 

Saskatchewan. You can really have that discussion about 

making exemptions for new builds, for the mom and pop 

apartments, that type of thing. We can do that. We can build it 

for Saskatchewan. But her answer is, no way. Absolutely no 

way. 

 

And we think it deserves a second look. Both the University of 

Winnipeg have recently issued a paper, January 31st — I’d be 

very happy to provide the folks opposite a copy of it — talking 

about rent controls and their role within the marketplace. 

Interestingly even the University of Calgary’s done a paper 

about this, and they’ve talked on at length about how there can 

be solid incentives for the private marketplace. It can work, but 

we do need second generation rent controls, rent controls that 

work for the people, both landlords and tenants here in 

Saskatchewan. It’s a reality, and it’s something that can happen 

for sure. 

 

You know when the Minister of Social Services joins in, she 

often, in her answers in question period, will talk about experts. 

She’d talk about economists who say that rent controls don’t 

work. 

 

And you know, I actually went back, and I did a little research 

on the people that she’s quoting. And one of her favourite 

economists is James Buchanan, co-founder of public choice 

theory. And he’s the one who won the Nobel Prize for 

economics, and anybody who wins the Nobel Prize clearly we 

should listen to, maybe not agree with but should listen to. But 

this is what he had to say when he was interviewed, and this is 

where this quote comes from that the minister often uses with 

the Frontier College in Winnipeg. Actually it was a conference 

in Montreal in the early 2000s that this happened . . . and was 

asking about rent control. 

 

The other thing that James Buchanan said that should be on the 

hit list, minimum wage levels are another classic example of 

what economists universally oppose. So here you have . . . I 

wonder if this minister also is on the side of those who say 

minimum wage has to go. If she agrees with James Buchanan 

on rent controls, does she also agree with James Buchanan 

when it comes to minimum wage? 

 

But this is a shocking answer that James Buchanan says. The 

Frontier people say, so how do you eliminate it? James 

Buchanan goes, well eventually people have to learn the 

economic argument the hard way. And, boy, in Saskatchewan 

are they learning the hard way from this government. They are 

learning the hard way from this government when it comes to 

housing policies. 

 

Now the other one the minister she loves to quote is that what 

economists agree on. And they go on to say that 93 per cent of a 

ceiling on rent reduces quality and quantity of rental properties. 

Okay, well what else does this group agree on? They agree on 

ending agricultural subsidies. Does she agree with that? Does 

she agree with that? Eighty-five per cent of them say we should 

end agricultural subsidies. They interfere with the marketplace. 

They also go on to say of course the minimum wage, that 

should be cut. 

 

But here’s one. This is a group that’s been talking a lot about 

the dome and all of that. Here it is. Local and state governments 

should eliminate subsidies for professional sport franchises. 

Eighty-five per cent of them agree that we should end subsidies 

to professional sport groups. Does she agree with that? Or is 

she picking and choosing? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of concerns about the housing, 

and one — before I move and I leave housing — is what 

happened to Head Start? What happened to Head Start? I’ve got 

to tell you; last year at this time, there was a big announcement. 

The former minister of Social Services said, you wait, in a week 

or two we’re going to have a big announcement about Head 

Start, affordable home ownership program. A year later, 

nothing. A year later, not a word, not a word. And this is their 

commitment to affordable home ownership? Wait a year? 

 

An Hon. Member — They were going to build a domed 

stadium. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — They were going to build a domed stadium 

instead. And then we heard about it again in the Throne Speech. 

We heard about it again in the Throne Speech. And what 

happened? We didn’t hear a word again. The press release came 

out. We wait a couple of weeks, more details to follow. Not a 

word, not a word. 

 

So here we have the same press release coming out for the third 

time, for the third time about Head Start and not a word. Will 

we hear something next week? Will we really . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’re betting on four. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Betting on four. How many press releases will 

we get out of this Head Start program? We got three. Will we 

get four? Will it be five? I don’t know. I don’t know. It wasn’t 

mentioned, I don’t believe, ironically it wasn’t mentioned in 

this document that talked about . . . Now what is the number? Is 

it 300 or 600? What is the real number? Head Start didn’t make 

it into this document, so what is happening there? I don’t know. 

I don’t know. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have some real, real concerns about this 

budget, and I know people in my riding and people right across 

this province have some real concerns. There’s so many things 

they started. And I would like to know when they had set this 

money aside — you know, and we were just talking about this 

— they’d set some money aside for the dome, where did that 

money go? People were hoping that money would go to 

something like homes, something like homes. That would be 

really something that I think would be very, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I move on, I do want to say that I think this 

minister here . . . If there’s anybody who should be an advocate 

for rent control, it should be this minister, this minister for sure. 

You know the rental housing supplement . . . And we’re very 

proud that we started that program. And when we started that 

program, it was budgeted at 4 to $6 million. And looking at the 

numbers, 2007-08 it was $6 million allotted; to spend was 5.6 

million. 2008-09 went to 7.1 but it actually spent 10.6 million. 

2009-10 they actually spent 17.978, 17 million. Last year they 



March 24, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6907 

budgeted 22 million. We don’t know where that’s going. But 

this year, do you know how much we’re spending on rental 

supplements? Thirty-one million, 31 million. 

 

And I’ve asked this minister. I’ve said, you know I like this 

program. It’s important for people who are up against the wall 

paying high rents. But do you know, yes, who’s getting the 

money? Who is getting the money? Who’s getting the $31.6 

million? When you think rental supplement’s getting $31.6 

million, and their housing initiatives get 1.7, how does that 

work? And we don’t know who’s getting the 31 million. 

 

Now the minister will say the tenants are getting it. Yes, the 

tenants are getting it for about two seconds because it goes right 

into the landlord’s hands. But we don’t know who the landlords 

are. We don’t know who the landlords are. And this is a real, 

real issue, and something should be done. And the Minister of 

Social Services, when you have taxpayers’ money of over $31 

million, this has to be addressed. This has to be addressed. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know we’re coming right up to one 

o’clock, and there’s a couple of other comments I want to 

make. You know, when we talk about the cost of living, we 

know the price of food’s going to go up next week. This 

morning on the news, Royal Bank says they’re anticipating it’s 

going to go up 8 per cent, and we’ve seen no increase in the 

basic allowance. I don’t know what people are going to do. I 

don’t know what they’re going to do. We hear stories of people 

paying 70 per cent, 80 per cent of their income, their total, all 

their money on one item, one item: rent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But they’re not going to pay tax. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — They’re not going to pay tax. They’re not 

going to pay tax. I mean, I just don’t know. I mean this is 

incredible. This is incredible what they’ve done to the poorest 

people in this province. And we have an opportunity when we 

have some choices to make, and what did they choose? What 

did they choose? We have some real concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the CBO sector that’s being 

left stranded after the big, big CBO summits we’ve had in the 

last little while where there was Equal Justice for All, Welfare 

Rights, Tamara’s House. We see a government that’s 

abandoned the CBO sector, abandoned them. The CBO sector 

was very clear during the summits about how they needed 

support. They need support. They didn’t have the capacity to do 

that kind of work. And yet we have a government that’s turning 

to the CBO work area to do more and more of the government’s 

work, and they’re leaving them stranded. They’re leaving 

stranded. 

 

And when they can’t do the job, they say . . . The government 

puts up their hands and walks away and said, you know, this 

group just doesn’t have the tools to do the job. Well they knew 

they didn’t have the tools to do their job. They knew years ago 

they didn’t have the tools. They asked for help, and they were 

left abandoned. And these folks are doing the jobs, helping the 

people out who need the help the most in our communities, and 

they’re just being abandoned. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we will be talking about that this week. We 

will be talking about it this weekend at our policy convention. 

This is hugely important. 

 

I just want to touch on the child welfare thing. I think that’s an 

important issue, very important. We have called for an all-party 

committee. I just want to also highlight the irony here. We see 

budget lines within this ministry that constantly overspend. 

They constantly overspend. And we see other budget lines 

where they constantly under spend, they under spend. For 

example, in the child and family services for the last records we 

have, 2009, they made a big deal of spending $158 million. 

They were going to spend $158 million. That year they spent 

130. Twenty-eight million dollars was left on the table. And so 

they’re going to make a big deal about spending more money, 

but will they actually spend it? 

 

And we know here we have a minister who again has a hard 

time with numbers. She’ll argue with the auditor, loves arguing 

with the auditor, doesn’t know how much the Linkin system 

cost, doesn’t know. She thinks it still costs $15 million. We 

know from Public Accounts it cost $18 million. She likes to 

argue those numbers. Somehow she’s got a better answer, and 

she doesn’t mind taking it up with other folks. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have some real issues because when you 

are spending that kind of money and leaving that kind of money 

on the table for children who need the help, families who need 

the help, I have some real concerns. And that’s why we’re 

calling for more accountability, more accountability on this 

very important issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to say that we could do so much 

more in this province. We need to take a look at the royalty 

structures that we have in terms of potash and uranium. We 

need to do the right thing. It’s people standing up for people in 

Saskatchewan. We don’t see that Premier standing up for the 

people, especially the thousands of people they’re leaving 

behind, the thousands of people. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 

for sure. This budget does not work, does not give any 

advantage to the less fortunate, the ones that are being left 

behind in Saskatchewan, and I will be opposing the main 

budget. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Being near 1 o’clock, this Assembly will 

adjourn until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6881 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6881 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6881 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6881 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6881 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6881 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6882 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6882 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6882 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6882 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Purple Day for Epilepsy 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6882 

 The Saskatchewan Advantage 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6883 

 Social Workers Support Human Rights 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6883 

 Population Growth 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6883 

 Sexual Assault Centre Celebrates 30 Years 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6884 

 Dinner Supports Restorative Action Program 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6884 

 Earth Hour 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6884 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Security of Health Information 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6885 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6885 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6886 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6886 

 Membership in the Enterprise Club 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6887 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6888 

 Provincial Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6888 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6888 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Audit of Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6889 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY (BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6890 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6895 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6898 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6901 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6904 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


