




















































Hansard: April 21, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 53A  THURSDAY, APRIL 21, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7391 

 April 21, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Justice on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — With leave to make a statement 

regarding National Day of Mourning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked for leave to 

make a statement regarding National Day of Mourning. I’d ask 

if the Minister of Justice would include also the opposition? Is 

that agreed? Are we agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

National Day of Mourning 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 28th, 

we will mark the National Day of Mourning for workers killed 

or injured on the job, a time for us to honour those who have 

been injured and those who have lost their lives as a result of 

work. On that day, we will join with others across this country 

and around the world to take a moment to remember those who 

have been injured or killed as a result of their job. The family 

and friends left behind by those who lost their lives will also be 

in our thoughts that day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Day of Mourning also gives each of us the 

opportunity to renew our commitment to promoting, creating, 

and maintaining safe and healthy workplaces. The Day of 

Mourning takes place each year on April 28th, the anniversary 

of the day in 1914 when the first comprehensive workers’ 

compensation Act in Canada received third reading. 

 

On April 28th, workplaces across the country will observe the 

Day of Mourning through moments of silence, candle lighting, 

and donning ribbons or black arm bands. Here at the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Building, Day of Mourning pins 

were distributed to the members of the Legislative Assembly in 

recognition of the Day of Mourning, and our flags will fly at 

half-mast. In Ottawa, Parliament Hill’s Canadian flag will also 

fly at half-mast to recognize those who lost their lives on the 

job. 

 

It saddens me to report, Mr. Speaker, that 45 people have lost 

their lives to their work in Saskatchewan. The names of those 

we honour today are being read into the official record and will 

be inscribed in the national registry at the Canadian Labour 

Congress in Ottawa. 

 

I would ask that all members please rise while I read the names 

of those who lost their lives: 

 

Brian Huber Norman Stewart 

Ken Campbell Gerard Schmidt 

Paul Currie Elvin Mierau 

Richard Schell Barry Johnson 

James Harrison Philip Curtis 

Roberta Courtney Ronald Werk 

Lenard Lycett Orville Bigstone 

John Graham Hugh McDermaid 

Horst Flurer Clinton Vance 

Morris LeBlanc Howard Spence 

Larry Michel Brett Hunt 

Eddie Zelinski Barry Freundl 

Edward Artic David Adler 

Walter Graham Michael Lloyd 

Danny Chiasson Gino LeBouthillier 

Cammie Issel John Paget 

David Jensen Margaret MacDonald 

Arthur Buzash Norman Petit 

Stephen Roe Roger Byer 

Clinton Andrews Kelvin Hicks 

Erkki Simola Stan Stepien 

Werner Bauer Jerry Coverchuk 

Trevor Smith  

 

I would also like to draw your attention to farm fatalities. With 

an average of 14 fatalities each year, farming continues to be 

one of the most hazardous occupations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Although we will not be in the legislature on April 28th, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask my colleagues to each take a moment on that day 

to pause and think about the lives lost in Saskatchewan last year 

and attend the various vigils being held by labour councils 

around the province. 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I express my 

deepest sympathy to those who have been left behind because 

of these tragic deaths. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only acceptable number of workplace injuries 

and fatalities is zero. We are all responsible for creating and 

maintaining safe and healthy workplaces and farms. Let us all 

come together to embrace health and safety in our daily lives 

and to make getting home safely the most important part of our 

workday. Together we can prevent the loss of life and the tragic 

toll it takes on our families and communities. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, when all members’ statements for the 

Day of Mourning are done, I ask that we observe a moment of 

silence in this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Leave to make a statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

minister in expressing the opposition’s deep regret for the 

senseless workplace injuries and fatalities in our province, and I 

want to extend our deepest sympathies to the families and all 

those left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister stated there were 45 deaths in our 

province in 2010. We must all in our way accept the 



7392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

unacceptable. Accept this reality we must, but we know we 

must do better. Mr. Speaker, we all agree that one death is one 

death too many. But, Mr. Speaker, 45 people are no longer with 

us in 2010. Mr. Speaker, seven of those people died of 

mesothelioma, asbestos exposure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mesothelioma is not common. In 60 to 70 per cent 

of mesothelioma cases, the person has been exposed to 

asbestos. People with the highest risk are those employed in the 

following areas: the asbestos industry; dockyardworkers, 

dockyard workers especially if they dismantle 

asbestos-insulated steam piping; workers who handle and 

manufacture asbestos compounds; the insulators and steam 

fitters; demolition and construction workers. Mr. Speaker, from 

the time between exposure to asbestos and the mesothelioma 

develops is 10 to 15 years. That is why mesothelioma usually 

affects people in their 50s, 60s, and 70s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is important for all of us to know and 

understand. Mr. Speaker, I urge all members on both sides of 

the Assembly to take time on April 28th to remember and 

commit to work place safety. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I would invite the members and the guests in 

the gallery to join us and stand with us for a moment of silence 

for injured workers. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you very much. Please be seated. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think all members of this Assembly would agree that 

we have just an excellent press gallery here at the Legislative 

Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan. We say it only of 

course because it’s absolutely true. And when one of the 

leading members of that press gallery is missing for a time, we 

miss them. 

 

And I want to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Assembly one such member of the press gallery who for 

a time is away from us, but attending to much more important 

things. Sarah Mills has joined us, Mr. Speaker. She of course is 

the chief correspondent for News Talk Radio, and a regular in 

the press gallery at the Legislative Assembly here. And she’s 

joined today by her husband, Chef Malcolm, Malcolm Craig is 

here — there they are — and her parents who have come all the 

way from England because of the company of yet another that 

I’ll introduce, Mr. Speaker. Their brand new baby, Brianna 

Rose Craig, has joined them and joined us today. She was born 

on the 3rd of April on what is called Mothering Sunday in the 

UK [United Kingdom], our equivalent of Mother’s Day here in 

North America. She weighed in at 6 pounds and 10 ounces, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we’re especially proud to be able to welcome all of them, 

especially Brianna, to their Assembly today. Sarah says her 

mom is convinced that Brianna will grow up to be a fan of 

English soccer. I don’t want to disappoint her, I have a feeling 

Brianna will grow up to bleed Rider green. Either way, we want 

to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly, and we want to 

thank Sarah and Malcolm for contributing to the province’s 

extraordinary population growth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Premier and welcome Sarah Mills back to the 

Assembly with her husband, Malcolm, and also her parents 

visiting from England to help out. And also, Mr. Speaker, offer 

a very warm welcome to Brianna Rose. She’s an absolute 

beautiful child, and I’m sure she is well cared for by Sarah. And 

of course, with help from grandparents and her husband, she’ll 

do fine. We do miss her here at the legislature. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say to the Premier, with a 

dedication to equality and equity, someday Brianna Rose will 

be playing soccer and football. She may not be just a fan. But 

welcome to the Assembly, and we look forward to you coming 

back. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your gallery 

are two individuals I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to all members. Seated in the gallery is Dr. Carman Rabuka 

and Dr. Luke Hnenny. Carman is my brother-in-law, and Luke 

is my friend and also good friends with Carman. And they’re 

both here today to watch the proceedings as interested citizens. 

I know they often tune in when their schedule permits. 

 

Carman is a dentist practising in Saskatoon, and Luke is a 

fourth-year neurosurgery resident through the University of 

Saskatchewan. So they are here simply as interested citizens, 

but if the Health minister had time, I’m sure Carman would be 

happy to talk about dental implants, and perhaps Luke would 

want to talk about a new angio suite — but only if he had time, 

of course. But I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming these two individuals to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport, the member from Regina 

South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Japanese.] 

 

I’m very happy to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly a group of 43 grade 11 students 

visiting our fair city all the way from their hometown of 

Yokohama, Japan. They are accompanied in the west gallery by 

their teachers, Kawamura sensei, Shimada sensei, and Umezu 

sensei, and by their tour guide, Komatsu sensei. To everyone, I 

am pleased to say: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Japanese.] 

 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7393 

And to our very, very special guests from Japan:  

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Japanese.] 

 

When I visited your lovely country, I was known as Beer-u des. 

 

Also present this morning are the student hosts from Campbell, 

Winston Knoll, Sheldon-Williams, and Thom collegiates here 

in Regina. The students are accompanied by the local host 

parents and organizers: Vicki Kerr-Wilson, Susan Schneider, 

Troni Grande, Ron Jacobs, Karen Henders, Wendy Johnson, 

Lee Malythong, Shirley Milhiney, and Jim Daschuk. 

 

We are delighted, Mr. Speaker, to welcome everybody to our 

city. We hope they are enjoying every moment of their stay and 

that they are having fun exchanging information about customs 

and cultures with their new Canadian friends. 

 

On a more serious subject, we also want to express to our 

guests our great concern for their fellow citizens of Japan 

following the recent tragic occurrences there. The whole world 

is watching that situation and hoping for a safe outcome for all 

citizens and a return to normal life for everyone in that great 

country. I ask my colleagues to join me in welcoming our 

guests here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would also like to 

introduce another very special guest to our Assembly today. 

With us this morning in your gallery is Mr. Codie Prevost. 

Codie’s name will be familiar to many of you as he is one of 

Saskatchewan’s most accomplished country musicians. In fact I 

believe the Premier mentioned Codie’s name several times in a 

recent statement about this year’s Saskatchewan Country Music 

Awards. That’s because Codie won no less than six awards 

there. He won Fan’s Choice Entertainer of the Year, for the 

second time, by the way; Male Vocalist of the Year; Single of 

the Year for “Rollin’ Back to You”; Song of the Year for “I’m 

Okay”; Video of the Year for “Standing Still” and Album of the 

Year for Get Loud. 

 

Codie is with us today because he is one of the Saskatchewan 

artists invited to perform at the Prairie Scene arts festival being 

held in Ottawa from April 26 to May 8. I’m going to be there; 

it’s going to be fantastic. Later this morning we’re holding a 

send-off event in the Saskatchewan gallery in our building for 

the artists travelling to Ottawa, and Codie is performing with 

us. So hold on to your seats, people, because it’s about to get 

loud. Please join me in welcoming Codie to his legislature. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I can just very briefly join 

with the minister in welcoming our guests from Japan. On 

behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, on behalf of all the 

people of Saskatchewan, we would want to take this 

opportunity to express our very best to these young students 

and especially to those that are at home, obviously. 

 

To the people of Japan, the people of our province and of 

Canada are working, are trying to make sure that we’re all 

standing with the people of Japan as they deal with the 

incredible damage that occurred as a result of the earthquake 

and with the trials and the challenges that have ensued for the 

people of that country. And we just want them to know that our 

prayers are with them, our thoughts are with them. And more 

than that, we are providing other sources of support. And we 

wish them all the best, glad that they’re here today. And we 

wish them all the best on their visit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of the legislature Mr. J.P. Ellson 

who is the head of SaskMusic. And it’s very important to 

introduce him because Codie Prevost, The Sheepdogs, all of the 

various musicians that come from Saskatchewan rely on the 

good work that J.P. does, along with his organization. And I 

think we should all be especially thankful for the good work 

that they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join my colleagues in welcoming the guests from Japan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, my niece, Chelsea Belanger, travelled to 

Korea and also spent a year in Japan teaching English as a 

second language. And she returned home to Ile-a-la-Crosse less 

than a month ago, and she has great and fond memories of the 

country of Japan and the Japanese people. 

 

And she indicated to me a really important part of her visit. She 

was stationed in Kobe and that’s where the legendary NBA 

[National Basketball Association] basketball all-star Kobe 

Bryant got his name because his parents travelled to Kobe, and 

I guess they just loved the beef there. There’s this phenomenal 

beef, according to my niece. And when I asked her how the 

people were in Japan, she just simply pointed out that they’re a 

most gracious people. So I want to thank the people of Japan 

for welcoming my niece to their country and for the fond 

memories that we have of the people of Japan. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn, the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just 

like to join with two of my colleagues to welcome visitors that 

have already been introduced. As the member from Lakeview 

has pointed out, J.P. Ellson is here. I’ve had the opportunity to 

work with Mr. Ellson in my previous roles, Mr. Speaker, and 

know first-hand the good work that he does on behalf of the 

music industry in this province. And I saw that, Mr. Speaker, 

frankly, not only from my portfolio of responsibilities, but also 

because of my spouse who is involved in the music industry. 

And so I’d like to personally thank him for all of his work. 

 

As well Mr. Codie Prevost who is here, is being introduced. I’d 

just like to extend my congratulations. I had the opportunity to 

be in Swift Current for the music awards and saw how 

successful he has done. And I’ve had the opportunity to spend 

some time with Codie at various events over the last number of 

years and know that not only is he a great ambassador, because 

of his music, for this province but just because he’s a genuine 



7394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

decent person. And so I want to wish him all the best. I believe 

he’s performing on April 28th in Ottawa and probably beyond 

then. So I want to extend my appreciation to him and to 

welcome him to the legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue that Saskatchewan 

residents being faced with surging rent increases is simply 

making life unaffordable in the province of Saskatchewan. It 

also notes that a majority of Canadians now live in provinces 

with rent control guidelines, including Manitoba, BC [British 

Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. Mr. 

Speaker, it also points out an interesting fact that when we look 

at Saskatoon and Regina combined from the year 2007 to 2009, 

CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation] states 

there were fewer than 300 rental unit starts in those two cities. 

Yet in rent-controlled Winnipeg during the same period of time, 

1,500 new rental units were begun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present these petitions on behalf of 

Saskatchewan residents in Saskatoon, Emerald Park, Humboldt, 

and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who support 

maintaining quality health care services: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Government of 

Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need for timely 

access to comprehensive and quality health care services 

for all communities within the province, including Wakaw 

and surrounding areas, and that the disruption of 

emergency services and in-patient services at Wakaw 

Hospital will not serve the needs of the residents in this 

community and surrounding area; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory tests within the community of Wakaw and 

surrounding area will not serve the needs of the residents 

either. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Bellevue, P.A. [Prince Albert], and St. Louis. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the need for hospice and palliative 

care in Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system, including residential 

hospices, would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition today are 

from the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of a potash royalty review because 

the people of Saskatchewan are the owners of a 1,000-year 

strategic resource, and we believe that the owners of that 

resource should receive the maximum benefit of the resource. 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, the CEO [chief executive officer] of 

a potash company in Saskatchewan had said that there’s a new 

norm for potash and for the shareholders of the potash 

corporation. And so, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to begin a 

comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs as well as initiatives such as debt repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Lanigan, Wadena, Canora, Melville, Glenavon, and Aberdeen. I 

so present. 

 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7395 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present a 

petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about 

the detrimental effect that Bill 160 will have on human rights 

law in the province if enacted. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Regina and Moose 

Jaw, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to a record of 

increasing debt, three consecutive years to the tune of well over 

$1.3 billion, and this year alone increasing debt by $548 

million. And of course, Mr. Speaker, this occurring at a time of 

record highs in revenues, offering negative consequences for 

Saskatchewan people now and well into the future. We’re going 

to raise this matter today with a debate later on here this 

morning. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by concerned residents 

from the communities of Balcarres, Raymore, Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Lumsden, and Buena Vista. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Day of Mourning 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, April the 28th is the day for 

mourning and remembering workers injured or killed on the 

job. This year the day falls when the House is not sitting. So 

today it is my honour to rise in this Assembly to mark a day set 

aside to remember all of those who have suffered injury or even 

death on the job. 

 

On too many days, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan and 

across Canada suffer injury or death simply because they went 

to work. Unsafe or unhealthy working conditions can claim a 

life instantly or ruin quality of life for months or years later. 

And workers, their families, friends, and communities are left 

to deal with loved ones whose work cost them far more than it 

ever paid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this day should be one not only for mourning but 

for action. All of us in this Assembly and in our wider society 

should recommit ourselves not only to remember those who 

have suffered a workplace injury or death but also to ensuring 

that no one, no one should have to work in unsafe or unhealthy 

conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier today we heard the names listed of those 

workers whose lives were lost in the past year due to workplace 

conditions. I ask all members to commit with me to work 

together to ensure that next year’s list is not nearly as long. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Treaty 4 Education Conference 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was 

accompanied last night by my wife and attended the 13th 

annual Treaty 4 Education Conference Award Ceremony and 

Banquet at the Queensbury Centre, along with fellow MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], the Minister of 

Government Services, the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, and of course yourself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The theme of the event was Honour, Embrace, and Implement 

Treaty Rights to Education. The evening began with a lovely 

meal followed by an award ceremony and then an inspirational 

speech by former NHL [National Hockey League] player and 

coach Ted Nolan, who spoke about the need for setting goals 

and dreams and working hard to make them a reality. He talked 

about the hardships he had to endure, such as being away from 

home and the overcoming of racism, to help realize his 

potential. He talked about good leadership, part of which 

includes surrounding yourself with positive people and relying 

on others or team building. 

 

The highlight of the evening for many was the first production 

of My Kohkum Prayed for Me, a play by Vera Tourangeau 

based on a book by the same name. You could have heard a pin 

drop for most of the time as the story unfolds of a young First 

Nations man whose kokum continually prayed for him to 

Kitchi-Manitou, or in Vera’s own translation, God of the Bible, 

for the evils of drugs, alcohol, domestic violence, and gang 

crime to not be part of her family or her people. After his 

grandmother dies, he falls into the traps she so passionately 

prayed against, but through the memory of her and the powerful 

words in her prayers, he is reborn and overcomes the previously 

mentioned evils by the power of his kokum’s God of the Bible. 

 

I invite all members to join me in congratulating the 

participants and award winners of last night’s event. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 



7396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

Administrative Professionals Day 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next week the House 

will not be sitting. We will all be enjoying the Easter weekend, 

and we’ll spend the week in our ridings, working with our 

constituents. Back in our constituency offices though, Mr. 

Speaker, the pace of work will go on as always. 

 

April 27th of this year is Administrative Professionals Day, and 

the entire week is an opportunity to express our gratitude for the 

hard work and invaluable contributions that Canada’s 475,000 

administrative professionals provide every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, behind every successful office, there’s an efficient 

and dedicated administrative support staff. In today’s high 

speed, demanding, and technical world, the role of an 

administrative professional is ever changing and becoming 

increasingly dynamic. Aside from handling the mail, answering 

telephones, writing letters, and sending emails and faxes, 

administrative professionals play an essential role in our public 

relations. 

 

Whether they’re greeting our constituents over the phone or in 

person, or maintaining a solid working relationship with our 

colleagues and the various organizations and institutions we 

seek to represent, our administrative professionals are the 

backbone of our offices. They ensure that the day-to-day 

business runs smoothly, and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we 

couldn’t function without them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues I take this opportunity 

to acknowledge the hard work of all administrative 

professionals throughout the province and commend them for 

their tireless effort and commitment today. To all of our 

constituency assistants, and in my office, Rose, and the 

administrative professionals in our caucus office, Jannet, Val, 

thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Health Care Quality Summit 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this past week the 

Saskatchewan Health Quality Council, the Ministry of Health, 

the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations all 

partnered to present the first provincial Health Care Quality 

Summit. 

 

The Health Care Quality Summit had three main goals, Mr. 

Speaker: the first, to foster sharing, awareness building, 

learning, engagement, and inspiration among those involved in 

quality improvement efforts in the health sector. The second is 

to demonstrate and share health sector quality improvement 

experiences with those outside the health care system. And the 

third is to connect participants with local and international 

quality improvement leaders and experts. 

 

Throughout the summit, stakeholders were engaged, focused, 

and energized at Saskatchewan’s first-ever provincial quality 

improvement summit. Participants had the opportunity to hear 

directly from North American experts about transformational 

power and quality improvement, and learn more about local 

successes in designing top-notch health care services and 

processes. Mr. Speaker, the participants were indeed inspired 

and, as witnessed by one of the tweets that we received just this 

morning, and I quote, “Wow, first in my 20 years of health 

care, Premier popping in to commend system leaders for 

changes under way in Saskatchewan health care.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to all the attendants for participating in this 

summit, which demonstrates a strong desire to improve health 

care throughout this province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Earth Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Friday, April 22nd is Earth Day. 

Across Canada and around the globe, people young and old will 

be celebrating the 41st anniversary of Earth Day. Millions of 

Canadians will join people in 170 countries in raising 

awareness about the critical environmental issues that face 

humanity. Dynamic, aggressive action has the power to capture 

the attention of our peers and political leaders. 

 

The theme of this year’s Earth Day, Mr. Speaker, is A Billion 

Acts of Green. And the campaign is urging people to make a 

clear pledge to take a simple action to benefit the environment 

— a pledge to recycle or compost, to save water or electricity, 

to stop idling the car, to ride a bike, or take the bus. These are 

things all of us can do, Mr. Speaker, to protect the environment. 

And taken together, a billion such pledges can have a hugely 

positive impact on our environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year the Earth Day campaign seeks to 

increase global participation by working with student 

communities in particular. The campus Global Day of 

Conversation is designed to help students organize constructive 

dialogue with campus and government officials on local 

environmental issues and sustainable solutions for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to engage their 

constituencies, and specifically students, in environmental 

discussion and, perhaps more importantly, action. Happy Earth 

Day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Celebrating Easter 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All around the world, 

people are preparing to celebrate the most important religious 

holiday of the Christian calendar. This is not a single day 

celebration. It’s an entire season in the Christian calendar year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is Holy Thursday. This day recognizes the 

last supper that Jesus shared with the Apostles prior to his 

death. It was here where he broke bread and shared wine with 

his closest followers and friends. This act forms the basis for 

Communion celebrations practised by Christians to this day. 

 

While spending time with our family and loved ones this 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7397 

weekend, whether it be over a family supper or sitting down to 

colour Easter eggs, I ask that we not forget the reason for this 

celebration. Many people attend church on this special holiday 

to remember the Crucifixion and to celebrate the resurrection of 

Jesus. And for others, this holiday is a season of Easter egg 

hunts, chocolate bunnies, and turkey suppers. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I do think it’s important that we 

remember that by giving his life, Jesus Christ paid the price for 

our sins, for my sins. I urge all members of this Assembly to 

recall the true meaning of Easter while spending 

much-deserved time with their families during this first long 

weekend of spring. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Planned Parenthood Services 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 

important public service Planned Parenthood performs in 

providing health information and resources to communities 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thousands of Saskatchewan citizens benefit every 

year from the sexual and reproductive health information and 

resources Planned Parenthood provides. From reducing the 

spread of sexual disease to helping prevent unintended 

pregnancies, Planned Parenthood’s activities benefit not only 

the health of the individuals who drop into its centres to receive 

counselling or attend a clinic, but also the health of the broader 

community. 

 

Of particular note, Mr. Speaker, is the service this organization 

performs for the young men and women who too often find a 

lack of compassion and understanding when they’re faced with 

some of the most sensitive, complex, and difficult personal 

decisions any young person could face. In places like the 

Sexual Health Centre in my home community of Saskatoon, 

these young people can feel safe to talk about these decisions 

and feel assured that they are equipped to make them with the 

best information available. Planned Parenthood carries out its 

mission of promoting reproductive and sexual health and 

well-being by the most effective means possible — knowledge 

and information. 

 

All decisions related to our personal health should be based on 

sound medical information and resources. Planned Parenthood 

has provided many years of public service in making this 

information and those resources available to those who need it 

on an informed, compassionate, and non-judgmental basis. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

College Merger 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a while since the 

Minister of Advanced Education reported on an investigation 

into the mess which he helped to create at Carlton Trail 

Regional College and St. Peter’s College. On March 28th the 

minister gave us just a tidbit of information about Carlton 

Trail’s bank account balance, and then he said this: “Day by 

day we’ll report on every dollar for taxpayers.” 

 

Well 24 days have passed since then and the minister has not 

reported on one single dollar. To the Minister: has he learned of 

any public funds that have been misused or misappropriated at 

either institution, and will he report that information to 

taxpayers today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in fact there has been a report. That report was posted 

last week on our website. There’ll be a second report posted 

today as discussed during the committee, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that there are a series of allegations, Mr. Speaker. We 

also have, Mr. Speaker, a number of audits under way. KPMG 

is doing an audit of St. Peter’s College. Deloitte is undertaking 

work as an administrator of Carlton Trail, and Meyers Norris 

Penny is doing an overview of both institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we continue to receive reports from these auditors and these 

entities, Mr. Speaker, we’ll make sure that we continue to 

provide timely updates to taxpayers right across the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, all that minister is putting on his 

website once a week is a couple of high-level paragraphs. That 

hardly fulfills his clear pledge that “Day by day we’ll report on 

every dollar for taxpayers.” 

 

Since he refuses to answer whether any public funds have been 

misused or misappropriated, perhaps he will at least report on 

the hundreds of thousands of dollars that have been dumped in 

to clean up and investigate his mess. 

 

We know that the minister set aside $160,000 for the Sask Party 

appointed administrator. That is over $53,000 per month for the 

work of just one individual. I received a phone call yesterday 

telling me that this individual is only at Carlton Trail and 

working on college matters one day a week. That means that 

taxpayers are paying for this one accountant over $13,300 per 

day, over $1,660 per hour. To the minister: how can he possibly 

defend spending over $1,660 per hour on just one accountant? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Ed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report, and this 

figure has come out previously . . . Mr. Speaker, based on the 

allegations, and at this point, Mr. Speaker, only allegations, and 

the member opposite continues to make references to rumours 

and phone calls, Mr. Speaker. And so what we have from 

Carlton Trail, from Graham Pearson, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve 

made reference to this previously, there is an outstanding 

question regarding $273,000. And, Mr. Speaker, what we have 

is a confirmation, the matter of internally restricted funds set 

aside for facilities, these funds are segregated within the general 



7398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

ledger and are all accounted for — $273,000. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know the member opposite continues to 

truck and trade in rumours. What we’re doing is taking those 

allegations very seriously. There are a number of audits under 

way, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to provide timely 

updates to the people of this province. We’re doing this 

through, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing this through, Mr. Speaker, 

on our website once a week, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 

taxpayers across the province can be assured that we’ll track 

every dollar down. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister promised to report 

day by day on every taxpayers’ dollar. He is not doing that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let’s not forget that this $13,300 per day is just for one 

accountant, and we know that a whole army of accountants is 

looking into the minister’s failed merger project. The minister 

arrogantly ignored concerns and he plowed ahead with his little 

legacy project. He has taken no responsibility for the mess that 

he created. 

 

We have no idea how many taxpayers’ dollars have been 

misused or misappropriated, and now taxpayers are forced to 

pay over $400,000 to investigate and clean up that minister’s 

mess, including $1,660 per hour for just one accountant. To the 

minister: is he proud of the fact that Saskatchewan taxpayers 

are forced to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars to clean up 

his mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let me quote from the 

Meyers Norris Penny initial report. And it says the proposed 

merger was initiated by the colleges and subsequently a 

proposal was submitted. That was last June. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative was a grassroots initiative. It came 

out, Mr. Speaker, from initiatives and meetings that started, in 

fact, prior to the last election. Mr. Speaker, a proposal was 

submitted, proposal was submitted, Mr. Speaker. What we said 

is that would be reviewed through an independent process, Mr. 

Speaker. That process was undertaken by Meyers Norris Penny. 

They made recommendations that the merger not go forward, 

Mr. Speaker. They also came, Mr. Speaker, with a series of 

questions, questions I’m going to continue, Mr. Speaker, to 

highlight. These are questions and allegations. These are under 

investigation through audits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a pledge to the people of this province that we will 

track down these dollars, Mr. Speaker. That work is under way. 

We’re providing weekly updates, Mr. Speaker, as promised that 

we would do in committee, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that there 

were timely updates. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to 

make sure that there’s a full accounting of this. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s deputy said the 

astronomical expenditure of taxpayers’ dollars to clean up the 

minister’s mess demonstrates, “the seriousness with which the 

ministry takes the allegations.” Well that’s as laughable as 

when the former minister of Parks said that taxpayers would 

appreciate our parks more, their visits if they simply had to pay 

more to go to them. 

 

Obviously Saskatchewan taxpayers want these allegations taken 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. But if the minister really wants to show 

that he’s taking these allegations seriously, he doesn’t need to 

spend $1,660 per hour for just one accountant. If the minister 

really wants to take this seriously, he should take responsibility 

and step aside until this mess is fully investigated and cleaned 

up. 

 

To the minister: when will he take some responsibility instead 

of just throwing more taxpayers’ money at this mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, since coming to office, our 

government has invested more than 2.8 billion dollars, $2.8 

billion into post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. You can see 

the results of that right across the province, Mr. Speaker. We 

can see the results of that as we have more First Nations and 

Métis students enrolled in programming, Mr. Speaker. You can 

see that, Mr. Speaker, as we continue to make process . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

can see that at the University of Saskatchewan as construction 

continues . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I barely sat down, had invited 

the minister to respond, and the member to my left is interfering 

with the minister’s response. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. You can 

see at the University of Saskatchewan where construction 

continues to proceed on the academic health science wings, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members opposite so irresponsibly allowed 

the College of Medicine to go on probation. Mr. Speaker, you 

can see that in communities like Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, where 

there’s a joint facility to ensure that our students both through 

the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system and through 

Carlton Trail Regional College continue to have opportunities. 

You can see it in communities like Swift Current and Estevan 

and Nipawin. Mr. Speaker, $2.8 billion, a record. We’re going 

to continue to invest in our students and our future in the new 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7399 

Eastview. 

 

Coverage for Dental Surgery 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week, 

Charlene Sullivan was in the Assembly asking for the minister 

to honour a promise he made in his office in front of witnesses 

to cover her dental implants. In response, the minister said, 

“We’ll look into the case again.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: has he reviewed the case again, 

and will he now honour his promise and pay for the dental 

implants that Charlene legitimately needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we can 

certainly look into that case. I’ll instruct the ministry to look 

into that case. What I will commit to and what I committed to 

in my office is that we would review the policies that were in 

place under the NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Those policies were reviewed, Mr. Speaker. Those policies 

were changed. They were changed to come in line with other 

provinces in Western Canada so that we not only could cover 

congenital defects, Mr. Speaker, that we would cover tumours, 

Mr. Speaker, that would cause then the loss of teeth. That 

policy was changed, Mr. Speaker. That is the commitment that I 

made in my office, and that is the commitment that we’ve 

followed through on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister appears to have 

selective memory about this event. Tuesday though in the 

rotunda, while the minister was saying he can’t make policy in 

his office and can only cover people who applied, his assistant 

deputy minister was phoning Dale Regal, telling him to send 

his application in because his implants will be covered. His 

application is approved sight unseen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when can Charlene Sullivan 

expect to get her phone call from the assistant deputy minister 

telling her she is covered? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the people that the 

member opposite referred to, for example, people that lobbied 

for this policy change, had not sent in their request for payment. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re inviting them to send in their request for 

payment, Mr. Speaker, and the ministry will evaluate those 

requests to make sure that they fall in line with the policy that 

we have changed. 

 

The one case that was sent in, Mr. Speaker, the ministry 

reviewed that. It didn’t fall in line with the policies, Mr. 

Speaker, because it wasn’t a tumour within the mouth, Mr. 

Speaker. On the other cases that the issue was raised, we are 

asking them to send it in so the ministry can review because we 

do think it falls into line with the policy. But we’re asking them 

to send in their application so the ministry can review it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister’s 

department went a step further and called Dale Regal’s dental 

surgeon to tell him to send in Dale’s file for approval because 

they were changing their policy yet again. And this dental 

surgeon has something clearly to say, and he will be saying it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is today’s requirement for 

dental implant coverage? Does Charlene need to go to Dale 

Regal’s dental surgeon to get coverage? Just tell her what she 

has to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure 

that all dental surgeons, and we’re working with the College of 

Dental Surgeons, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that they’re 

familiar with the policy change. We’ve had people that have 

had implants put in, Mr. Speaker, that have applied since the 

policy has changed. We’ve had four that have been covered, 

Mr. Speaker. Four more have applied, but it didn’t follow in 

line and they were rejected, Mr. Speaker, as was the member 

opposite’s case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re asking people that . . . And we’re informing 

dentists, dental surgeons around the province, to make sure that 

they understand the policy that has been changed. I understand 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member is yelling from 

his seat, which policy . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote to allow the minister to 

respond. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I’ll make it very, very plain. It was a 

policy that under 16 years of NDP government would have 

rejected every one of those cases that came forward, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the policy that was changed, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re very proud of it. 

 

Now we’re informing the dental surgeons to make sure that 

they understand and their patients understand what will be 

covered, Mr. Speaker, because I can understand that after a long 

16 years, those policies were just ignored. Mr. Speaker, not 

under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve a 

question to the Minister Responsible for Government Services. 

On two occasions, I’ve submitted a written question to the 

minister regarding the total taxpayers’ dollars paid for the lease 

and now purchase to the private sector owners of the Parkridge 

nursing home. 



7400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

Can the minister now inform the Assembly how much the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan have paid for this lease and recent 

purchase of this facility that was built in 1986? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite have given their views on 

Parkridge facility and its lease arrangement, but perhaps a few 

other facts should be mentioned in regards to this facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lease that was entered into by a previous 

government did not include any requirements for the 

maintenance of the facility. The responsibility rested with the 

government and was passed on to the Health regions who 

operated the facility. So when the member opposite laments 

over the cost of the upgrades or the costs of the needed in 

Parkridge, they should perhaps mention that it was the NDP 

government that did not provide the necessary funds to carry 

out proper maintenance during their term. And the payments 

being provided by the Ministry of Health for this government 

are being made to cover the work being done, and the work that 

was covered was not done by the building owner, but rather 

work done by the former NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while indeed a lot of money was paid to the 

developer over the term . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I note the minister didn’t 

answer the question, so I guess I’ll answer it for her because 

yesterday or two days ago in the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies, the ministry provided us with this 

information. The total amount that has been publicly report by 

the Ministry of Government Services as being paid to Wolfe 

Group Investments Ltd. from 1986-2011 is $57,965,312. 

However this amount does not include payments from 1987-88 

and 1988-89. They’re going to continue their efforts to locate 

the information. This does not include the $7 million that was 

sent from the Ministry of Health to pay for renovations at the 

facility, and this does not include the $19 million that 

apparently of renovations the facility needs. 

 

So to Minister of Health: we have this nursing home that’s 

being built in Saskatoon by Amicus. This is a $27 million 

facility with also a lease that will be paid out to Amicus. Can he 

tell us what this is going to cost us over the next 25 years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, but to me 

it’s like déjà vu all over again. Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite asked a questions each and every day of last session 

except for the very last one. She didn’t ask a question on the 

very last day of the fall session, but she’s picking it up now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Amicus is a long-term care facility that will service the needs of 

100 people, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon. It will be an agreement 

that we’ve entered . . . 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Allow the minister to respond 

to the question presented. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it is an agreement that 

the Saskatoon Health Region has entered into with the Catholic 

Health Ministry to supply services. The Catholic Health 

Ministry has supplied excellent health care services throughout 

the province, Mr. Speaker, for decades, for generations, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so we look forward to the day when this 

facility opens, and we can move people out of what is really 

quite frankly acute care settings, inappropriate for them to live 

in, into the proper living conditions with the help from the 

Catholic Health Ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Parkridge 

nursing home deal cost the people of our province over $80 

million. Mr. Speaker, that facility was built in 1986 and we 

know that if it had been paid for in 1986, it would have saved 

the taxpayers of our province tens of millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a 100-bed nursing home being built in 

Saskatoon, and it’s going to be owned by someone other than 

the health region. It is being built for $27 million, and the 

minister tried to tell us last spring that we’ll pay, as taxpayers, 

less than $1 million a year to Amicus for the support of this 

guaranteed mortgage. Can minister really tell us, in real terms, 

what is this particular deal going to cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 

facility will certainly provide great care, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

entered into an agreement, the Saskatoon Health Region, that 

will see us pay a per diem rate for the care of the facility, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as some capital costs on top of that, Mr. 

Speaker. And we believe it’s a very good deal that will serve 

the people very, very well. 

 

But I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, because they like to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It would seem to me the members 

would like to hear the response from the minister to the 

question presented by their colleague. I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Parkridge was in place 

for many, many years, many, many years. First of all it started 

under a Conservative government, but for 16 years under an 

NDP government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it very 

curious. We have got four different Health ministers sitting 

over there, former Health ministers, that didn’t say a word for 

16 years about the Parkridge deal, Mr. Speaker. They’re quite 

happy to live with it for those 16 years, Mr. Speaker. Now all of 

a sudden it’s a problem. If they were so concerned about it — 

and that member herself was a Health minister — if she was so 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7401 

concerned about it, why didn’t she do something about it when 

she was the Health minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Relationship with Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was just, I believe, about 

two budgets ago when the Minister of Finance stood in this 

House and then later . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it was just over two budgets ago 

when the Minister of Finance stood in this House and then later 

in the Assembly to announce to the media that the long-term 

funding formula for municipalities was cancelled or delayed 

because of this government’s financial mismanagement. Mr. 

Speaker, there were no phone calls to municipalities to give 

them a heads-up. There was no respect shown to municipal 

partners, just an announcement through the media. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was lots of apologies that followed, and the 

Premier and the minister said they would do better. But here we 

go again. The provincial housing plan was announced in this 

year’s budget with no consultations with the municipalities, and 

it dumps a majority of responsibility on municipal partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is this minister refusing to negotiate with 

municipal partners? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can speak 

to the past experience that I had with the board for our Housing 

Corporation. And I know that board has had extensive 

consultations with municipal leaders, with developers. They 

have gone to a number of the cities and communities within our 

province, and they have expertise right on the board, quite 

frankly, in the different areas of housing. 

 

So I don’t think it is quite accurate to say that the board did not 

consult before decisions were made on the housing strategy as 

we move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yes, here we go again. This 

government makes an announcement forcing responsibilities 

onto another level government and has done no consultations 

beforehand. This program supports developers, but it misses the 

mark on meeting the needs for Saskatchewan residents. And it 

again downloads a fair bit of responsibility onto the municipal 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to sit down and do 

some actual consultations with municipal partners before 

downloading onto them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m going to clarify for the members opposite exactly what this 

government has done in terms of downloading on the 

municipalities. I’m going to talk about the revenue-sharing 

plan, and I’m also going to talk about education property tax, 

Mr. Speaker, two commitments that we made. The member 

stood in her first question . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

want an answer about how this government has worked with its 

partners, the municipalities, and that was the question, about 

what we’ve done in terms of downloading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we committed to in this year’s budget was to 

ensure that we were going to create a revenue sharing pool that 

would address 1 per cent of all of the PST [provincial sales tax] 

dollars collected by the province. Mr. Speaker, that 1 per cent 

translates into $216 million. Mr. Speaker, $49 million more 

than last year. So that’s what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

downloaded $49 million to municipalities to make sure that 

they can meet the challenges of a growing province and, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve created a Saskatchewan advantage here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — If this is a minister that is responsible for the 

finances of the province of Saskatchewan, I’m worried. If he 

doesn’t even know that the municipal operating grants were 

negotiated and paid on the basis of the operating expenses of 

municipalities, he needs to read his briefing book. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government, this government has 

downloaded onto municipalities, and they have dumped the 

majority of costs onto those municipalities. The 250, that is 

loans to developers. They’re quite able to support developers, 

but they have ignored municipalities, and they have not even 

given them the respect of negotiating this housing agreement 

with them. Mr. Speaker, when will this minister actually do 

some honest-to-goodness consultations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear, let’s be 

clear about what this government has done with the 

consultations of all people of this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, mill rates, the mill rates that that member was part of, 

back a number of years ago, ensured that there was 20, 21, 22 

mills charged to agricultural people, to people who have 

residences, in all communities, Mr. Speaker. We make a 

promise, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to reduce that mill rate 

to 3.91 mills for agricultural lands right across this province, 



7402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

Mr. Speaker. That’s our consultation. 

 

We also said that we would address the problem faced by 

homeowners, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the mill rate for 

homeowners this year is 9.51 mills, a far cry from the 19 or 20 

or 21 mills that that member was part of, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve downloaded, we’ve downloaded tax savings to 

the people of the province. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 1,032 through 1,047. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,032 through 1,047 are tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Seventy-five minute 

debate. If I could have members’ attention, it will just take us a 

moment till we get the clocks sorted out again. 

 

Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the members to come to 

attention so the Clerk can call the motion before the Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Financial Reporting 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on the debate. It’s not necessarily my 

pleasure actually, Mr. Speaker, but I certainly do so with 

purpose and recognizing the importance of doing so when we 

look at the direction of our finances in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and the complete lack of transparency that 

Saskatchewan people are being provided from a government 

that shrouds deals in secrecy and that isn’t willing to test the 

deals it signs with the Saskatchewan public to ensure it’s in 

their best interests. And that’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To test it in the best interest to make sure that those contracts, 

those tenders are in the best interest as it relates to efficiency 

and effectiveness of services, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that this 

government continues to report its finances in a manner that’s 

inconsistent with public sector accounting standards, out of line 

with the rest of Canada and all other provinces, Mr. Speaker, 

and territories, and the Government of Canada I might say, Mr. 

Speaker, and that this government continues to report its 

finances in a way that doesn’t depict the reality that’s going on, 

Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t provide the true picture. So the motion 

that we’re speaking to here today, that I’ll be moving at the end 

of the day is: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government 

for its unwillingness to grant the public the transparency 

they desire and deserve, including when it comes to 

reporting the government’s actual debt; and 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to adopt public 

sector accounting standards and begin reporting the 

provincial government’s actual debt to the public, as 

opposed to its current practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just start in on one aspect here, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is the aspect of public debt which 

Saskatchewan people, certainly business leaders across this 

province and individuals who observe the books are well aware, 

and the general public, Mr. Speaker, I will say are well aware, 

that this government is adding huge debt to our province’s 

books, our public books. And certainly those people recognize 

that. They recognize it because certainly that’s been a 

discussion in the public domain. But they recognize it as well 

because they read the budget books of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what confuses the public and what frustrates the public is 

when they see taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, being used to 

spin a message that is a distinct departure from reality, Mr. 

Speaker, and that the ads that in fact mislead the public, Mr. 

Speaker, and in fact use public dollars, taxpayers’ dollars, 

people’s own dollars, to carry forward a message that is 

incorrect, Mr. Speaker. I reference just one example of those: 

are the recent ads that are being played right now, Mr. Speaker, 

or for the last few weeks, outside of budget with taxpayers’ 

dollars, authorized by this Sask Party caucus, Mr. Speaker, to 

try to allege a picture of debt paydown that’s incorrect, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not true and that’s debunked by the own books 

of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we know the reality is, now that the Sask Party put 

forward these ads and in fact used taxpayers’ money to say that 

a certain amount of money had been paid down, well that 

number in fact is of course, Mr. Speaker, incorrect, not true, not 

the reality, Mr. Speaker. But not only that, Mr. Speaker. Those 

ads suggest that in fact debt has been paid down over the past 

few years and by this last budget. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 

we all know, and the members opposite all know. They can 

certainly, I guess, let their ads continue to mislead the public on 

this front with taxpayers’ dollars, but the fact, Mr. Speaker, is 

within their own budget books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Saskatchewan people recognize that in fact over the last 

three years, debt has been on the increase in a massive way in 

this province, Mr. Speaker, and at a time of prosperity, Mr. 

Speaker, with record highs in revenues, and that the trend, of 

course, has continued to this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the Saskatchewan people are upset to see their ads being 

run with taxpayers’ money to ads that are misleading and 

incorrect and not true, Mr. Speaker. But they’re also 

disappointed to recognize the true state of our finances, 

understanding that this has huge consequences for 

Saskatchewan people, both now but well into the future, and 

ties the hands of future governments and reduces the prosperity 

that we should so enjoy, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the 

resource rich future of our Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now just to use the Sask Party’s own budget documents, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll use the budget summary from 2011-12, and we’ll 

go to page 60. This is a statement about debt, Mr. Speaker. 

Sometimes that government — and certainly I shouldn’t say 

sometimes — that government pretends to be reducing debt, 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7403 

Mr. Speaker. That’s not correct. The ads that this government 

has run, Mr. Speaker, that suggest that debt has been paid down 

in this last budget are incorrect, Mr. Speaker. Those ads are 

misleading, not true. 

 

It’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, that truth in advertising laws 

don’t apply to this government, but it’s unfortunate for 

Saskatchewan people who are feeling frustrated with a Premier 

and a government that are relentless in their attempt to suggest 

something that’s different than the real circumstance, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly hiding something that comes at a direct 

consequence to Saskatchewan people. 

 

So from the books of this government, from page 60 on the 

budget summary, I’ll quote: “Public debt is forecast to increase 

by $375.9 million during 2010-11 and increase by an additional 

$485.3 million in 2011-12.” Mr. Speaker, that’s pretty crystal 

clear. Debt is on the increase this year and it’s on the increase 

next year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I move on to the next page, page 61, and I look at the 

trend line of this government and a chart that lays this out for 

Saskatchewan people . . . And Saskatchewan people recognize 

this; business leaders recognize this. And I don’t know any 

more, Mr. Speaker, who this Premier thinks he’s joking, who 

he’s kidding, Mr. Speaker, when he suggests otherwise, but the 

debt’s laid out here very crystal clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2009 total debt as reported by this book is $7.7 billion, so 

even by the Sask Party’s own measure — they show the trend 

line out and into 2015 — we see total debt at $10.5 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. This year alone we see it at $8.4 billion. We know 

over the last three years we have incurred well over $1.3 billion 

of increase to the total public debt of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And we recognize that this year alone, at a time of 

highs in revenues, that we’re adding $548 million to our books, 

all with reckless and irresponsible government, Mr. Speaker, 

and management, a government that lives for the now but not 

for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t taking care of needs of 

today nor is it planning for a future generation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll highlight specifically that the debt that we see increased is 

categorized in the area of Crown debt, Mr. Speaker. In fact we 

see a doubling of Crown debt. From roughly $3 billion in 2009, 

we see that doubling to just over 6 billion in 2015. That’s a 100 

per cent increase, a doubling of debt, Mr. Speaker, and a real 

. . . That impact is felt by Saskatchewan people who are paying 

rates and the owners of those public utilities and Crown 

corporations, both now but well into the future. 

 

It saddles families with consequences that they simply can’t 

afford both now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the price of gas, 

whether we’re talking at the pumps or the price of our utilities 

when we’re talking power, and the whole array of cost of living 

increases that have been a huge burden brought upon 

Saskatchewan people by this government. 

 

But when we look at that Crown debt, what’s interesting about 

it is that we see this doubling of the Crown debt, this massive 

increase over this period of time. But we’ve seen the 

unsustainability of these budgets, Mr. Speaker, on display when 

this government has just been all too willing to drain all of the 

resources that our Crown corporations have and utilize those for 

our operational budget, Mr. Speaker, a living-for-the-now kind 

of experience. Not only those dollars but our rainy day funds, 

Mr. Speaker, draining those off. 

 

We’ve drained over $1.7 billion from our Crown corporations, 

an unprecedented high for three years running of over $500 

million a year. Absolutely unsustainable. If we look specifically 

at Sask Trends Monitor, I quote, this is May 2010. This speaks 

of the dividend, Mr. Speaker, from CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] and I quote, “The 217 per cent in 

2009 and the proposed amount for 2010 are of course well 

above that average and unsustainable in the long term,” Mr. 

Speaker, speaking of the risk that we experience, Mr. Speaker, 

with that kind of drain on our dollars. 

 

I reference from SaskPower’s annual report, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have this relentless pursuit of private power in this province 

without the measurement and transparency back to 

Saskatchewan people. And I read from a page here called, off 

balance sheet agreements, Mr. Speaker. And what it highlights 

here specifically is that the liabilities that are being created by 

private contracts, Mr. Speaker, grew from in 2009, $7.5 billion 

to over $11.7 billion, Mr. Speaker, just this year, two years 

later. That’s a massive increase in private contracts that of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we understand are less efficient and that 

are less effective for Saskatchewan people, and a government 

that’s saddling future generations and tying the hands of future 

generations in a real, living-for-the-now kind of a moment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see that this province fails to comply with public sector 

accounting standards, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan New 

Democrats have an incredibly proud record of moving forward 

our fiscal well-being as a province but as well our reporting, 

Mr. Speaker. And this isn’t something that remains static. And 

it’s well past time, Mr. Speaker, for us to comply with reporting 

standards that are demanded and expected by public sector 

accounting standards, and that are complied by with every other 

province in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And in not doing so puts this 

government in a position, as we’ve seen in the last few years, to 

exploit the fiscal tools available to them and to mislead the 

public, Mr. Speaker, as to the true state of our finances, Mr. 

Speaker, that are truly in a negative trend line and circumstance 

under this government. 

 

[11:15] 

 

We’ve had a very worthwhile Bill put forward by the member 

from Wakamow who’s going to be speaking here today as well, 

Mr. Speaker, the kind of positive change that this, that’s 

required in this province where people benefit, quite frankly, 

Mr. Speaker, in this province and would allow us to understand 

the merits and the concern, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

contracts and tenders. Why that information shouldn’t be public 

to the people of this Assembly, who can provide scrutiny and 

ensure risk is mitigated, Mr. Speaker, and the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people are served, it’s beyond me why this 

government won’t move in this direction. 

 

But this occurs at a period of time where we have this 

government hiding debt, Mr. Speaker, making decisions that are 

not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people as it relates to 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker, private long-term care with 



7404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

organizations taking on debt and us paying more, far more, 

through the long run and having less control over those 

services. We see that in health care, Mr. Speaker. We see it in 

these purchase power agreements, the private power of this 

province from our . . . taking away the most efficient and 

effective way we can deliver that through our publicly owned 

Crown corporation, owned by the people of this province for 

the benefit of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see the secrecy continue with 20-year leases, Mr. Speaker, 

to occupy the most expensive space in Regina, Mr. Speaker, to 

build new office space, but with no understanding from this 

government, Mr. Speaker, as to what that space will actually be 

utilized for, Mr. Speaker. At a time when they’re shrinking the 

civil service, they’re taking out this massive amount of space, 

Mr. Speaker, and not sharing those contracts with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Why should we be concerned, Mr. Speaker? Well the examples 

are just too concerning to dismiss. We could look to this 

Parkridge example as a long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker, as 

but one example where taxpayers, under the Devine 

administration, entered into a contract with a private entity to 

deliver long-term care. And instead of building that building 

ourself for, at the time, $8.5 million, Mr. Speaker, they chose to 

enter into contract and to grease the wheel of the private sector, 

Mr. Speaker, at the expense of Saskatchewan people, both 

taxpayers but also as it relates to services, Mr. Speaker. And it 

relates to efficiency and effectiveness of being able to respond 

to the broader needs. It ties the hands of future generations. 

 

But this Parkridge deal, Mr. Speaker, instead of paying $8.5 

million upfront, they tied the hands, entered into contract, Mr. 

Speaker, and that contract’s now cost taxpayers over $80 

million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as the Health minister said here today, his quote was déjà 

vu all over again, Mr. Speaker, and he is true. We see a repeat 

of the Devine debacle that I believe today the member from 

Nutana will be able to speak to very clearly. We see practices 

that bring us back into breach of the recommendations put 

forward by the Gass Commission that was authorized in 1992 

to clean up the financial mess and clean up the circumstances of 

this province at a time where we were left as a fiscal basket 

case, Mr. Speaker, by the Devine administration. And to take us 

to the point of fiscal strength, Mr. Speaker, of continuous 

improvement, to see that all go by the wayside and decline is 

troubling for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see the hiding of debt. We see the failure to comply with 

public sector accounting standards, and we see the fiscal trend 

line. One that is adding debt, Mr. Speaker, when they’re 

pretending something else, Mr. Speaker, a massive adding of 

debt to the books of Saskatchewan people. We see just a 

simple, a fiscal shell game under this government, and we 

certainly don’t see a true, real circumstance, Mr. Speaker, being 

shared with Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time I’m going to move my motion that’s going 

to be debated here today: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the provincial government 

for its unwillingness to grant the public the transparency 

they desire and deserve, including when it comes to 

reporting the government’s actual debt; and, 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to adopt public 

sector accounting standards and begin reporting the 

provincial government’s actual debt to the public, as 

opposed to its current practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concludes my statements here for today, and I 

move this motion at this point in time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government 

for its unwillingness to grant the public the transparency 

they desire and deserve, including when it comes to 

reporting the government’s actual debt; and, 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to adopt public 

sector accounting standards and begin reporting the 

provincial government’s actual debt to the public, as 

opposed to its current practice. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m certainly pleased to enter into this debate that the member 

opposite put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it sometimes amazes me that members opposite 

will make statements and put forward motions that deal in only 

half of the information and only tell half of the story, Mr. 

Speaker. And what I intend to do, Mr. Speaker, is give the 

people of this province the rest of story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have the budget document for this current budget in my hands, 

Mr. Speaker, and it is a document that is 100 pages long. It is 

filled with financial tables. It is filled with projections. It is 

filled with economic analysis, Mr. Speaker. And to the average 

citizen that doesn’t have an accounting background or at least 

some experience with financial records and reading balance 

sheets and that sort of thing, it can be a pretty overwhelming 

document, Mr. Speaker. And it is difficult for the average 

citizen to really get the whole . . . all the information, the total 

story. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member from 

Regina Rosemont to allow the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood to respond to the debate before us. 

Order. I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But there are some 

tables in this document that I’d like to refer to that summarizes 

the financial picture of our province. Within the province there 

are . . . within government there are a number of ministries that 

provide services to the people of the province. In Saskatchewan 

we have a large Crown sector that the people of the province 

own, and all their financial numbers are distilled down and 

summarized in the budget document. And as I said, there are 

some summary pages that give the financial picture of our 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7405 

province, Mr. Speaker. On page 80 there is a number of 

financial statements that give the summary of the financial 

picture of our province and then they go on into greater detail. 

But for the simple numbers, sort of a one-pager that people can 

understand, page 80 will provide at least some of that. 

 

But before I go to those numbers, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

perhaps explain the framework of a provincial budget and 

perhaps put it in context of a household. The provincial budget 

is not unlike a household budget except you add a whole lot 

more zeros. The numbers are much bigger. If you can imagine a 

family, Mr. Speaker, where you may have two or three family 

members earning income, working at various jobs and earning 

income, and all the money that those family members . . . get 

deposited into one bank account and that is the bank account 

that pays for the families’ living costs. It buys their car. It pays 

for their vacations. It buys their big screen TV if they decide to 

do that. And we’ll call that the family living budget. 

 

Well at a provincial level, it’s the General Revenue Fund. It’s 

the fund that the province deposits all the money received in 

taxes and resource royalties, all those sorts of things. And from 

that bank account, from the GRF, the General Revenue Fund, 

the government then takes money to pay for health and 

education and roads and all those sorts of things. 

 

Now if we take the same family, Mr. Speaker, and they also 

own a small business and within that business occasionally they 

take some money out of that business, because it is profitable in 

most years, to supplement their living costs and they say . . . 

And it’s legitimate because they own assets and they require . . . 

It’s only natural that they would assume that that business . . . 

They’re working in that business, devoting some of their time 

and they require, assume that they should have a bit of return. 

And so they take a modest amount of money on an annual basis 

to supplement their living costs. 

 

Well on the provincial basis, we have the Crown sector. And 

the people of the province own the Crowns and they have 

investment in the Crowns, large investments in the Crowns, and 

the Crowns provide services to the people of the province. And 

the Crowns are successful. They make money in most years, 

Mr. Speaker. And the people of the province says, well okay, if 

we own assets and they’re doing well, can we not take out just a 

little bit of money that they make, some of, a little bit of the 

profit, and use it to fund education and health, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So if we look at it in those terms, Mr. Speaker, and then we go 

back to the budget and we look at . . . As I said there on, page 

80, there’s sort, a summary document that tells the story of the 

General Revenue Fund. And this year’s General Revenue Fund, 

the revenue is projected to be $10.794 billion. Expenditures are 

projected to be $10.679 billion, leaving a surplus of $150 

million. With that surplus then, the people of the province, 

through their duly elected government, will determine what 

they will do with it. This case, the government of the day, our 

government, decided that we should pay down some more 

General Revenue Fund debt to the tune of $325 million. 

 

Just for information purposes, when this government, the Sask 

Party government, became government in November of 2007, 

the general revenue debt was $6.8 billion. Do you know what it 

is today, Mr. Speaker? After paying out an additional $325 

million in debt, it’s 3.1 billion, Mr. Speaker. In less than four 

years, a phenomenal reduction in debt. And then the members 

opposite stand and say that this government is running up the 

debt of the province. 

 

The only place that debt has increased in this province is in the 

Crown sector, and it is not debt. It is borrowing. It’s an 

investment. Just like that family, if they need to grow their 

business, occasionally they need to, occasionally they need to 

borrow some money to buy some additional equipment or, in 

the case of a farm, to buy some more land. And it is 

self-sustaining debt, Mr. Speaker. Because the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, are managed well. They’re 

profitable. And the members opposite, they laugh. 

 

Well let’s have a look here at what the budget document says. 

The member opposite quoted out of the budget document on 

page 60 and 62 and 61. And if you look at the chart that the 

member was referring to on page 61, you will see that the 

increase in debt is in the Crown sector, and that it’s not a debt. 

It’s an investment. It’s borrowing, and it’s self-sustaining, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On page 62 of the budget document, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite failed to tell the people of the province, and I’ll quote 

what it says, Mr. Speaker: “All 2011-12 borrowing 

requirements are for the purpose of Crown corporations.” There 

is no borrowing for the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. It 

is an investment in this province, Mr. Speaker, and the 

members opposite know it. 

 

And the member opposite stood in this House and said that we 

are not using generally accepted accounting principles. Well 

let’s see what the Provincial Auditor had to say about that. For 

the record, Mr. Speaker, we are using the exact same 

methodology as those members used when they were in 

government to prepare a budget. We are using the same highly 

talented and knowledgeable Finance officials to prepare the 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. And what does the Provincial Auditor 

say about our accounting principles? Well I’ll tell you what he 

said. I’ll quote, and this is what the Provincial Auditor said: “I 

have audited the summary financial position . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I believe the 

member from Regina Rosemont was able to present his 

arguments without interference, and I would ask the member to 

allow the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood to do the 

same. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll quickly start again. 

The auditor says this: 

 

I have audited the summary financial position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan as of March 31st, 2010. In 

my opinion, these financial statements present fairly in all 

material matters the financial position of the Government 

of Saskatchewan at March 31, 2010. 

 

And he goes on to say that they are done with the generally 



7406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

. . . in accordance with Canadian generally accepted 

accounting principles. Mr. Speaker, so when those members 

stand up and say that we are not using accepted accounting 

principles, Mr. Speaker, the auditor does not agree with 

them. And I will take the auditor’s word over those 

members’ word any day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in the short period of time that I have had to 

enter into this debate, I have given the people the rest of the 

story. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I had a bit of a plan in 

mind about the things I wanted to touch on, but the member that 

just spoke, I think he’s kind of sidetracked this a little bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think more and more what sticks in my mind is 

. . . And I go back to the election campaign and the 

commitment that this Saskatchewan Party made clearly to the 

people of the province, printed in their platform document, and 

it says, and I quote, “A Saskatchewan Party government will 

provide Saskatchewan people with more transparency and 

accountability than any previous government.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing in this first three and a 

half years shows that this, that statement isn’t worth the paper 

it’s written on. And this government has time and time again 

buried facts, given half-truths and partial information to people 

across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s unacceptable, and 

there needs to be some changes that are made. 

 

And I want to quote from an article. When I was looking at the 

whole issue of transparency and accountable, this quote has 

stuck with me, Mr. Speaker. And it says: 

 

Government accountability means that public officials — 

elected and un-elected — have an obligation to explain 

their decisions and actions to citizens. Government 

accountability is achieved through a variety of 

mechanisms — political, legal, and administrative — 

designed to prevent corruption and ensure that public 

officials remain answerable and accessible to the people 

they serve. In the absence of such mechanisms, corruption 

may thrive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “A transparent and accessible government is 

essential to a successful free society and fosters trust and 

confidence in government.” And it goes on to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that “a lack of government accountability and 

transparency undermines democracy and gives rise to 

cynicism and mistrust.” And, Mr. Speaker, that is the basic 

element of our discussion today, that the transparency and 

accountability is lacking from this government. 

 

And the explanations that we just heard from the member 

saying that Crown corporations borrowing debt is fine or 

acquiring debt is fine because that’s an investment, Mr. 

Speaker, I was trying to think of an analogy that would look 

at this the same way that the member that just spoke did, and 

I’m hard pressed to find some type of a rational explanation. 

But I guess what people need to look at is that this 

government has taken up to 90 per cent of the profits out of 

the Crown corporations. 

 

Often when the Crowns paid a dividend to the shareholders 

— which is us, Mr. Speaker; we own the companies — and 

they would every year pay a dividend to the General Revenue 

Fund as their payment to the shareholders, the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan which contributed to health care, 

highways, education, all of the things that are important to 

Saskatchewan people. But, Mr. Speaker, there was a formula 

that was followed for dividends to be paid to the General 

Revenue Fund because as a business — and you know, the 

members opposite, they talk about being such wizards of 

business and understanding it all — there needs to be 

retained earnings in the Crown corporations so they are able 

to operate and continue to provide the services to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, so here we are. They are peeling, they are 

peeling 90 per cent of the revenue out of the Crown 

corporations and expecting the Crown corporations to borrow 

money to maintain their business operations and improve 

business operations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on one level that is offensive. But on another 

level it is also offensive to the general taxpayer of this province 

because this government is happily spending the revenues from 

the Crown corporations, but ignoring the responsibility of the 

debt that has been created because of their actions. Mr. Speaker, 

you can’t take credit for the revenue and not take responsibility 

for the debt. They go hand in hand, and they will end up being 

the responsibility of the people of this province. So, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

members now to allow the opposition member to make their 

arguments in the debate. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite also went on about the budget documents and 

how difficult they are to read and understand and taxpayers 

may not be able to understand them. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is 

an insult. 

 

And there is a book, it is the Estimates book, and also a budget 

summary book which lays out in very clear language, some 

very clear graphs, and some concise numbers, the situation of 

the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, citizens of 

this province should look at that book, and they should see that 

the debt for the province of Saskatchewan is increasing. And 

you know what? I don’t care if it’s general revenue, whether 

it’s Crown corporations, whether it’s government-owned . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s all government debt. 

And while the member may like to pick and chose, he’s kind of 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7407 

like that old milk horse. You know those old pictures where 

they used to wear the blinders down the street so they didn’t get 

distracted by anything else? You know, the old milk wagon 

pictures? And there’s that horse with his blinders on, walking 

down the street. Well that’s kind of what the member’s like, 

Mr. Speaker, because he doesn’t want to look at anything 

outside of what his tunnel vision allows him to see. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he’s not seeing the whole truth and that’s 

what he needs to do because, Mr. Speaker, when it gets right 

down to it, there’s one taxpayer. There’s one taxpayer and we 

are it. And this government has a responsibility to be clear and 

open and transparent for those taxpayers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced Ed, he just takes a 

cheap shot and then heads out the door. You know if he wants 

to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Member, 

order. Members know they’re not to refer to the absence or 

presence of members. I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Oh, okay. Well I apologize, Mr. Speaker. But 

I would recommend that if the minister wants to get into the 

debate, I’m sure there’s an opportunity for him to get up and 

make his comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, we can talk about what the 

accounting practices are. And I know there are 

recommendations that talk to public sector standards and what 

needs to be used, and on a regular basis, these are updated and 

refined and improved. And I also know that the province of 

Saskatchewan is the only province that does not use summary 

financial statements. Mr. Speaker. And summary financial 

statements include all of the debt of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, all of the debt that is a responsibility of the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would again refer people back to the 

budget summary document, page 61, which lays out some very 

clear graphs about how the debt, the responsibility of the 

taxpayers of this province — whether through utility rates, 

through government debt, whichever — but it’s our 

responsibility how it’s increasing over the next few years. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s going up. And when we look at this chart, it is 

very clear. It is very easy to understand and, Mr. Speaker, I 

wouldn’t, I wouldn’t venture to insult the people of the this 

province for not having a good grasp on the debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another area that is a huge concern is on 

page 61 of the budget summaries document, and it lays out the 

debt of the General Revenue Fund. Now this is the debt which 

the member opposite is referring to when he had his blinders on 

here, so he can’t see the Crown debt or can’t see 

government-owned debt. But the line on that chart says 

guaranteed debt. And it says the actual in 2010 is 17 million. 

Forecast in 2011 is 42 million, almost 43, and the estimated in 

2012 is 91.3. Now that’s guaranteed debt, Mr. Speaker. But we 

have seen a number of initiatives over the last few months that 

have been, had the sunlight shone on them that are 

questionable, and whether the debt is actually being accounted 

for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a couple of issues pop to mind. The member 

has announced and withdrew and announced and withdrew 

funding for 13 long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, half of that money has been committed, 

almost half, but the rest of it has not. Half of the $156 million 

has been committed. The rest is still nowhere. Nowhere. It’s not 

in the budget. It doesn’t show up at debt. It doesn’t show up as 

a liability for the Government of Saskatchewan. It just doesn’t 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s a real 

pleasure to stand in the Assembly today to speak on this topic, 

which I will not be supporting. This motion is about negativity 

and debt. So I would like to highlight the good initiatives in 

support of our government towards the people of this province 

and exactly what programs are available that our government is 

doing. 

 

And I also want to take this time to show the public how the 

government cares for the people of Saskatchewan. The riding 

that I represent is Saskatchewan Rivers, and we have eight rural 

municipalities that I represent. When speaking to the reeves, 

they discovered that the past government was not listening to 

their voice, and so they are very happy with our government’s 

initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had record crop insurance coverage and 

funding in the 2011-12 Agriculture budget, and this will help 

protect these Saskatchewan producers against the risks such as 

excess moisture that we had last summer and what we’re 

experiencing probably today. 

 

Now the Government of Saskatchewan has also increased its 

Agriculture budget by 32 million to 418 million in the 2011-12 

budget. Now this is the second largest Agriculture budget ever 

announced in the province history, and I believe that that 

demonstrates this government’s positive growth for supporting 

Saskatchewan livestock and agriculture producers. Now more 

than three-quarters of this year’s budget will fully fund business 

risk management programs including Crop Insurance, 

AgriStability, and AgriInvest. And our government will be 

leaving more money in the hands of Saskatchewan farmers and 

ranchers by implementing phase 2 of its education property tax 

reduction plan, and this will reduce education property tax rates 

by 80 per cent on agriculture land compared to 2007. This year 

the mill rate will be reduced from 7.08 to 3.91 on agriculture 

land. 

 

And our government will continue to provide funding for the 

Crown land sale program, the wildlife damage compensation 

program, the gopher control rebate program, irrigation 

infrastructure, the farm and ranch water infrastructure program, 

the farm business development initiative, and other programs to 

benefit producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming to work this morning, I ran into an old 



7408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

friend from north of the Prince Albert area where I come from, 

and he works for SERM [Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management]. And I said, well what brings you to the 

city? And he said, well we were called in to help the flooding 

here with provincial disaster assistance program. And I said, 

well why were you called in? And he said, well my crew and I 

were called in to help, and we’re going to help everywhere in 

Saskatchewan that we can. And I believe this is a very good 

example of the Saskatchewan way. We assist others in need, 

and it’s a common sense example of going where you can be of 

service. And perhaps that’s our Saskatchewan advantage — our 

sense of wanting to help other citizens in Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan highways and transportation 

are very important to the residents of rural Saskatchewan as 

well as urban. And there was an investment of 556.2 million, 

and this brings a total transportation spending to 2.2 billion 

over four years. This year’s Highways and Infrastructure budget 

will improve 14 kilometres of provincial highways, and this 

budget includes 285.3 million of capital construction. And I 

believe that’s the largest capital investment in the province’s 

history. 

 

There was 54.6 million to support major, multi-year projects 

including, close to home where I come from, new lanes will be 

graded from north to Duck Lake to south of Macdowall, and 

opening new twin lanes on Highway 11 from south of Hague to 

north of Duck Lake and north and south of Macdowall. And all 

this brings traffic from the South for our tourism in the 

constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

As well there’s continued work on the new St. Louis bridge, 

and this will improve the route on No. 2 Highway access into 

the city and flowing into Saskatchewan Rivers, where we do 

experience a lot of traffic for tourism in the beautiful Sask 

Rivers constituency. And I’m also pleased to say, because of 

this, 10 million for a new program to upgrade community and 

tourism access roads. And I believe details of this program, this 

particular program, will be released later this year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, the 2011-12 budget fulfills 

the second phase of the government education property tax 

reduction plan and 80 per cent on farm land, which is very 

important to the rural area and the farmers and ranchers that 

have spoken with me. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put some quotes on the 

record. During the budget time, I was speaking with Chief Guy 

Lonechild, but then I was reading in The StarPhoenix, and he 

said: 

 

“This government has put its money where its mouth is,” 

said Guy Lonechild, chief of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. “This is an opportunity for 

us to start doing much needed work to roll up our sleeves 

and start improving educational outcomes for First 

Nations people . . . early childhood development, K to 12, 

and post-secondary education.” 

 

Then I was doing further research and he also continued to say 

on CJME, “This is an important step forward. This budget 

allows for this work to come in for the next 12 months so we 

are actually quite happy with it.” 

 

And speaking with Mr. Lonechild, he did say he was very, very 

happy with working with the members of this government and 

in particular the First Nation cabinet minister. 

 

Then I was talking with Dave Marit, and I read about a quote 

from Global TV that he said. And Dave Marit is with SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], as most of 

you know. He said, “For an average farmer in rural 

Saskatchewan with 10 quarters of farm land with an assessment 

of 300,000, he’s going to see his taxes go from an average 

about 34, 3,500 down to about 1,300.” 

 

And then when I was reading further with Dave Marit, SARM, 

from CTV Regina he said: 

 

The big one we saw, of course, was the education property 

tax reduction. It’s huge to our organization and to farmers 

and ranchers in rural Saskatchewan, so that’s significant. 

The revenue-sharing piece that we saw going to a full 1 

per cent by the province is very, very huge for rural 

municipalities. 

 

There is a few more, but I see my time is very limited. 

 

I’d also like to talk about tourism because it’s such a significant 

industry in my constituency, and our Saskatchewan advantage 

budget has met with glowing approval by the tourism industry. 

 

Sue Schigol belongs to the Tourism Saskatchewan’s board 

Chair, and she does live in my riding, so I’d like to quote her: 

“The significance of tourism to the province’s economic growth 

and employment has been recognized through commitments 

made in today’s provincial budget.” Sue goes on to say, 

“Targeted support to highway infrastructure and provincial and 

regional parks demonstrates the government’s understanding 

that tourism is a growing, viable sector and that investment will 

pay dividends.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, with my work with the Ministry of Immigration, I 

can tell this Assembly that our immigration programs have 

definitely improved because of our Saskatchewan advancement 

budget, and that our government has made important 

advancements in improving net migration, both interprovincial 

and international. And our province’s 14.7 million immigration 

budget includes 1.8 million in new funding for settlement and 

supports. 

 

So I do believe that we are on course and that our government 

is making great strides for meeting the needs of people of 

Saskatchewan, both rural and urban. And I’m very proud of our 

government’s accomplishments. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 

supporting . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I 

rise today to enter into the 75-minute debate where we are 

basically condemning that provincial government for its 

unwillingness to grant the public the transparency that they 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7409 

desire, including when it comes to reporting the government’s 

actual debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 2007 election campaign, those men and 

women over there promised the people of Saskatchewan that 

they would be the most open and transparent government in the 

history of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, I’d even heard them 

say, the history of the entire world. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I got a little taste of that transparency when 

I submitted a request for information about the Amicus nursing 

home deal in Saskatoon. And what did this most transparent 

and open and accountable government do? Was this the most 

open and transparent government in the history of the globe, 

Mr. Speaker? Well I got 1,500 pages of blanks — 1,500 pages 

of blanks. Like, Mr. Speaker, it was this big. I still have it down 

in my office. Fifteen hundred pages of nothing, Mr. Speaker. So 

much for the most open and transparent government in the 

history of the globe. 

 

And what do . . . I’ll give you another example. Mr. Speaker, I 

submitted two written questions to the Minister of Government 

Services. I wanted to know — which I think is a reasonable 

question given that the government had purchased the 

Parkridge nursing home in Saskatoon after twenty-three and a 

half years of lease payments — I wanted to know, what did the 

Parkridge nursing home cost the people of our province? 

Because it had been built in 1986. It was a request for a 

developer to build it. The government, the taxpayers would 

lease it and purchase it, Mr. Speaker. And I wanted to know, 

what did that cost the people of Saskatchewan, so I put in two 

written answers. And the lovely member from Biggar, what did 

he do, Mr. Speaker? He stood up and told the Assembly, the 

most open and transparent member of the Assembly from 

Biggar — actually I was born in Biggar — Mr. Speaker, you 

know, this open and transparent member from Biggar, what did 

he do? He stood up in the Assembly and converted it, Mr. 

Speaker. He converted it. Now how is that open and 

transparent? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I started going through public accounts to try 

and figure out what this Parkridge nursing home cost. And lo 

and behold, Mr. Speaker, I went into the estimates and I started 

asking the Minister of Government Services, and she said that 

they would see what they could do. Because they knew, I think 

they knew I was kind of on to them. You could go back through 

public accounts and figure it out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what did we find out? We found out that this nursing home 

has cost the people of this province . . . Now remember it was 

built in 1986. It could have been built for maybe 8 million — 

I’m being very, very conservative here — $8 million. It has cost 

the people of Saskatchewan $60 million to lease and now buy 

that facility. And guess what? There are another $20 million 

worth of renovations that need to be done which we, the 

taxpayers, will pay for. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we got another deal. And I go back to my 

1,500 pages of nothing, the 1,500 pages of nothing. The 1,500 

pages of nothing is about another nursing home deal. If the 

government wants to build nursing homes, then what you do is 

you cash finance them so that we all know what these things are 

going to cost. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know what’s amazing? I listened to 

Stephen Harper’s speech or his debate the other night, and he 

told the country that there are no corporate tax cuts this year. 

And, Mr. Speaker, Jack Layton and Mr. Ignatieff said that that 

was simply not true. But Stephen Harper said in the debate and 

he continued to say it, there were no corporate tax cuts. 

 

Well you know, we’ve got a group of men and women here that 

tell us day in and day out and day in and day out that the 

province’s debt is only . . . They said it in 2009-10. They say 

that the province’s debt in that year was $3.6 million. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that is, it is . . . I can’t use the L word, but it’s simply 

untrue. It is not true. Mr. Speaker, in fact, the Provincial 

Auditor tells us that the actual public debt of the province was 

$8.46 billion because they refused to include Crown 

corporation debt. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, debt is debt is debt. And now what we have 

these guys doing is they’re entering into all kinds of deals — 

25-year leases — and they say, okay well that will be off 

budget; that will be off the books. But do you know what? We 

have to pay for it over the next 25 years. And, you know, I 

think my colleague has asked the Minister of Government 

Services, tell us what it costs for this 25-year deal down at the 

Hill tower where civil servants are going to move from existing 

space over to the Hill building. Obviously if I was the 

developer, I’d want a 25-year lease too. That makes absolute 

sense. But why did the rocket scientists over there think that 

they have to use taxpayers’ money in order to help certain 

developers develop their buildings and have a return on their 

investment? I don’t think it’s prudent and I don’t think, frankly, 

it is a good use of the people’s money. 

 

Now you know, as my colleague says, if you’re going to brag 

about the revenues, then you need to brag about the 

expenditures and you need to know about the debt, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know, they’ve entered into a purchase power 

arrangement through SaskPower to all these private facilities. 

 

Here’s what the people of Saskatchewan need to know. They 

need to know that the North Battleford facility, which is 

Northland Power, the total cost of all power purchase 

agreements is expected to be — get this — 11.6 billion, billion 

dollars, billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, billion dollars, billion 

dollars. And you know the question is, why are we using the 

people’s money on these kinds of deals when, if you simply 

built it yourself, you could save us money, Mr. Speaker? It’s 

absolutely unbelievable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that wilfully withholds 

the actual cost of its deficit. It says it’s balanced the books, but 

we know that isn’t true. We have a government that is 

obviously embarrassed by its actions because it keeps feeding 

the public about the debt, and it’s simply wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

Debt in this province is going up and the citizens of our 

province need to know that. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government came to office promising the 

people of Saskatchewan that it was going to be the most open 

and transparent government in the history of the province, and 

I’ve heard some members over there say, the history of the 



7410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

world. Well, Mr. Speaker, our debt is going up; it is not going 

down. And even, Mr. Speaker, we know that debt has been on 

the rise, and it’s expected to climb much higher over the next 

four years. This is a government that is not open. It is not 

transparent. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they’ve changed the 

rules. 

 

You know what I learned the other day over in Education 

estimates? School boards are now going to go out and borrow 

their share of the money in order to build schools. So when the 

government says . . . Oh here’s the other thing I learned: I 

learned that they’ve said over and over again, we’re spending 

$450 million on new school capital. Well what they didn’t say 

. . . We have to drill down a bit; finally got them to admit that 

$75 million was returned to the GRF [General Revenue Fund] 

and in fact the answer is $350 million. And, Mr. Speaker, you 

know what? That money, for the most part, hasn’t gone out the 

door yet. Those facilities haven’t been built. 

 

They take away a school board’s ability to tax, and they’re 

telling school boards now they changed the rules. They’re now 

Treasury Board Crowns and they can borrow. School boards 

will now borrow their portion of the cost of that capital project. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all that does is add to the debt of the 

province. That’s $150 million I’m estimating, $150 million that 

school boards are going to have to go out and borrow, and it’s 

going to add to the debt of the province. 

 

And then we have these people . . . You know, we’re back into 

the immigrant investor funds, and we’re backstopping them. 

We’re loan guaranteeing them. And what are they doing with 

those immigrant investor funds? They’re giving them to the 

private developers. 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. Order. 

Order. Why is the member from Athabasca on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

joined today by two special visitors from the Red Earth Cree 

Nation. In the east gallery is Harvey McKay and Robert 

Whitecap. And we were hoping that the chief would be here, 

Chief McKay, and so hopefully he will show up. And I’m 

planning on having lunch with them. But I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, very quickly in my Cree language, which is really 

important to many of the people that speak Cree, including our 

guests: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Again the language is: this is your House, this is our land, and 

you’re more than welcome here. There’s plenty of room for the 

First Nations people. 

 

And I want to say that my entire caucus all recognized these 

two fine folks when they walked in. So once again, Mr. 

Speaker, I would ask all the members to welcome some very 

special guests from Red Earth Cree Nation, Harvey McKay and 

Robert Whitecap. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Carrot River Valley is 

asking for leave to introduce guests as well. Is leave granted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I also 

would like to welcome the members from Red Earth as it’s up 

in the wonderful constituency of Carrot River Valley. And I’m 

sorry to hear about their flooding problem lately, and the 

government will be working hard at trying to help them out. So 

I would like the rest of the members of this Assembly to 

welcome to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

Financial Reporting 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

enter into this debate today on this motion. You know, I kind 

of, I looked at the end of the motion and it says: 

 

That this Assembly urges the government to adopt public 

sector accounting standards and begin reporting the 

provincial government’s actual debt to the public, as 

opposed to its current practice. 

 

Well these practices, Mr. Speaker, were done, were done for 

years by the previous administration, and all of a sudden now 

it’s a terrible thing. So anyways, and I just want to put into the 

record again, as the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

already put in there, a quote from the Acting Provincial 

Auditor. And it says, and I quote: 

 

I have audited the summary statement, the financial 

position of the Government of Saskatchewan as at March 

31st, 2010. In my opinion these financial statements 

present fairly, in all material respects, the financial 

position of the Government of Saskatchewan as of March 

31st, 2010, and the results of its operations. The changes 

in its net debt and its cash flows for the year then ended in 

accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting 

principles. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know this is what has been done. It’s 

proper accounting procedures. But I’ll tell you what. The 

member from Regina Rosemont keeps on putting spin on this. 

Every day he stands up in the House presenting petitions which 

he said are signed by the grand total of maybe five people, 

which he claims this government is running this province into 

the hole and is just doing a . . . [inaudible] . . . job, Mr. Speaker, 

of our finances. 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7411 

You know, when I say spin it reminds me of a top, and I think 

this top’s getting a little wobbly, Mr. Speaker. Like I mean 

really, what he does is he’s got dear leader pulling that string on 

that top to get it to spin. And he gets talking about transparency, 

and that takes me back to the first part of the motion, “That this 

Assembly condemns the provincial government for its 

unwillingness to grant the public the transparency they desire 

and deserve.” 

 

Now I would like to talk just a little bit about transparency. 

Where did this spin go? Where did this spin go? Where was it 

when the $35 million was hidden for six years, was hidden 

from this Assembly for six years? SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company], where did that go? 

Where was the transparency on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker? Where was the transparency? Where was the 

transparency on Murdoch Carriere, Mr. Speaker? What kind of 

transparency was that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go on and on on the various different 

things on the business, the great business failures that that 

government when they were in power had. Tappedinto at 6.7 

million; Persona, 9.4; Navigata, 43.4 — these are all at millions 

of dollars — Retx.com, 26 million; Craig Wireless, 10 million. 

It goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. How many different things that 

they had absolutely no transparency. They actually wanted to 

hide it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you know by 2007, the people of 

Saskatchewan decided they had seen this top and it was 

wobbling way too much. And they decided enough already; 

let’s have a change. 

 

You know, this government is about transparency. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, ouch. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes it is. It is not an ouch. It is great on 

transparency. Well a good example is in our stabilization fund. 

Like I mean, we’re not pulling the NDP trick of robbing Peter 

to pay Paul, working on a credit card so to speak, to try and 

help doing the accounting of the government’s money. You 

know, we have a rainy day fund that honestly, actually has real 

money in it, not just a credit card. 

 

Now I have to admit that the member from Regina Rosemont 

wasn’t there in those days, but you know dear leader was. And 

he was pulling hard on that string to try and spin the top as fast 

as possible. Mr. Speaker, but all of a sudden he saw the top 

wobbling, so he pulled the pin and he went to Alberta, taking a 

hit off of some Nexen oil with him. Oh and we know about the 

transparency in that deal don’t we, Mr. Speaker? Ah the great, 

the NDP is great on transparency. 

 

And speaking, and speaking of dear leader, when he goes up 

north and talks to the Missinipi Broadcasting Corporation, he 

forgets about, he forgets about his issue on royalties. He only 

mentions potash, but he forgot about uranium up there. But yet 

when he comes back down here, when he comes back down to 

southern Saskatchewan, he wants to review the royalties on 

potash, uranium, oil, and gas. 

 

He wants to drive this province into being a have-not province 

again. He wants to have this job-killing monster out there. And 

for the life of me, I can’t, I can’t understand why when we’re 

sitting here being a have province after years and years under 

the NDP of being a have-not province. And all they can do is sit 

there and say, well we still want equalization. That’s how they 

figured that they would pay, pay for all the promises that 

they’ve been making lately. If they were to come into 

government, one of the things was, is they thought they could 

go get equalization. Well isn’t this great? In other words, 

they’re trying to say they want to make us back into a have-not 

province. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we are doing well in this province. We are 

transparent, and we are showing the people of this province 

what transparency is really about. We do not go around hiding 

things like the previous administration. We are moving this 

province forward. This is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my time is starting to run out. But it’s, I just 

have to say, this is a great province. I’m proud to live in it. I’m 

also proud to represent the people of Carrot River Valley. The 

member from Regina Rosemont, his talk is running out of 

steam. It’s slowing down. It’s about to fall over and spin off the 

table. You know something, Mr. Speaker? Come this next 

November the 7th, I don’t think their leader is going to be there 

to put the string back on and give that top another spin. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — We will now enter the 10-minute question 

period. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party has wasted taxpayers’ dollars, public money on ads that 

aren’t true, aren’t factual, aren’t correct, Mr. Speaker. They 

suggest that debt’s being paid down. Of course all members in 

this Assembly know that’s not the case. And they reference 

their own book right here, Mr. Speaker, to say that debt is 

massively on the rise under this government. 

 

I guess my question would be to the member from Sask Rivers: 

how does she defend running ads with her own constituents’ 

hard-earned tax dollars that are incorrect, not true, that are not 

factual and misleading the public, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

member opposite for the very valuable question. When our 

government came into office in 2007, there was a 6.8 billion 

GRF debt. Now we’ve paid it down annually, and now after this 

Saskatchewan advantage budget, the GRF debt now stands at 

3.8 billion. So in three and a half years, we have paid down the 

GRF debt by $3 billion. 

 

So further to that, we are saving Saskatchewan people more 

than $600 million in interest costs over four years, money that 

can be used to improve the quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

residents. And debt reduction means lower interest costs and 

more money to pay for infrastructure and important government 

services such as health care and education. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

do believe our . . . 

 



7412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP’s record in government placed a tremendous burden on 

the people of this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when their 

leader was in government, he raised the PST three times. He 

raised income tax twice. He raised business taxes four times 

and raised fuel taxes twice. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: what measures did her 

leader take to be transparent with the people of this province 

when he implemented 11 tax increases which placed a great 

economic burden to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1991 when the 

NDP came to government, we were faced with over a $15 

billion deficit. I can tell the member opposite the 1999 election 

campaign, the NDP under Roy Romanow ran on a — because 

we were starting to get our fiscal house in order — ran on a 

record to cut personal income taxes by $1,000 per household, 

Mr. Speaker, and that was a policy that was implemented. 

 

[12:15] 

 

In 2002, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh we 

absolutely did. And we redesigned the income tax system 

which they have not changed. Mr. Speaker, in 2003 we said we 

were going to reduce corporate capital tax, corporate income 

tax, the small-business tax, and renew the royalty structure in 

the province, and that’s exactly what we did. And our record is 

causing the record growth in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, quite simply, a question 

for the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. Why on earth did 

this government run on a platform of being the most transparent 

government in the history of Saskatchewan and then refuse and 

ignore that promise when it came to being accountable to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government has 

reduced the debt by 44 per cent since we took office. Debt 

reduction is not a lofty accounting principle, it means lower 

interests costs and more money to pay for important 

government services in Saskatchewan. Our government has cut 

the small-business tax rate by more than half, from 4.5 per cent 

to 2 per cent, and education property taxes on farm land, 

residential, and commercial property are further being reduced 

by 55.6 million. 

 

Not only has our government reduced GRF debt since 2007, but 

our government has reduced the amount you pay in education 

property taxes, the largest ever property tax cuts in 

Saskatchewan history. So I believe in our government, and we 

do care for the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite believe that our budget is different than other 

provinces across the country. Mr. Speaker, they are right. The 

Saskatchewan advantage budget is different. Our budget is the 

one and only one in Canada that is balanced. As CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] reporter Stefani 

Langenegger said, “This is a real balanced budget. Even the 

auditor would agree.” 

 

The members opposite may want to smear our province’s 

reputation by attempting to discredit our accounting principles. 

But our government believes in the Provincial Auditor’s ability 

and will stand by his work. 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: why do you and your 

party want to damage Saskatchewan’s reputation as one of the 

most fiscally stable and economically strong jurisdictions in 

Canada, simply for your own political gains? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to take that question, Mr. Speaker, and to correct the 

record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan has made 

recommendations annually and he’s done so in the 2010 

volume 2 report, Mr. Speaker, calling for compliance with 

public sector accounting standards, recognizing that 

Saskatchewan is out of line with all of the provinces, the 

territories, and the Government of Canada. 

 

Further to the member’s foolish suggestion that this budget is 

balanced, what we don’t have in that budget: we don’t have 

teachers’ contracts; we don’t have . . . which is upwards of 

$100 million; we don’t have many other aspects such as the 

flood damage we see to our highways; we don’t see the 

long-term care projects, Mr. Speaker. And what we recognize is 

that debt is on the rise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we need in this province is to comply with the Provincial 

Auditor’s report, and what we’d be well-served by is a 

backbench with a backbone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just listened very carefully to 

what the member from Sask Rivers told this Assembly. She 

told this Assembly that her government has reduced debt by 40 

per cent. Then my question to the minister or to the member is 

this: when you say you’ve reduced debt by 40 per cent, are you 

including Crown corporation debt and General Revenue Fund 

debt, or are you just referring to General Revenue Fund debt? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to look at this in its entirety and I would 

argue very carefully . . . I know the House Leader has the 

answer for her. She is capable of answering the question, Mr. 

Speaker. We don’t need Mr. House Leader to answer it for her. 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7413 

Mr. Speaker, is she referring only to the GRF debt? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I specifically said 

GRF debt. However I would also like to put on record, if you 

would allow me a moment to quote our province’s Acting 

Provincial Auditor, “I have audited the summary statement of 

the financial position of the Government of Saskatchewan and, 

in my opinion, its Canadian generally accepted accounting 

principles . . .” 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — The Acting Provincial Auditor’s report states, and 

I quote: “I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian 

generally accepted auditing standards.” And his final statement 

is this: 

 

In my opinion [in his opinion] these financial statements 

present fairly in all material respects the financial position 

of the Government of Saskatchewan as of March 31, 

2010. And the results of its operations, the changes in its 

net debt, and its cash flows for the year then ended in 

accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting 

principles. 

 

To the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: why does your 

party think that they know more about accounting principles 

than the Acting Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, it has nothing to do with the 

debate over the Provincial Auditor or the Acting Provincial 

Auditor. It’s how this government actually reports debt and 

reports to this Assembly and in the media to the taxpayers of 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at, if you look by the government’s 

own reports today in the province of Saskatchewan, for every 

man, woman, and child there is $6,000 in debt on every man, 

woman, and child. In four years, by the member’s own budget, 

that debt will be $9,000 on every man, woman, and child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’re inaccurate. You’re looking at it like an old 

milk horse with blinders on, Mr. Speaker, and ignoring all of 

the debt that you’re creating. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite want to look at the general revenue debt and 

Crown corporation debt as different. A simple question to the 

member from Sask Rivers: if you buy a new tractor on your 

farm and you have to borrow 50,000 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The time has elapsed on the 75-minute 

debate. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Furber: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to rise today to introduce some guests in the Assembly. 

With us today are some folks from the PAGC [Prince Albert 

Grand Council] and the Red Earth First Nation. Mr. Speaker, in 

the east gallery are: Ian McKay, chief of the Red Earth First 

Nation; Barry McKay who’s a councillor at Red Earth; Roy 

Head who is the emergency coordinator at the First Nation; and 

Richard Kent who is the commissioner, emergency and 

protective services, for the PAGC or the P.A. Grand Council, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I do want to add this in my introduction. I’m hopeful that 

the work that they’re doing on their First Nation with respect to 

flooding is going to protect their citizens. We certainly, in this 

Assembly, are unified in our prayers of support for your First 

Nation. 

 

And certainly the opposition in Saskatchewan supports your 

call for some permanent, long-term solutions to your flooding 

problems because we know full well that this is an issue that is 

ongoing for you. So thank you for being here today and best of 

luck in your ongoing efforts with respect to flooding. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — To make an introduction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Carrot River Valley has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

Assembly for this. I really appreciate the people coming from 

Red Earth coming down here today and discussing their 

problems with their flooding. I know that they’ve had problems 

before, Mr. Speaker, and I know that this government will work 

hard at trying to alleviate some of the problems. And it is a 

continuing problem up there, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly 

appreciate them and thank them for coming down to this 

Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. Order. 



7414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2011 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to take a 

moment to recognize in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, five 

individuals that work in the Sask Party caucus office, Mr. 

Speaker, observing proceedings here today. I welcome them to 

their Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Of course these are funded by the 

taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that that total bill would add 

up to about $300,000 a year and I suspect sometimes sitting up 

there they must get a little bit frustrated, Mr. . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 

Order. Order. Order. Order, Order, Order. Order. I would just 

ask the member to introduce the guests and not get into debate. 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would just simply in 

closing . . . Certainly all members and all staff of this Assembly 

work incredibly hard. Maybe not at this very moment, Mr. 

Speaker, but I do want to wish all individuals a great Easter 

weekend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Why is the 

member from Yorkton on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

introduce the five hard-working caucus members that came 

down to listen to debate on their lunch hour. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Responses to Provincial Emergencies 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Ottenbreit.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be 

given the opportunity to speak to the main motion that was 

moved by the member from Yorkton. And I’d like to read the 

motion into the record again, because it’s very important. It 

says: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the dutiful efforts of the 

many volunteers, organizations, and different levels of 

government’s swift response to the emergency situations 

of this past summer, as well as our continued efforts to 

enhance and expand the Provincial Disaster Assistance 

Program to the benefit of those who must rebuild their 

lives after the disastrous flooding of 2010. 

 

And it’s very relevant that when this disasters happen, as our 

guests in the legislature from Red Earth Reserve is experiencing 

right now, that these disasters affect real people and their homes 

may be lost or they’re out of their homes for a long time before 

the disaster is, some of the problems are mitigated and looked 

after. 

 

So I’d just like to take this opportunity to wish all the people 

who had problems in the last year, last year and this year, all the 

best in the future. Our government certainly is there to help 

them in any way that we can. And I’m going to take this 

opportunity to explain some of the things that we’ve done, as 

far as a government, to help people in a time of crisis. 

 

But I like to start out by thanking the member from Wood River 

who is the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing. He and his officials and the civil service in that 

ministry has done great work throughout the last two years, 

helping people with the application process and all those 

necessary things that have to happen to get money into the 

hands of people after a disaster has taken place. 

 

As we know, Mr. Speaker, last year some of the worst flooding 

took place in Yorkton, Maple Creek, but it also took place in 

North Battleford, Saskatoon, many rural areas, and of course 

we see that there’s flooding taking place again this year. And 

we certainly wish all those folks all the best, and we are here to 

help them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency we didn’t have a serious 

amount of flooding, but we’ve had some. We’ve been very 

fortunate that we haven’t had a lot more, but the towns of 

Asquith and Langham and the villages of Borden and Perdue 

will be sharing funding from the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority totalling nearly $6,000. And that’s just in my 

constituency. 

 

During the Easter break, I’m going to be touring my 

constituency and stopping by and visiting all the RM [rural 

municipality] council offices and the villages and town offices 

just to get a first-hand read of any problems in the constituency 

and offer any assistance that I may have to offer and our 

ministry and government can offer, some of the things that 

we’ve done. I look back — how many years? — five, six years 

ago when Langham had a lot of flooding. And they called me 

out and the issues that they had was it took a year and a half to 

two years to get payment for the disaster that they incurred. 

 

[12:30] 

 



April 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7415 

And certainly, certainly our government has taken many 

initiatives to address that slowness in processing applications 

because these people need money. In many cases they’re out of 

their homes and their businesses are affected. And some of the 

changes that the claimants received, how they received faster 

payments . . . We changed, made changes to the provincial 

disaster assistance program or PDAP that will significantly 

reduce the amount of time claimants wait for their claim to be 

processed as program staff work towards processing the 

remaining 2010 PDAP claims more quickly. 

 

Now PDAP has received more than 5,900 claims related to 

flooding in 2010, more than double the previous record number 

of claims set in the 2005-06 fiscal year. To date more than 14.5 

million has been paid out, 3,900 claimants have received 

portions of their overall payment, and approximately 1,100 files 

have been closed in their entirety. PDAP’s staff are working to 

complete the remaining claims as quickly as possible in 

preparation for 2011 claims resulting from, obviously, spring 

flooding that’s taking place. And to do so, PDAP will add 30 

additional temporary staff to process claims, either from within 

government or from new hirings. As well, PDAP staff will 

begin working in two separate shifts, six days a week. Officials 

will also adjust claims based on the relative size and other 

streamlining processes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, not only people have had flooding problems 

with houses and businesses in the commercial side, but also the 

agriculture sector has had considerable flooding as well. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to point out some of the . . . With 

partnership with the federal government, we have made $360 

million available to Saskatchewan farmers through the excess 

moisture program in 2010 and for land that we’re unable to 

seed due to excess moisture and land that was seeded and 

flooded out totally. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we introduced the 

Saskatchewan feed and forage program to assist livestock and 

forage producers, $30 a tonne to help producers affected by 

excess moisture purchase additional feed, and funding to help 

with the transportation of feed and moving livestock to 

alternative feeding locations, and also $30 an acre to help 

producers reseed hay, forage, and pasture land affected by 

excessive moisture. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s other very 

important initiatives that we have taken. 

 

But I want to point to one thing in particular. And our Premier 

and our minister responsible for PDAP and our government 

made the decision when we see that there was going to be a lot 

more flooding taking place this spring, we committed $22 

million to assist flood victims and to help with their . . . 

mitigate some of the problems relating around to flooding. The 

RMs and communities took up that offer. We soon realized that 

$22 million wasn’t anywhere near enough to address the 

problems out there and the expanse of concerns in the province. 

And so we’re estimating that there’s going to be another $30 

million needed to go out to Saskatchewan people and 

municipalities to help mitigate the flooding concerns. So that’s, 

you know, nearing $50 million that our government has 

committed to that process. 

 

And I know, talking to other MLAs that have been in the 

constituencies, that there has been a lot of culverts that’s been 

. . . concerns with culverts being frozen and they’ve been, that 

issue’s been mitigated and it has helped reduce the flooding and 

the washouts of roads around the province. And there’s many 

other areas that that money has gone into and will continue to 

flow. And we’re committed to helping with the minimum of 

$50 million. 

 

Also the Premier made it very clear that we did commit to $22 

million but it didn’t matter; whatever the cost was going to be 

incurred, we are prepared to have the money available to help 

in mitigating flooding problems in Saskatchewan this spring. 

And it just speaks to our Premier who certainly made that 

decision. And it was certainly well received in caucus and in 

cabinet that our government, you know, spend the money now 

to help alleviate any flooding problems. And as we always have 

in this government, we’ve been there for people in the province 

when needed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know this isn’t about the budget, but at the 

end of the day we have that extra $30 million in the coffers to 

help people. And the only way you have money is to have a 

growing economy and a good future and businesses and people 

working in this province and businesses creating jobs. And so 

with our tax policies and reducing debt and reducing the 

amount of interest paid on debt, we have been able to have 

extra money for disaster relief. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just would . . . I’m glad I’ve had the 

opportunity to speak to this file, and it’s such a very important 

one. You know, you don’t expect disasters to happen, but when 

they do, people need help; municipalities need help; farmers 

need help. And we have been there to help them through this 

disaster, and we’ll continue to be there in the future. So, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I trust members will enjoy their time with 

family over this Easter break. And this Assembly stands 

adjourned until May the 2nd at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:37.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 National Day of Mourning 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7391 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7391 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7392, 7393 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7392 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7392 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7392 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7393 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7393, 7410 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7393 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 7410, 7413 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7413 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7414 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7414 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7394 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7394 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7394 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7394 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7395 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7395 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Day of Mourning 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7395 

 Treaty 4 Education Conference 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7395 

 Administrative Professionals Day 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7396 

 Health Care Quality Summit 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7396 

 Earth Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7396 

 Celebrating Easter 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7396 

 Planned Parenthood Services 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7397 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 College Merger 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7397 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7397 

 Coverage for Dental Surgery 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7399 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7399 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7399 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7400 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7400 

 Relationship with Municipalities 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7401 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7401 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 7402 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Financial Reporting 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7402, 7411 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7404 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7406, 7412 

  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7407, 7411 



 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7408, 7412 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7410 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7412 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7412 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7413 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7413 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Responses to Provincial Emergencies 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7414 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


