




















































Hansard: March 30, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 30, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7033 

 March 30, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Joining us in your gallery today is someone who quite literally 

has changed for the better the lives of thousands of 

Saskatchewan people. He’s seated in your gallery. His name is 

Tim Marshall. And for a little while longer he’ll be with STEP, 

the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, until he retires 

after 25 years of service when you combine STEP and his time 

with AgDevCo. He’s joined by Lionel LaBelle, the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of STEP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, by the way of introduction, tell you that 

Tim is currently the honorary consul of Mongolia in 

Saskatchewan. He’s a fellow of the British Institute of 

Agricultural Engineers and a fellow of the European 

Agricultural Engineers. He speaks a number of languages, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s familiar also with Russian and German, Danish, 

and Portuguese. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, he has served the province 

well, first at AgDevCo where he worked to open up markets to 

beef cattle genetics from our province and agricultural 

equipment into eastern Europe in exchange for textiles. 

 

And very, very significantly over the last period of time in his 

career, he has pioneered in the opening up of markets of pulse 

crops — Saskatchewan pulses, lentils and dried peas and chick 

peas — all around the world. Mr. Speaker, 18,000 pulse 

growers today in the province owe, in no small measure, some 

prosperity and some success to his work in opening up pulse 

markets around the world to the point, Mr. Speaker, where our 

province is now responsible for two-thirds of the world’s pulse 

exports. In no small way, this has been achieved with the help 

of, with the vision of, and the leadership of Tim Marshall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2010 he was recognized as the Pulse Promoter 

of the Year by the Saskatchewan Pulse Growers. If they had a 

pulse promoter of the decade or maybe of the half-century, he 

would be eligible for both of those awards as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to just say on behalf of the government 

and on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan today, we want 

to say thank you to Tim. Thank you for all of his work. Thank 

you for literally improving the lives of many businesses and 

producers in this province. And we just wish him all the best in 

his retirement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

Premier in welcoming Lionel LaBelle, the CEO and president 

of STEP with us here today, as well as David Froh, one of our 

export specialists from STEP who have joined Tim Marshall. 

I join with the Premier in congratulating Tim on a fine career in 

the civil service, one of the proud members of our 

Saskatchewan civil service, and one of the leaders as well in the 

establishment of STEP. And I remember very clearly at that 

point in 1996, I believe, Tim when you were leading the active 

promotion of moving the trade development out of the 

Department of Economic Development over to STEP. And you 

were very, very much involved in that action that has led to one 

of the, I think, the best organizations of trade anywhere in 

Canada, and one that I know you’re very proud of, but so is the 

government and so are members of the opposition. 

 

I just want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that Tim and I, and I 

know, the minister in charge, last night we celebrated the 

retirement out at the Saskatchewan hotel. The minister said 

some very positive things about travelling with you. I’m going 

to stick to my commitment that what goes on the road stays on 

the road. We can talk about that another time. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to welcome as well the 

members of STEP to the Assembly and wish Tim a very, very 

special greeting as he leaves his post, and the best in your next 

international adventure. Thanks, Tim. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome 

today paramedics in the gallery representing the Saskatoon 

Ambulance Employee Association. We have Scott Ingraham, 

president of the association; Paul Hill, vice-president; and Rob 

Dziadyk, operations representative. All three are paramedics in 

Saskatoon, and welcome to the gallery today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to 

have two special groups of people in the galleries to introduce. 

First is the Métis Nation Eastern Region No. II from 

Archerwill. We have with them 17 grade 7 to 12 students. 

They’re from Nipawin, Melfort, Prince Albert, Tisdale, and 

Kelliher. 

 

They also have with them today Helene Johnson who is the 

regional director, and Ryan Calder who is executive director, 

Percy Daoust who is the president of Nipawin Métis Local, and 

Dianne Homstol who is the president of Tisdale local. And they 

have as chaperones Ethel Lee Flanigan, Emile Tessier, and 

Celeste Calder. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that these students 

really don’t need chaperones. They look like they’re very 

well-behaved to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Métis culture is a very important part of our 

history, and I know it’s going to be an important part of our 

future as well. And I hope the students notice the Métis sash on 

the table, and it’s an important part of our legislature. So I’d ask 

everyone to welcome this group of people from Métis Region 

No. II to their legislature. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’m also delighted 

today to introduce 30 public service employees who are seated 



7034 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re here today to take part in the 

parliamentary program for public service, and I thank you very 

much for being here. The participants are employees from 

Agriculture; Education; Energy and Resources; Enterprise; 

Environment; Finance; First Nations and Métis Relations; 

Highways and Infrastructure; Intergovernmental Affairs; 

Justice; Municipal Affairs; Public Service Commission; 

Saskatchewan Financial Services; Social Services; Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank each of them for their dedication 

and hard work and their passion for their jobs and for working 

with the people in the province. Welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming the folks from Métis 

Nation Eastern Region II, particularly executive director Ryan 

Calder and regional director Helene Johnson from the home 

base in Archerwill. Certainly Region II is one of the most 

vibrant and with-it Métis regions in the province, the real leader 

in terms of business development and keeping that Métis 

culture alive, proud, and going on into the future. So I want to 

say congratulations to them on the work that they do, coming 

here with the students and with the presidents from the two 

different locals, welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d be remiss if while on my feet I didn’t say hello to the 

group from the Treaty 4 student success program. I believe the 

group of students here are from Standing Buffalo, but they’re 

accompanied by a couple of the administrators from the Treaty 

4 student success program, Vera Tourangeau and Russ 

Marchuk, who I had the pleasure of going to school with back 

in the ’80s at Scott Collegiate, although which side of the 

student, teacher divide I was on, I won’t say. But anyway I 

won’t comment on his current endeavours around political 

pursuits, Mr. Speaker, but it’s good to see him and these 

students from the Treaty 4 student success program here in the 

gallery at their Legislative Assembly. And, Russ, may you have 

a fine view from the gallery for many years to come. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

also introduce my special guests in the Assembly today, the 

students from the Standing Buffalo grade 9 class, who are here 

actually at the request of Vera Tourangeau. I asked her to help 

me out with some consultation work, some input for a report 

I’m doing to the Premier concerning what many term as 

vulnerable or at-risk youth, but what we’ve come to start 

describing them as, Mr. Speaker, as youth with promise and 

potential. 

 

With the students today, I’m going to ask them just to stand and 

give us a little bit of a wave as I introduce them, is Juanita Bear, 

Kelsey Bear, Tristen Swampy, Chance Goodwill, Mackenzie 

Yuzicappi, Janine Bear — I apologize ahead of time if I’ve 

messed up any of the names, Mr. Speaker — Shayla Goodwill, 

Katrina Goodwill, Taylor Isnana-Hotain, and Alexandrea 

Moostoos. 

 

And with these special people, Mr. Speaker, are, as has already 

been introduced, Russ Marchuk of the Treaty 4 student success 

program. Teacher Joel Russel is with them as well. Joel, give us 

a wave. And Vera Tourangeau is a very good friend of mine, 

Treaty 4 community engagement coordinator also involved 

with the Treaty 4 student success program. She’s a pastor. 

She’s an author, Mr. Speaker, of three significant books: Miss, 

It Hurts; My Kohkom Prayed for Me; and her new book, Empty 

Arms, a story of residential schools and their effects. And just 

as a note of interest, Mr. Speaker, April 20th, her second book 

My Kohkom Prayed for Me will be playing in town. So she has 

become a playwright. So I ask all members to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join with the member from Yorkton in welcoming the Standing 

Buffalo grade 9 class that’s here with us today. 

 

Standing Buffalo First Nation is in the constituency of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. It’s in the beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley. 

The school is in between the Pasqua and Echo Lakes right near 

the park, just north of the park. And I certainly hope that our 

guests here today, along with the Treaty 4 adults that are with 

them, enjoy their stay in their legislature. And I ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 

I’d like to join the minister and also the member, my colleague 

on this side of the House that introduced a guest of the . . . I 

guess our Métis students and area director. 

 

I just want to acknowledge Helene Johnson as a friend, a 

mentor, for your hard work, your dedication you do on behalf 

of the Métis people in our province. You serve us proud. You 

have challenges. But I just want to say, keep up the fight. Keep 

on doing what you’re doing for our next generation — our 

grandchildren, my grandchildren, yours. Keep up the fight. 

 

And Ryan, just want to acknowledge you as well for the good 

work you’re doing. Continue to fight in your area, and I know 

the Métis people are in good hands when we have leaders like 

you fighting for us. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce Mr. Kyle Addison. 

He’s the president of the student union over at the University of 

Regina. Kyle has been a tireless worker on behalf of students, a 

vocal advocate of ensuring that their voice has been heard. And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, he’s helped to ensure that we have a 

very robust post-secondary system that focuses on excellence. 

I’d like to thank Kyle for his service and ask all members of 

this Assembly to join me in welcoming him to his Assembly. 

 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7035 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Minister 

Responsible for the Public Service Commission in welcoming 

all of the public service employees that are participating in the 

parliamentary program. I know that this is a program that’s 

been going on in the province for many, many years, and 

literally thousands of public employees have had the 

opportunity to come to the legislature and see how this place 

works. I want to welcome these public servants to the 

legislature, and I’d ask all members to join me once again in 

welcoming these fine public servants. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I wouldn’t want the 

opportunity to pass for the chance to introduce to you and 

through you someone who has already been referenced in the 

introductions, Russ Marchuk who is the nominated 

Saskatchewan Party candidate in Regina Douglas Park, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’re very pleased that he has, that he is willing to fly the 

standard for the Saskatchewan Party in that constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re looking forward to the day when his proximity 

to the chairs we occupy, as opposed to where he is right now, 

becomes a lot closer, Mr. Speaker, after the next election. We 

welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 

all the, all the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

that have welcomed the Aboriginal students and our Aboriginal 

guests today. I think what’s really important, as one of the few 

Aboriginal members of the Assembly, is to always encourage 

the Aboriginal community to come and see what the Assembly 

is all about. And it’s always a pleasure to see young students as 

young as grade 9 coming to visit our Assembly. And as always, 

in my own language of Cree I would say: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So in translation, I’m really proud that they’re here. And I’m 

happy for them and that there’s a lot of room, and I encourage 

them to keep coming to learn more about the Assembly. So to 

all the students in the gallery and the Métis guests, that this 

home, this House also belongs to the Aboriginal people. 

 

So I’d like them to also join in welcoming all our students and 

Aboriginal guests today. Thank you very much. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Kyle Addison to the Assembly. 

Service as an elected official at any order of government or in 

an organization representing individuals is a good thing, and I 

do thank him for his service and would like to join with the 

minister in welcoming him here today. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions again on behalf of citizens in Saskatchewan who are 

asking support of maintaining quality health care services. The 

undersigned citizens are wanting the government to be aware: 

 

That they ought to recognize the need for timely access to 

comprehensive and quality health care services for all 

communities within the province, including Wakaw and 

surrounding area; 

 

And that the disruption of emergency services and 

in-patient services at Wakaw hospital will not serve the 

needs of the residents in this community and surrounding 

area; 

 

And that the cuts in access to timely and accurate 

diagnostic and laboratory tests within this community of 

Wakaw and surrounding area will not serve the needs of 

the residents; 

 

And that the government realize that the utilization and 

value of the full range of professional skills offered by 

health care providers is promoted through the address of 

critical retention or recruitment issues and by ensuring 

safe staffing levels, and that such promotion can only be 

achieved through the commitment of adequate public 

funding to publicly administer publicly accessible health 

care. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to commit to maintain quality 

health care services through the commitment of necessary 

funding to address critical retention and recruitment 

issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

There’s over 100 signatures on this one today, Mr. Speaker, 

from Regina, Saskatoon, La Ronge, Maple Creek, Battleford, 

Cochin, Rouleau, Prince Albert, Langham, Carnduff, 

Lampman, and Swift Current. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And it’s about the need for 

a new school. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 



7036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition to protect tenants from unreasonable rent 

increases through rental control. Since 2007 far too many 

tenants have suffered from monthly rent increases for hundreds 

of dollars with average rent increases of over 35 per cent in 

Saskatoon and Regina. The majority of Canadians now live in 

provinces with rent control guidelines including Manitoba, 

British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island. 

Rent control in Winnipeg generated more housing units from 

2007 through 2009 than Regina and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, 

the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to immediately address the 

deepening housing crisis in Saskatchewan, evidenced by 

the soaring unaffordable rent increases in rent which have 

placed the cost of shelter out of reach for far too many 

Saskatchewan residents, and make known that 

Saskatchewan’s housing crisis has worsened by the 

extremely low vacancy rates in Saskatchewan’s urban 

centres which has resulted in dramatically reduced 

options for renters; 

 

And in so doing, bring to the government’s attention that 

the leave it to the market approach has proven to fail 

Saskatchewan renters, and now at this present time 

Saskatchewan renters need protection from the 

government to prevent further large rent increases; 

 

And accordingly, Saskatchewan people would be best 

protected by enacting rent control without delay to ensure 

that the basic human need of shelter is put within reach of 

Saskatchewan’s renters, thereby making Saskatchewan 

once again an affordable place to live, work, and raise a 

family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

my place today to present a petition in support of the 

elimination of poverty in Saskatchewan. The petitioners note 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We respectfully request the government of Saskatchewan 

act as quickly as possible to develop an effective and 

sustainable poverty elimination strategy for the benefit of 

all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the residents of the city 

of North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today 

to present petitions signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effects that Bill 160 would 

have on human rights law in the province if enacted. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultations 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Shaunavon and 

Frontier, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions from residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude to the record that 

includes the tabling of deficits and increasing of debt at times of 

record highs of revenues, Mr. Speaker. This record includes 

increasing debt for the past three years, a record of $1.3 billion 

of total debt being added to our books. This year alone, at a 

time of unprecedented highs in revenues, we see $548 million 

of debt being added to our books. Of course this comes at a 

consequence for Saskatchewan people, both now and well into 

the future. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7037 

Kamsack, Veregin, Prince Albert, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

pleased to present a petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the provincial government to recognize that the 

Northern Trappers Association maintains the traditional 

value of hunting and trapping and also brings in millions 

of dollars to the provincial economy every year from the 

proceeds of fur harvesting combined with the economic 

spinoffs to the tourism sector and to the local economy; 

and in doing so, Mr. Speaker, to cause this government to 

stop turning their back to the northern trappers, but to all 

the people who live and work in northern Saskatchewan; 

and in doing so, Mr. Speaker, to cause the provincial 

government to immediately reinstate the funding to the 

Saskatchewan Northern Trappers Association. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many, many people signed this petition. The 

people who have signed the petition here are from Sandy Bay. 

They’re from La Ronge. They’re from Buffalo Narrows. 

They’re from Prince Albert. They’re from Turnor Lake, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re from all throughout the land, and I’m pleased 

to present this petition. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Nurses Practising in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

number of nurses practising in Saskatchewan has reached a new 

record, topping 10,000 for the first time. A 6.4 per cent jump in 

2009 was followed by a 3.8 per cent increase in 2010. This 

brings the total number of nurses working and assisting the sick 

and elderly in our province to 10,288. This is an increase of 

nearly 1,000 during the last two-year period: 

 

“It’s certainly positive,” said Shirley McKay, registrar 

and director of the regulatory services for the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association (SRNA), 

which released the numbers in its 2010 annual report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s because of initiatives brought forward in the 

last four years that we are seeing significant increases in nurses 

practising in our province: 

 

An increase in the number of university nursing seats, 

taking effect this fall, is specifically targeted at filling 

future gaps, said Lorna Butler, dean of the college of 

nursing at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government has made a promise to the 

people of Saskatchewan to hire 800 nurses in four years, and 

we have kept and succeeded that number, Mr. Speaker. I will 

say that it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that a former associate 

minister of Health and nurses’ union president was unable to 

increase the number of nurses in the province during the tenure 

of her government. Mr. Speaker, we are not afraid to make 

promises or goals. Our government’s fulfillment of its promises 

and goals is moving Saskatchewan forward. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Senior Civil Servant Retires 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to say a few 

words of congratulations on the retirement of a senior civil 

servant who has through his long career done a lot to benefit the 

province of Saskatchewan, the business people and families 

right across the province. Of course I’m speaking about Tim 

Marshall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Marshall first came to Saskatchewan in 1986 and arriving 

from Zambia where he was involved in many export business 

concerns. Born in England, Tim Marshall is nonetheless a 

citizen of the world, a fact he could explain to you in German, 

English, Danish, Russian, Portuguese, or any number of 

African languages. 

 

In an economy as export-driven as Saskatchewan’s, Tim 

Marshall’s skills at negotiation and global networking, getting 

contracts put together, ensured that the goods produced in 

Saskatchewan by businesses found markets overseas to ensure 

the success and economic growth of the province. 

 

Tim Marshall was recognized at his retirement party last 

evening with friends, family, co-workers from Saskatchewan 

Trade and Export Partnership. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like 

to ask the Assembly to join with me in thanking Tim and his 

family for decades of work on behalf of the men, women, and 

children, families of Saskatchewan. And we wish the very best 

to him as he takes the next steps in the great adventure of life. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Davidson Cyclones Win Provincial D Championship 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to talk about a championship hockey team from 

Davidson. The Cyclones from Davidson recently defeated the 

Gull Lake Greyhounds for the right to be crowned senior 

provincial D champions for a second year in a row. 

 

The Davidson Cyclones have played well this past winter, but 

knew that the final game against the Gull Lake Greyhounds 

would be tough. Game one in Davidson saw the Cyclones 

defeat the Greyhounds 10 to 1 in front of a very packed rink. 

Many of these same fans travelled down to Gull Lake to cheer 

on their team to victory. The second game of the three-game set 

was played Saturday, March 26th in Gull Lake with the 

Cyclones taking it 4-2 in the end. Goal scorers in the Cyclones 

on this night included Derek Allan, Josh Sim, Jason Schneider, 

and Brent Leedahl. 

 

In the provincials this year, the Davidson Cyclones had to 

defeat teams from Kenaston, Kelvington, Lucky 



7038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

Lake-Dinsmore to get to Gull Lake and win the 2011 provincial 

senior D championship. While I’m on my feet I also want to 

remind the member from Cypress Hills about our little wager 

for a steak supper on the final game. 

 

The Davidson Cyclones have a great success this year with a 

solid hockey team guided so well by local coach Jason Shaw, 

general manager Rob Allan, and trainer Tim Bruch. 

 

I would like to offer the whole team my warmest 

congratulations and ask that the members join me in offering 

them our best wishes today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

The Battlefords Junior Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform all 

members of the legislature today that The Battlefords 2010 

Junior Citizen of the Year is Taryn Jackson, a student at the 

North Battleford Comprehensive High School. 

 

Taryn Jackson has been a member of the yearbook club, the 

book club, the debate club, the drama club, the jazz band, the 

concert band, the school choir, and the student representative 

council. Outside of school, she is a member of the North 

Battleford City Kinsmen Band; the Saskatoon Youth Orchestra, 

both youth and adult choirs. She has been a volunteer at Zion 

Lutheran Church, the Western Development Museum, 

Telemiracle, Red Cross, and the Canadian Cancer Society. She 

has filled Christmas shoeboxes, collected food for the Food 

Bank, and assisted young musicians in developing their talent. 

She endeared herself to one of her teachers, her school, and her 

community last year by cutting her hair in support of cancer 

fundraising efforts. 

 

And while doing all this, Taryn Jackson maintained a 94.7 per 

cent grade average in school last year. She has three years on 

the principal’s honour roll, the Saskatchewan Elocution and 

Debate Association’s Provincial Excellence Award, and she is a 

University of Saskatchewan Greystone scholar. 

 

The high school students’ services councillor said, “She is a 

very committed, dedicated youth who is passionate about the 

things she does and she has a social awareness mature beyond 

her years.” 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating Taryn Jackson, 

The Battlefords 2010 Junior Citizen of the Year. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Spectra Place Fundraiser in Estevan 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs and I 

attended a fundraiser for Spectra Place event centre in Estevan. 

Mr. Speaker, 770 people came out to celebrate the near 

completion of their new facility. Mr. Speaker, just over 

$300,000 was the net amount raised at this event. This brings 

the $23 million facility within almost $2 million of being fully 

funded. 

 

Our government kicked in $8 million towards this much-needed 

project, and the feds contributed as well. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

lion’s share of the funding came from my community of 

Estevan as well as other local donors. 

 

Guest speakers were Brian Burke, general manager of the 

Toronto Maple Leafs, and Gene Makowsky and Darian Durant 

of the Riders. A 2011 Ford truck generously donated by 

Senchuk Ford of Estevan was one of the many items auctioned 

off. 

 

This event was also an opportunity to celebrate the area’s 

athletic talent. Male Athlete of the Year went to Michael 

Bittman. Female Athlete of the Year went to Chelsea Peterson. 

Young Official of the Year was Dylan Lay, and the Volunteer 

Coach of the Year was Marco Ricci. Mr. Speaker, it was a 

wonderful evening and a great opportunity to celebrate our 

community. I want to thank all organizers and participants, and 

I look forward to the grand opening in April. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Vote for The Sheepdogs 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Music fans in our province are celebrating as 

our favourite Saskatoon indie rock ’n’ roll revival band, The 

Sheepdogs, tours North America to rave reviews and a growing 

fan base. Recently they’ve impressed fans in Austin, Texas at 

the South By Southwest festival. They were loved in 

performances at the Western Canadian Music Awards. They 

performed to enthusiastic audiences in Montreal and at the 

JunoFest in Toronto. 

 

The band has three independently full-length albums, the latest 

being Learn & Burn, which reached no. 21 on Earshot’s 

national monthly top 200 charts. 

 

Currently The Sheepdogs are one of eight finalists in a contest 

of new musicians competing for a place on the cover of the 

Rolling Stone, Mr. Speaker. Members of the band are: Ewan 

Currie, vocals and guitar; Leot Hanson, guitar; Ryan Gullen, 

bass; and Sam Corbett, drums. Band members write songs, 

rehearse, and record in their basement studio at the Corbett 

family home on 10th Street in Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Sheepdogs have recently travelled to New 

York to do photos, video, and recording for the Rolling Stone 

competition. The guys are going to be back in Saskatchewan 

tomorrow. I would ask every member of the legislature to vote 

for The Sheepdogs. This is one election, this is one election that 

we can all agree upon. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Royalty Policies 

 

Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

hasn’t taken long for NDP [New Democratic Party] members to 

distance themselves from their own leader’s reckless policies. 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7039 

Yesterday the member for Regina Dewdney said in his budget 

speech, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, so those who say that an NDP government 

would change the natural gas and oil royalty structure in 

Saskatchewan are absolutely wrong. And our leader does 

not say that. He does not say that. In fact . . . has 

emphatically said that oil and natural gas would not be 

changed. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in a transcript of an interview with the 

Leader of the NDP on CKRM on December 13th, 2010, the 

Leader of the NDP said, and I quote, “If I become the Premier 

in November 2011, I would institute a review of all the 

royalties in the province with industry, whether it’s potash, 

uranium, oil, or gas.” 

 

There you go, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the member for 

Dewdney stood in this House and denied that the Leader of the 

NDP ever called for a review of oil royalties when the fact is, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what he’s calling for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the NDP MLAs are beginning to realize that 

their current leader and his policies are a disaster. They will kill 

investment, kill jobs, and drag Saskatchewan back into a 

have-not status. Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we are 

committed to moving Saskatchewan forward. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Emergency Medical Services 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, earlier in the week, the 

Saskatoon Ambulance Employee Association issued a press 

release. And in that press release they said the following, and I 

quote: 

 

Saskatoon ambulance employees are alarmed that the 

provincial government chooses to ignore the needs of the 

province’s land ambulance services and paramedics in the 

recent provincial budget despite warnings that there are 

urgent public safety risks that need to be addressed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that at the time the minister 

refused to comment on the issue of the lack of funding for 

ambulances and paramedics and the fact that families’ lives, 

members of families’ lives, are put at risk because of this lack 

of funding, can he comment today why there’s nothing in the 

budget to deal with this issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to take this opportunity on behalf of the 

provincial government to thank EMS [emergency medical 

services] workers throughout this province that work 24 hours a 

day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year, Mr. Speaker, in some 

extremely difficult conditions, be it weather or be it extremely 

stressful conditions, Mr. Speaker, quite often early on the scene 

of an accident, Mr. Speaker, and the stress that that must cause 

for many of those workers. So on behalf of the government I 

want to thank them specifically for the work that they do. 

Whether they work for a private delivery company or whether 

they work within the public system, Mr. Speaker, they do great 

work. 

 

I will say that, Mr. Speaker, that this year’s budget shows a 

significant increase to health regions, a $260 million increase in 

health, but to the health regions alone an increase of 250 

million, 60 million overall, 250 just for health regions, Mr. 

Speaker. These services, be it private or public, are employed 

through the health regions. They do the negotiating, Mr. 

Speaker. They make sure the proper services are provided and, 

Mr. Speaker, I think they do a very good job. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there is little doubt that the 

EMS employees and the workers do a great job. And a number 

of them have come to the Assembly today. The reason they 

came is because they couldn’t get any answers from the 

minister after he issued his press release on Monday. So they 

came here today to see whether or not the minister would 

answer issues like during the debate around the establishment 

of better rules, he issued a press release in 2008 in which he 

said: 

 

“Saskatchewan people repeatedly tell me that emergency 

medical services need to be more effective, accessible 

and fair,” McMorris said. “This review gives us an 

opportunity to be proactive in this area and make positive 

changes that will benefit patients, families, health 

professionals and communities across the province.” 

 

From that report there were 19 recommendations. And what the 

medical profession are telling us and people across the province 

are telling us is that none of the 19 recommendations have been 

implemented. Can the minister tell us why in the world he fails 

to implement the recommendations that his own study tells us 

we need to make the services of ambulance work in this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, you know, 

there are private delivery services, publicly funded services 

through health regions, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve heard from the 

opposition on many cases that, many occasions that they’re not 

in favour of any private delivery of services, Mr. Speaker. I 

would think that with that case in mind, Mr. Speaker, had they 

ever become government in the future, that many of these 

private services would be completely wiped out. That will not 

be the case under our government. 

 

One of the recommendations, Mr. Speaker, was to look at the 

way we deliver services, emergency medical services. A 

committee has been struck to redesign that, Mr. Speaker. That 

committee will be meeting in the very near future to look at 

how we can better utilize all the services that we have, Mr. 

Speaker, integrated throughout the whole province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has had the 



7040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

result and recommendations of the study for two years, none of 

which have been implemented. And the question to the minister 

. . . In regards to timing, we now have a situation, because of 

his lack of implementation of the recommendations, that in 

Saskatoon for 40 minutes of every day there is no ambulance 

service in the city of Saskatoon and surrounding area — for 40 

minutes of every day. And that’s true across the province. 

 

Can the minister tell us how in the world families are supposed 

to take care of the sick, if there’s a car accident, in cases of 

emergency, when for 40 minutes every day of the year there’s 

no ambulance service in the city of Saskatoon? How’s that 

supposed to work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, 

I’ve mentioned many times in this House, and I’ll mention it 

one more time to the opposition members — should be familiar 

with this — but the Saskatoon Health Region, for example, in 

Saskatoon is responsible for EMS services throughout the 

health region, Mr. Speaker, as is Regina Qu’Appelle or any of 

the other health regions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done . . . Over the last number of years 

under our government, Mr. Speaker, in ’06-07, Mr. Speaker, the 

budget for EMS in this province was $43 million. Mr. Speaker, 

in ’09-10 the budget, Mr. Speaker, for EMS services was 54.6, 

Mr. Speaker, and continuing to increase. We are funding health 

regions to supply EMS services. The level of services those 

regions decide on, Mr. Speaker, is their responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker, the same as it was under the former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if they’re asking us to run the EMS 

service out of the Ministry of Health. That would not be 

appropriate. It didn’t happen under their government, and it 

won’t happen under ours. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that 

the minister is responsible for health services in the province, 

including ambulances. It may come as a surprise to him, but 

families in this province expect the minister and the Premier to 

be responsible for medicare, which includes the services 

surrounding the delivery of ambulance services. 

 

In light of the fact that we have a wait of too long, too many 

minutes, too many hours in some cases, waiting for 

ambulances, and in the city of Saskatoon, 40 minutes a day 

families go without service . . . And the minister shakes his 

head and members opposite laugh about it. This is no laughing 

matter. We need service in the province, and the people of the 

province deserve better than waiting 40 minutes with no service 

every day in this province. When will the minister properly 

fund ambulances so families don’t have to have that wait? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have 

increased the budget for health regions, Mr. Speaker, in this 

provincial budget by, on the health region side, $250 million 

that will go to covering off many of the issues that health 

regions face. Whether it’s wages, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s 

increased volumes, that $250 million, a much bigger increase 

than ever seen under an NDP government, will go to dealing 

with that, Mr. Speaker. But I find it absolutely amazing. I really 

cannot understand where the opposition is coming from. Today 

they’re pushing and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, today they are pushing 

for more money going into private delivery of health care. Mr. 

Speaker, when we talk about reducing surgical wait times, 

they’re absolutely against it. A little bit earlier, they were fully 

in favour of private delivery of chiropractic service. They 

wanted more money to go into that, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

perfectly fine. But if we have private money going into a CT 

[computerized tomography] scan, that’s not all right, Mr. 

Speaker. If it’s privatization under their watch, it’s perfectly 

fine, Mr. Speaker. When we expand it under ours, the sky is 

blowing up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Contract Negotiations with Teachers 

and Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want the 

provincial government to deliver excellence in our education 

system. But this government has been undermining our 

education system by not providing a stable funding formula to 

school boards and by firing educational assistants. Now we 

have learned that negotiations have broken down with the 

province’s teachers. To the minister: why is the Sask Party 

government failing to deliver a deal that is truly fair, 

reasonable, and competitive for our province’s teachers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

government truly does value teachers within our province and 

we have to remember, we all recognize, that negotiations are a 

process, not an event. We know that the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation will be meeting with their local 

representatives this weekend, Mr. Speaker, and we encourage 

both sides to return to the bargaining table. What we will not 

do, Mr. Speaker, is have the negotiations here on the floor of 

the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — What the government has put on the table is 

obviously not fair, not reasonable, and not competitive. That’s 

why the teachers had to walk away from negotiations. Here’s 

what one teacher wrote as she asked for more respect from this 

government: “I hope this letter convinces you that teachers 

deserve to be paid equivalently to other professions. We are as 

dedicated, educated, and caring as police officers and nurses.” 

Another quote: “When it comes to contracts and what we get 

paid, I feel we are undervalued and not respected.” 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7041 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party government 

disrespecting teachers by refusing to make an offer that is 

actually fair, actually reasonable, and actually competitive? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to say again that we encourage both sides to return to the 

bargaining table. We will not conduct the negotiations here on 

the floor of the Assembly. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a problem with 

responsibility with members opposite. We have a Minister of 

Advanced Education that tells us he’s not responsible for his 

merger mess. We have a Health minister telling us that he’s not 

responsible for EMS shortfalls in the province. We have an 

Education minister telling us that she’s not responsible for 

funding education in this province properly. 

 

I don’t know how this minister can stand in her place and claim 

that the offer the government made is fair, reasonable, and 

competitive when the teachers viewed it as so insulting that 

they walked away from negotiations. Here’s another quote from 

a teacher: 

 

I know that the extra work I put into creating a better 

learning program will in turn help create a better society, 

but I feel that I am the only one who truly recognizes the 

extra effort I put into my career in order to meet the needs 

of students. There are a tremendous amount of 

expectations on teachers, and it would be wonderful if 

those expectations were accurately acknowledged and 

properly valued by the government. 

 

Again to the minister: what does she have to say to this teacher? 

When will the government properly value the work of teachers 

and give them a fair deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

the member opposite is trying to spin that we don’t take 

responsibility but, Mr. Speaker, it’s just spin. We took 

responsibility for education. That’s why we’ve increased the 

money that goes to school divisions year over year over year. 

Mr. Speaker, we are now over 16 per cent increases to the 

school divisions within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made unprecedented investment into 

infrastructure within this province, Mr. Speaker. We have now, 

in one term, we have invested $422 million into the 

infrastructure within our school system in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. We take responsibility for child care spaces and we’ve 

increased those by over 35 per cent now, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ve taken responsibility for early childhood learning as we 

expand pre-K spaces year over year over year. This is a file 

that’s been sadly neglected under the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve taken responsibility and we’ve increased funding in each 

and every area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand and take 

responsibility for breaking a promise to provide a stable 

funding formula to school boards? Mr. Speaker, will the 

minister stand and take responsibility for reducing the number 

of educational assistants in our province? Mr. Speaker, will the 

minister stand and take responsibility for not treating teachers 

with respect? 

 

Another teacher goes on to say, “I hope this letter confirms that 

we deserve to be recognized and valued for the demands we 

meet and the commitment we exercise by making sure we offer 

a quality education to the youth of tomorrow.” 

 

And another one: “I definitely do not feel that I’m adequately 

compensated for the work that I do, but I am a confident teacher 

and I’m committed to my profession despite the setback.” 

 

To the minister: what does she have to say to these teachers? 

And why is she undervaluing their work? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have said 

at the onset and I’ll say it again, we do value the work that 

teachers do, and they do a great job. I myself have had nothing 

but fabulous teachers for my own three daughters, one of . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible] . . . extra, extra help. But, Mr. Speaker, the promise 

we made, just to remind the member opposite, the promise we 

made was to reduce the dependency on property tax in this 

province, and we kept the promise in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

We have dramatically decreased the dependency on property to 

fund education in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the funding formula that we’re still using is using 

the formula that was used under the NDP. If they didn’t like it, 

then why didn’t they change it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

References to Ministry of Justice 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Justice, when asked for the third time about matters referred to 

Justice by the Minister of Advanced Education, matters which 

have been raised in the Assembly for weeks, the minister finally 

responded by saying essentially, how would I know? I’m only 

the minister. 



7042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

To the minister: is this the government’s definition of 

ministerial responsibility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Justice 

provides legal services, as I indicated earlier, for all areas of 

government. We provide competent, professional service. 

Matters are referred routinely from officials in other ministries. 

They’re referred across. They do not go through the minister’s 

hands of either the ministry that creates the request nor do they 

go through mine unless there’s a compelling reason that they 

should or must, Mr. Speaker. It is like any other law firm. And 

I’m very pleased with the competence and professionalism of 

the lawyers that work in my ministry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s my view and it was 

my view when I sat over there that questions raised in the 

Assembly are a compelling reason for the minister to be 

briefed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a letter to the editor published in The 

StarPhoenix today, Klaus Gruber, former executive director of 

Family Service Saskatoon said, and I quote: 

 

It has been difficult to get the attention of the provincial 

government regarding the issue of homelessness. 

 

It appears that advocates have been going about things 

the wrong way. They should have bought every homeless 

person a membership in the Enterprise Club. 

 

According to Brad Wall, that “would ensure that their 

comments and ideas will be heard.” 

 

To the minister: in light of the continuing concerns 

Saskatchewan people have, will the minister co-operate with 

the Chief Electoral Officer in a review of donations made under 

the banner of the Enterprise Club of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered this 

question in the House earlier. I had indicated that there is a 

professional, Graham Pearson, that’s appointed to look after the 

affairs of one of the colleges. The review is under way. And I 

indicated as well that, as recently as a day or two ago, 

information and requests for information were still going back 

and forth. It’s not my intention to interfere with that process. 

My officials have indicated that if there is something untoward 

or something comes up that would warrant further 

investigation, they will refer to the appropriate police agency. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also indicated, and I want to reiterate again 

today, if there is something that involves members of this 

government or people that are close to this government, my 

officials will immediately refer the matter out of province. 

Nothing has arisen like that, but that is what will happen with 

this government. That is what should’ve happened with that 

government. I suspect that it did when they were in office and, 

Mr. Speaker, that is the tradition that has taken place, a good 

protocol, and we will continue to have that protocol in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister may want to 

review the record, and I appreciate that it was members on both 

sides of the House that were carrying on during my question 

and he may have not heard it. 

 

But my third question: Mr. Speaker, last Thursday when asked 

about the Glen Kobussen donation to the Sask Party under the 

banner of the Enterprise Club, the Minister of Energy and 

Resources said, “. . . there was a cheque cut in September for a 

2010 membership donation which will be fully disclosed in our 

2010 annual return as in the normal course of business.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Monday when asked by the media, the 

Minister of Justice said the donation wouldn’t show up on the 

Sask Party returns, and only a portion of it ever would have, but 

because of a payment to the St. Peter’s College, none of it 

would show up on the returns. 

 

Given the confusion between Enterprise Club members on the 

front bench, will the Minister of Justice co-operate with the 

Chief Electoral Officer in doing a complete review of donations 

to the Sask Party under the banner of the Enterprise Club? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a cheque was received 

from Mr. Kobussen in September of 2009 for a membership in 

the Enterprise Club for the year 2010. As I’ve indicated earlier, 

Mr. Speaker, there is a portion of that membership that is 

eligible for a contribution receipt. That amount is determined 

dependent on what the costs are for meals, etc., or other things 

that take place during that year. A receipt is issued in early 

2011 for that portion of that donation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the funds were returned . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres will allow the minister to complete his response. I 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in early 2011 when the 

matter was raised, the funds were returned. Mr. Speaker, I can 

advise as well . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think the minister was trying 

to respond and provide the answer. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve advised the members 

opposite, I’ve advised the media that when it turned out that the 

funds were actually paid by a third party, the funds were 

returned. A letter was sent to Mr. Kobussen and to Canada 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7043 

Revenue Agency indicating that they cannot and ought not rely 

on the tax receipt that was issued. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is nothing untoward or irregular on that. We 

have returned the donation that was made, Mr. Speaker, and 

indicated to Canada Revenue Agency that it ought not be relied 

upon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Payments Regarding Parkridge Nursing Home 

 

Ms Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, my question is to 

the Minister of Government Services. In June 1985, the Grant 

Devine government handed out quite a deal to Wolfe Group 

Investments to lease and purchase the Parkridge nursing home 

in Saskatoon. For the last 25 years, the province of 

Saskatchewan has made yearly payments to Wolfe Group. Can 

the minister tell us how much the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

have paid in lease fees to this landlord? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

thank the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite should know and would know from her time 

in office and government, lease costs are not made public. The 

practice of keeping lease costs as confidential is long-standing. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Parkridge deal was a 

sweet deal, giving a large amount of money each year to Wolfe 

Group to lease a facility the Saskatoon Health Region has 

operated. We asked for information on this deal through not one 

but two written questions but this minister refused, choosing to 

use legislative procedure to hide information the public has a 

right to know. So to the minister: what is the total amount of 

money the people of Saskatchewan have paid Wolfe Group 

Investments to lease the Parkridge nursing home? Or is she 

going to continue to hide the answers from the public? Is this 

accountability and transparency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much. And I’d like to again 

thank the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, the 

Ministry of Government Services’s position regarding the 

disclosure of lease information is based upon avoiding 

disclosure to third party of economic information that would be 

harmful to the firms that the ministry does business with. 

Consistent with the intent of the freedom of information 

legislation is to protect third party and support of private sector 

parties to the minister’s policy. This is the same policy that the 

previous government upheld. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

Ms. Atkinson: — It’s been 25 years since the deal was made. 

That’s a long time for this company to profit but it now appears 

that Wolfe Group Investments has received one last payout. 

Quorex’s own website says the provincial government now 

owns the facility. So to the Minister of Government Services: 

when did the government buy the Parkridge nursing home and 

how much did it pay for it? And is it true that we have paid over 

$30 million in lease fees and that we paid $5.1 million to buy 

the facility and we’re going to pay $19.5 million worth of 

repairs and remediation? At the end of the day, that’s $55 

million. Is that true? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much. It’s interesting that 

the member would pose that question since they were the ones 

that in fact, for the majority of that time, were responsible for 

the payments for that. This facility provides incredibly well . . . 

rather provides services for long-term care patients. Because of 

that, the people in the city of Saskatoon do appreciate this 

facility. 

 

As I said earlier, this is a policy that was put forward by the 

previous government that we would never, they would never 

reveal what is being paid in leasehold payments because it does 

affect the marketplace. So because of that, and with 

Government Services being a substantial leaser within the 

province, we would never want to interfere with the 

marketplace. Thank you very much. 

 

[14:30] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question 970. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 970 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answer to 

question 971. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 971 is ordered. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 



7044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to rise in the House to provide a response to the 

Speech from the Throne with regard to the budget speech, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have heard the budget speech, and I 

want to start off by saying I was exceptionally impressed by the 

member from Canora-Pelly in his new role as Minister of 

Finance. And I want to tell the members that I will be 

supporting the main motion and certainly not voting in favour 

of the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, usually members at this time use this opportunity 

to briefly pay some respects and some acknowledgements 

around their personal life and around their constituency. Mr. 

Speaker, my constituency of Saskatoon Southeast continues to 

see very rapid growth in the areas of Rosewood and 

Stonebridge. We’re pleased to see this. It’s a sign of the 

economic prosperity and growth in our province. 

 

There is under way at the present time, the expansion for the 

new south bridge going across, and I would like to point out, 

Mr. Speaker, the province provided some ninety-eight and a 

half million dollars for that. And I know the constituents in my 

constituency are enduring some road construction and at times 

where the freeway goes down to single lane and the speed limit 

has been reduced to some 60 kilometres an hour during this 

period of time. We realize that this is one of the prices that we 

pay for progress. And we’ll be pleased a year from now when 

the construction is finished. The construction work is well 

under way and is under budget, we’re pleased to indicate as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize some of the people that 

have worked and provided support. In my constituency office I 

have Gordon Rutten, and he is assisted by a university student, 

Laine Goertz, who many of the members will know about 

because she has spent some time working in the legislature. 

 

In this building I have got some very good staff. Jean Watts and 

Michelle Chyz are the admin assistants. I have a 

communications person, Judy Langford, and two other MAs 

[ministerial assistant], Lara Zaluski and Matthew Glover. My 

chief of staff, Denise Batters, has worked in the ministry since 

I’ve been there, a very competent, professional individual and 

has once again worked to put on a golf tournament, the David 

Batters Memorial Tournament, and raised $20,000 this year for 

mental health. I’m very proud of the work that she does and 

pleased to see that that’s happening. 

 

I also would like to recognize Deputy Minister of Justice 

Gerald Tegart and the people that work at the Ministry of 

Justice, and Deputy Minister of Labour Relations and 

Workplace Safety Mike Carr, and all of the employees that 

work in both ministries as well as the Workers’ Compensation 

Board. As members of the legislature, we are fortunate to have 

a skilled and professional public service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my personal life, I would like to recognize and 

thank my mother-in-law for the very good baking and the butter 

tarts — my mother-in-law, Mildred Simpson, from Rosetown. I 

was out last week. I think sometimes she dreams up excuses 

with her computer that make me travel out there to fix it and get 

it back on track. But it is always worth it for the butter tarts. 

 

My own mother continues to live in Saskatoon Nutana. I am 

trying to persuade her to move into my own constituency 

because it may be one of the votes that I could count on 

absolutely, although she does frequently remind me of the visits 

of the member for Saskatoon Nutana, and is an avid watcher of 

question period and offers significant critiques and criticisms of 

both sides of the House. And I’m well appreciative of my 

mother who is nearly 90 years old. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to as well recognize and thank my 

wife, Sandy, for her continuing support. She works at 

Robertson Stromberg Pedersen. We’ve been together for nearly 

25 years and, Mr. Speaker, she’s a wonderful person. She was 

raised in an all-girl family, and she has never quite got over the 

fact that when you live with men things are called something 

different. Whenever I travel, she asks me whether I’ve got my 

makeup bag, and in spite of the last 15 or 20 years I’ve 

corrected her and referred to it as a shaving kit, she still 

continues to refer to it as a makeup bag. She asks me whether I 

have enough blouses, and I tell her that they’re shirts. And I 

will not tell you, Mr. Speaker, what she refers to underwear as. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to just recognize and thank all of the 

people that work in this building: the Pages, the legislative 

staff, and the people that work hard to keep the building 

looking very pristine and very polished. When you have a 

100-year-old building there are certainly lots of challenges and 

we are very well served by the people that are here. 

 

I would like to commend and thank the very good staff that 

work at the Ministry of Labour and Workplace Safety. We 

continue to have, tragically, Mr. Speaker, the second worst 

record in Canada for workplace injuries, even though in the last 

two years we have seen a 37 per cent reduction and we’re 

continuing to see a drop. All provinces are seeing a drop, so 

where we stand with regard to the other provinces has not 

improved, although our accident rate continues to decline. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that even one injury is 

one injury too many. So that continues to be of significant 

concern, not just to myself but should be a significant concern 

to all of the members. And I think all members in the Assembly 

would want to thank the good work that is being done at OH & 

S [occupational health and safety] and at Workers’ 

Compensation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about this budget. It 

is a budget that is balanced. It is fair. It will help us build a 

strong Saskatchewan for the future. We are investing in health, 

in social services, and in education. This budget increases 

spending on health care by 6.2 per cent, for a total of $4.46 

billion. Our social services budget is increasing by some 8 per 

cent. Spending on education is up over 9 per cent, and for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration, an 

increase of 3.2 per cent. 

 

We are, Mr. Speaker, investing in highways and infrastructure: 

$285 million for repaving and capital infrastructure projects; 

$129 million, an increase of about $1.9 million, to continue 

restoration and maintenance work on road and bridge 

infrastructure; $25 million to maintain funding for the winter 

maintenance programs. I would like to mention in particular, 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7045 

Mr. Speaker, the twinning of Highway 11 between Saskatoon 

and Prince Albert, a stretch of highway that is heavily used by 

people in my constituency going north to Prince Albert and to 

the lakes north of Saskatchewan. It is part of Saskatoon’s 

gateway to the North. Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier the 

work continues on the Circle Drive project in Saskatoon. I 

would like to mention again the contribution of our province of 

ninety-eight and a half million dollars. 

 

We are investing in health care: $250 million increase to 

regional health authority base funding; $2.8 billion total base 

funding for compensation, drugs, and medical supplies and 

operating costs; a $12 million increase for the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency, a total funding for the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency of $121.9 million. This will include funding for new 

patient appointments, chemotherapy treatments, mammograms, 

a doubling of the bone marrow transplants by providing this 

procedure to patients who previously had to travel either out of 

province or out of country, additional colorectal cancer 

screening. Ten point nine million dollars to increase patient 

volumes for cardiac care, diagnostic imaging, and chronic 

kidney disease; $2 million to revitalize the kidney transplant 

program. And we have developed a partnership with the Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society or STARS. 

 

We will invest $5 million for a new emergency helicopter air 

ambulance service to better meet the needs of critically injured 

patients in rural and remote Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there 

will be funding of $937 million which will allow Government 

Services to hire 15 full-time equivalents over two years to bring 

air ambulance services in line with industry standards, which 

will include two pilot crews per airplane. This is in addition to 

our existing support for the children’s hospital to be built in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, most members will be aware of the 

$200 million investment by the province in that particular 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are as well investing extensively in education: 

$36.4 million for a 2.3 per cent increase in school operating 

funding, $2 million for English as an additional language to 

accommodate the increased level of immigration to the 

province, $2.9 million to support greater education success of 

Aboriginal students, $1.4 million for First Nations and Métis 

initiatives fund, $1 million for a high school completions fund, 

and half a million dollars for individual achievement grants to 

support greater educational success of Aboriginal students; $1 

million for enhanced intensive support funding for students 

with disabilities and learning difficulties; $2.1 to develop 500 

new child care spaces in 2011-12. This will increase licensed 

spaces by 4.1 per cent to a total of 12,700. 

 

Four million dollars to support the development of 500 new 

child care spaces of which some will be designated to 

post-secondary institutions; $2.6 million to develop an 

additional 40 pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs, bringing the 

total number of programs to 270, and provide new spaces for up 

to 640 three- and four-year old children targeted to high-needs 

areas; $6.1 million for planning of nine new high school 

projects in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, things that I’m particularly proud of, we are 

investing in a safer Saskatchewan: $167.5 million for policing 

services including increases of $7.6 million for the provincial 

policing service; 5.2 million to fully fund and complete the 

government’s commitment to hire 120 police officers over four 

years; and 250,000 to continue the redevelopment of the 

western gang database; $104 million for adult corrections, 

including increases to deal with increasing custody and 

community supervision caseloads; and 500,000 to expand 

anti-gang programming; $114.6 million for provincial disaster 

assistance program; $7 million to begin construction on a 

32-cell addition to Pine Grove Correctional Centre; $1.2 million 

to implement year three of The Road Ahead, an action plan to 

improve safety and security in the province’s adult corrections; 

$13.8 million to begin construction of an addition to the Court 

of Queen’s Bench on Spadina Crescent in Saskatoon. 

 

Five hundred and ninety thousand dollars for a serious violent 

offender response program; 200,000 for the Aboriginal 

courtworker child protection pilot program; $100,000 for a 

grant to Community Legal Assistance Services for Saskatoon 

Inner City Inc.; $50,000 to the Rotary RAP [restorative action 

program] program in Saskatoon, restorative action program in 

high schools; 50,000 for northern transportation initiative to 

help women and children in abusive situations get to shelters. 

These budgets fall and issues fall under the ministries of Justice 

and of Corrections, Policing and Public Safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to these items, we are modernizing the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. Under the 

leadership of Human Rights Commissioner Judge David Arnot, 

the commission has developed a strategic plan to increase 

efficiency, help people to settle complaints without litigation, 

and make broad-based systemic changes to resolve issues that 

affect large numbers of people and increase awareness of 

human rights in the province. One of those changes will be the 

elimination of the Human Rights Tribunal and that the 

complaints will be heard by the Court of Queen’s Bench. Mr. 

Speaker, we are pleased and proud of the progress we are 

making. 

 

Turning back to the budget, we are paying down the provincial 

debt. Mr. Speaker, the budget strengthens the foundation for the 

future by reducing debt by another $325 million. While other 

jurisdictions see debt rising with deficit budgets, 

Saskatchewan’s debt and interest payments are falling. 

Government general public debt at March 31st, 2012, will be 

$3.8 billion, a decrease of $3 billion from March 31, 2008. 

 

We are reducing taxes and supporting municipalities. The basic 

and spousal exemption amounts are increased by 1,000, and the 

exemption amount for dependant children rises by $500 for 

each dependant child. The increase will raise the basic and 

spousal exemption amounts to $14,535 and the dependant child 

amount to $5,514 per child for the current year. Together these 

measures will save taxpayers some $60 million a year. The 

small-business tax rate will be reduced from 4.5 per cent to 2 

per cent beginning July 1, 2011, which will save small 

businesses an estimated $80 million a year. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Education property taxes will be reduced by a total of $55.6 

million in 2011. Savings amount to $31.3 million on farm land, 

18.7 million for residential property, and 5.6 for commercial 

property. 



7046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other commitments that was made was 

the beginning of revenue sharing with municipalities — $216 

million in revenue sharing to meet the government’s 

commitment to fully implement the new municipal 

revenue-sharing agreement, which will equal one full point of 

provincial sales tax, an increase of $49.4 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud and pleased to do these type of 

things. We also in the various ministries to try and save money 

and be efficient and give taxpayers the best and most value for 

their dollars, we have implemented lean initiatives where the 

workers are called upon to try and develop strategies and 

techniques that will make their processes more efficient and 

will give better service to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done some of those things in our court 

services and in the Office of Residential Tenancies. And some 

of those processes are now complete and under way. And they 

have saved turnaround time on filing processes and saved 

aggravation and irritation points on people not being able to 

access a live person when they needed something as simple as 

directions or an address or an indication that they were going to 

be able to . . . [inaudible] . . . a hearing date because of an 

illness or other reason. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the things that we’ve done have had little 

or no cost but have saved the taxpayer a substantial amount of 

money. We commend and thank the individuals that 

participated in those programs and look forward to working 

with them on those type of things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fair and forward-looking budget. This is a 

budget that promotes the Saskatchewan advantage, Mr. 

Speaker. We are proud of our government. We are proud of our 

finance, Mr. Speaker. I will be opposing the amendment. I will 

be supporting the main motion, Mr. Speaker. I thank you very 

much for the opportunity to participate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 

in the life of a legislature there are a number of speeches that 

have a bit more focus, a bit more attention, a bit more hype and 

hoopla than others. And the budget speech would certainly fall 

into that category of one of the more important speeches in the 

life of a legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess one of the things that I’ve come to be interested in 

— certainly as the budget speeches are delivered by this 

government — is the way that things are presented in the 

budget speech and hoopla’d and ballyhooed, and then the way 

things actually play out on the ground. And certainly there are a 

lot of things that sound really great in the budget speech, Mr. 

Speaker, and this speech is no exception. But then the way that, 

the way that there’s this yawning chasm between the rhetoric 

that is delivered by this government on the one hand and the 

reality on the ground on the other is fairly alarming, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I guess we’ve heard no end of talk about the new 

Saskatchewan and all the glories therein and, you know, some 

years they declared this year country, Mr. Speaker. And then 

when they blow the potash revenue projections, then it’s back 

to next year country. And sometimes it’s a little hard to keep 

track of what year they’re operating on in terms of their 

calendar. But anyway, this year again we saw the return of the 

declaration of it being this year country in Saskatchewan. 

 

And there’s a lot of self-congratulation that goes on on that side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if it was the five 

self-congratulatory standing ovations that were given on that 

side during the speech itself. The way that, you know certain of 

their members broke down, it was kind of like watching James 

Brown do his thing where he’d sort of break down and then get 

propped back up and come back out to the microphone and 

carry on with his song, Mr. Speaker. Or the way that you listen 

to the different speeches that have taken place on this side of 

the House where various members on that side have talked 

about the hard work of the Saskatchewan Party government. 

And it’s not giving credit to the Saskatchewan people, but 

referring to their hard work and congratulating themselves on 

their hard work. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit strange to watch from this 

side of the House. But certainly the people of Saskatchewan 

have been working very hard. The people of Saskatchewan are 

trying to put food on the table, develop businesses, build 

homes, build lives, and certainly what a government should be 

doing is to support those efforts. But the way that you see this 

government take credit for, you know, everything under the sun 

that is good, and decry everything that is bad and blame that on 

somebody else, well, it’s a bit much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, this budget was declared by various of the bright 

lights on that side of the House to be one of the best budgets in 

history and this measure is historic and that measure is the 

largest ever and on and on. And it reminded me of the member 

from Carrot River Valley and the potash budget that ultimately 

went boom. And I don’t mean that in a good way, Mr. Speaker, 

but where the projections turned out to be so bad that they had 

to pay the potash companies money. I think the member from 

Carrot River Valley declared that budget to be the best in the 

universe. So I think you’ll forgive us if we on this side tend to 

be a little reticent when it comes to taking their own comments 

as the gold standard on whether their budget is a good thing or 

not. 

 

I guess what I want to speak about, Mr. Speaker, is what I see 

on the ground in my home neighbourhood of North Central in 

my constituency of Regina Elphinstone and what I see 

throughout the province. And I guess for a government that 

likes to pat themselves on the back for the boom times, I think 

it’s interesting to note that it’s different than what Kennedy 

used to say, Mr. Speaker — a rising tide in their case has not 

lifted all boats. A rising tide has not lifted all boats. 

 

In fact, we see social assistance caseloads going up under this 

government. We see food bank utilization rates going up under 

his government. We see a housing crisis that is worsening, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see an Aboriginal employment situation 

where this should be the great golden opportunity to bring First 

Nations and Métis people into the mainstream of economic life 

in this province. And what do we see under the past three years 

of this government but Aboriginal employment going 

backwards. 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7047 

So when you measure those things up alongside the hype and 

the hoopla that is deployed by the members opposite in the 

self-congratulation parade that seems to be never-ending over 

there, it’s kind of hard. It’s like cognitive dissonance, Mr. 

Speaker. They say it’s one thing in here but you see something 

else out on the streets and in communities, and it’s very hard to 

reconcile. 

 

We see some good things in this budget, yes. We see some 

measures that on the face of them look good, and I hope to 

goodness that they carry out being good measures on the 

ground. But the problem, as with many things in the life of this 

government thus far, you know, what does it say about the 

priorities of this government? 

 

And a constituent of mine who has very intimate dealings with 

autism and the kind of challenges that that can pose in a life, 

Mr. Speaker, what she had written to me was about the child 

and youth agenda and the way that all the costs broke down in 

that. And she couldn’t believe that of the 900,000 that was 

devoted for autism and the way that this was being played by 

the members opposite as a breakthrough — and again any 

dollars that go towards autism are a good thing and affords 

different measures in that agenda — but she had a hard time 

understanding how it was that . . . or what this said about the 

province’s priorities where you’ve got 900,000 for autism and 

you’ve got $5.1 million for off-sale liquor vendors. 

 

And she couldn’t understand how it was that this is the way that 

the government was approaching this and making its priorities 

known, while she was off that night to a fundraiser, a steak 

night, for a friend of hers who is raising money for ABA 

[applied behaviour analysis] therapy for her child that is dealing 

with autism, and what that says about the government’s 

priorities, Mr. Speaker. So again there’s a question of new 

monies and, you know, new programs that are ballyhooed off 

the start or hyped up, but we’ll see how they play out on the 

ground. There is also a question of some of the priorities in this 

budget. 

 

Another one with the 5.1 million for off-sale liquor vendors, but 

you’ve got $1.7 million in actual money for housing programs. 

Of course this government can’t talk about housing without 

talking about the $32 million that was put towards housing after 

the third quarter financial update. And again, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn’t compare to the cutbacks that housing has taken under 

this government from the start. One of the first budgets that 

they brought into this place, they cut back the budget for Sask 

Housing by $8 million. And of the $32 million that was brought 

in the third quarter, guess what the vast majority of those 

dollars will be going towards, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be going 

towards maintenance. They’ll be going towards actually 

keeping up the housing stock that Sask Housing already 

operates with its partners throughout the province and the 

various housing authorities. 

 

So again this is a government that likes to play the game of how 

optics work and how public image works, but in terms of how it 

works on the ground for people dealing with a wretched 

housing situation, that $32 million is not the hype that it’s 

equal, nor does it tell the story of the dollars that were clawed 

back in the years previous and nor does it tell the story of the 

inadequacy of that gesture in the midst of a housing crisis. 

So then again we have the 1.7 million come forward in the 

budget, and again they can’t even keep it straight in terms of 

how many units this is going to represent from their budget 

speech to their budget propaganda, Mr. Speaker. And then we 

have the 250-odd million dollars come forward under the 

immigrant investor fund and this would seem to me to be a 

piece of creative financing worthy of the old Devine era, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of, you know, not being upfront with the 

people of the province in terms of the way that this program has 

been rolled out. And there was a Throne Speech that introduced 

it and then there was another budget that brought it forward, 

and it’s only now that we get the details on it this year after in 

the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ve got a government that has presided over a housing 

crisis. Their first action was to take $8 million out of the Sask 

Housing budget. Their emergency response to the budget 

criticism that they got in 2008 around housing was to appoint 

the Merriman-Pringle task force. The Merriman-Pringle task 

force comes back with a bunch of recommendations, most of 

which sit on the shelf. The others aren’t taken up on, Mr. 

Speaker. And the housing crisis gets worse. So then the 

geniuses on that side of the House decide that, well you know, 

obviously a task force isn’t enough to throw at this, what we 

should throw at it now is a summit. 

 

So they’re going to throw a summit at it, Mr. Speaker, and 

instead of waiting for the summit to throw out their creative 

financing masterpiece, which is this immigrant investment fund 

piece, you know, they get enough heat on housing coming out 

of the budget that, okay well, we’ll roll that out of the gate a bit 

earlier. Then we’ll have all these different groups that we’ve 

been consulting with that are supposed to be coming to the 

summit in good faith, although their good faith has worn 

mighty thin a long time ago, Mr. Speaker, given that they’ve 

already been through the task force and seen the crisis get 

worse for their troubles. So the summit is going to be the big 

answer to things. Well I think it’s pretty easy to see just how 

hollow these measures are, how hollow these measures ring on 

the part of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again since 2008, we’ve seen increasing food bank 

utilization rates. We’ve seen increasing social assistance 

caseload numbers. And on the housing file, we’ve seen 

increased wait loads with the different housing authorities. And 

in the city of Regina alone, we’ve seen upwards of 3,000 people 

that are in housing trouble on a consistent basis. And that’s the 

good work of people like Hirsch Greenberg, Dr. Marc Spooner, 

and the others that are involved with Pathways Regina or the 

HIFIS [Homeless Individuals and Families Information 

System] study and the work that is done there. 

 

And again, for a government that talks about being ready for 

growth — it ran on a platform of ready for growth, ran on a 

slogan of ready for growth — one of the most fundamental 

things to a growing economy is making sure that people have 

housing. That people have the shelter to be able to get the 

education, to carry out the job, to do those things that make 

them more economically viable in the economy. And if you 

don’t have housing, Mr. Speaker, it makes a lot of things very 

hard. And it makes it particularly hard if you’re somebody 

that’s trying to go back to school or trying to establish yourself 

in the workforce. 



7048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

And there are different community-based organizations and 

different organizations in through inner city of Regina and 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre that have the people, that have got 

the courage, that have made a decision in their life to try and go 

back to school, try to get that education or to try and get 

themselves attached to the labour force, and to provide a 

productive role in this so-called booming economy. 

 

But they, if they’re housing surfing, if they’re couch surfing, 

Mr. Speaker, or they’re in overcrowded conditions or if they 

don’t even have a house and they’re living out in the backyard 

in a tent, then how are they to take advantage of the booming 

economy? How are they going to keep themselves going in to 

that program every morning at 8:30? How does this work? 

 

Well how it works, Mr. Speaker, in the current circumstance is 

not very well. You have people that are making that effort, that 

have made that decision and are trying to do their level best to 

get themselves into those opportunities to take advantage of this 

labour force that we’ve got that should be getting developed. 

But instead they have housing problems and it exacerbates 

whatever other problems they’ve got going on in their lives. 

And how does that work for a community? And how does that 

work for a society? Well it doesn’t work very well. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But the worst of it is, Mr. Speaker, is that those individuals who 

have taken the trouble in their lives who should be, who should 

be supported in these efforts, who should be, who should be 

applauded for making this effort, they’re going to be looking at 

this housing response from this government, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re going to be saying, okay, this is targeted at units that are 

valued at 180 to $300,000. What are they thinking, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

That’s a segment of the market that . . . Again, I’m not a 

housing expert. But in terms of where the pressure points are in 

the market, Mr. Speaker, in terms of people that are in rental 

and low income, to target your program at 180,000 to $300,000 

builds is sort of like saying, well there’s a fire and what we’ll 

do is we’ll go around the block and we’ll throw water on a tree 

or something instead of actually getting at the problem itself. 

And we’ve seen that for housing for the past three years, so I 

guess it shouldn’t be that much of a surprise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But for them to come back again with all this ballyhoo and all 

this hype with a solution that is not going to address the 

problem, I think speaks about the way that that government is 

out of touch, the way that that government doesn’t understand 

the problems that present in places like inner city Regina, let 

alone around the province. This is a government that dismisses 

out of hand the question of rent control, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rent control was under serious consideration in the summer of 

2007, and at that time in conversations with the real estate 

developers, there was a lot of talk around no, no, don’t do rent 

control. Let the market do its thing. And this was of course 

alongside efforts by the government to add to the public 

housing stock, to add to the affordable housing stock that were 

fairly robust, to use a favourite word of the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Mr. Speaker. But what happened with 

those market efforts? We didn’t see those come to deal with the 

housing crisis, but what we did see was rent go up and up and 

up. 

 

And again if you approach problems in a pragmatic way, Mr. 

Speaker, and if you’ve got all things being equal and you try to 

be less than dogmatic about it, but if you’re interested in what 

works, the premise on which rent control is based on is making 

sure that people have predictable, sustainable increases on their 

rent. And what we’ve seen instead, Mr. Speaker, in an absence 

of rent control is the way that rents have skyrocketed over the 

past three years. And that is unsustainable and that is not, that’s 

not workable for the pocketbooks of the families of this 

province. 

 

So again on housing, we see this government come forward 

with just, you know, sort of dogmatic, slavish obedience to 

their ideology and not looking at something that holds out the 

promise of working, as it has worked, Mr. Speaker, in the 

province of Manitoba. 

 

I guess another thing that I’d like to comment on under the 

heading of measures that look good but the way it plays out on 

the ground is something else, Mr. Speaker, is the question of 

the renewal of Scott Collegiate, the revitalization of Scott 

Collegiate. 

 

And so I guess one of the things that I was very proud to 

participate in as a member of the then government was the 

providing of monies to take the work around the North Central 

shared facility, which was a project advanced by the health 

region and by the Regina Public School Board and by the local 

community association centred on Scott Collegiate, to revitalize 

Scott Collegiate and to build out a shared facility that 

incorporated a number of components — a joint-use library, a 

lot of different sort of community space and common space, 

ways to bring in the primary health care aspect, ways to bring in 

the service learning model that the school board has advanced 

quite a long ways in. And we, as the government, thought that 

this made good sense. 

 

Scott Collegiate is the high school in the youngest 

neighbourhood in the city of Regina. It should be a real anchor 

for our community. And where the school board was coming 

forward and saying that, yes we want to make this a priority, 

that had changed from years previous where the future of Scott 

Collegiate had been somewhat in question and what was going 

to happen with it. And that, frankly, Mr. Speaker, shows in the 

facility itself and the way that has been sort of been glued 

together and jerry-rigged together and made to serve the 

students that go there. But obviously it’s a school that its 

physical life had long since passed its best-before date. But with 

the North Central shared facility project and with the 

centrepiece of that being a revitalized Scott Collegiate, the 

provincial government of the day thought that was a very 

important way to go about this. And the community was very 

much looking forward to this project taking place. 

 

And I guess in February 2007, we had been able to advance 

planning money as part of a larger package around housing and 

education opportunities in through the inner cities, Mr. Speaker. 

But that effectively launched the skilled trades centre here in 

Regina and provided the planning money for the North Central 

shared facility as well as put $60 million province-wide towards 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7049 

housing. And I guess the way that that project was advancing, it 

got a lot of good response from the community. Then in the 

summer of 2007, back when the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 

12] provincial capital list meant something, it had advanced to 

number two on the province-wide K to 12 capital list. 

 

So in the budget of 2008, and again this is after the then NDP 

Calvert government had been defeated and the Wall Sask Party 

government had come to power, in the budget of 2008 — and 

thank you for your indulgence on that point, Mr. Speaker — we 

were very . . . I was ecstatic to see that budget 2008 contained 

monies for Scott Collegiate. And again this is in accordance 

with the way that the provincial capital list used to be accorded 

to, and that sort of autonomy that local school boards had. 

 

And then again, you know, there was some more planning went 

on and then by the time of March 9th, 2009, then Associate 

Deputy Minister Ball in human services said that the Scott 

Collegiate project has completed its schematic design phase and 

is ready to go to detailed design sometime later this spring. So 

again it gets the initial tranche of money in February 2007 and 

’08, 2007. Then budget 2008, it’s recognized on the capital 

priorities by the government opposite. It’s re-recognized in 

2009, and then what happens, Mr. Speaker? Well we go on and 

wait. 

 

Well and again I’m glad that the minister from Regina South is 

interested in this, because he’s been to Scott, and he’s been 

there to comment on what a great project this is and how great 

it looks. And again this is one of the problems with this 

government, Mr. Speaker, is that they’ll come into communities 

and say yes, this is great. This is really good. And then what 

happens down the line? Well the Regina public school board is 

still waiting to get the approval from this government to go to 

detailed design phase. So a project that was supposed to have 

the shovels in the dirt this summer, Mr. Speaker, is still waiting 

for that government to give the approval. 

 

So again it gets the initial approval in budget of 2008, and 

meanwhile we’ve got the youngest neighbourhood in Regina. 

We’ve got a school where somebody like Paul Martin comes to 

town and recognizes it and does a joint entrepreneurship 

program with the Regina Chamber of Commerce, where you’ve 

got a lot of good things going on in terms of different learning 

models and service learning. And what happens at that school, 

Mr. Speaker? We get the announcements from this government, 

but we don’t get the action. 

 

So as the centrepiece of how this government conducts its 

business, I hope this isn’t one more thing where it looks a lot 

better at the announcement phase then it does when you’re 

waiting for the thing to actually show up. But the people in 

North Central Regina are waiting and have waited for quite a 

long time for the approval to at least go to the detailed design 

phase, and for that government to make good on monies that 

have already been allocated in budgets previous. So how much 

longer do they have to wait for this project to proceed, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And for so many reasons, that’s a neighbourhood, that’s a 

community that needs a school, that needs a shared facility like 

has been planned and worked on and dreamed upon and prayed 

upon by the people of North Central and by the people of 

Regina. So how long will it take, Mr. Speaker? I hope, I hope 

not long. But it’s already overdue, and we can’t wait much 

longer for this government to make good on the hype of the 

announcements with the reality on the ground. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues want 

to participate in this debate, and I’ve gone on long enough. I 

just want to say at the end that this is work that you can’t do 

without the support of family and friends and that I am very 

grateful for that. I’m grateful of the people that I work with out 

of the constituency office and out of the riding association. 

 

But to close, Mr. Speaker, this budget doesn’t add up. If past is 

indeed prologue, this budget will not add up to the hype that it 

is presented with. I will therefore be voting against this budget 

and in favour of the opposition amendment. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

certainly my delight to be able to rise today to offer some 

comments on the budget that has been delivered by the Sask 

Party government as recently as March 23rd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I start my comments, I’d like to make a 

few personal remarks. And that is I owe a deep sense of 

gratitude to some people who are very integral in helping me 

with my role as Environment critic and as MLA for Regina 

Walsh Acres. Obviously the primary people in my life would be 

my husband, Jeff Morin, and my daughter Morgan Morin. They 

are very supportive and very encouraging and very 

understanding. Numerous times, there are a lot of times when I 

have to call and say I won’t be home or I’ll be late or, you 

know, other things that come up, Mr. Speaker. And as I said, I 

owe them a deep sense of gratitude for the support and 

encouragement they give me to allow me to fulfill my role as 

the MLA for Regina Walsh Acres and as the Environment 

critic. 

 

In the same breath, Mr. Speaker, I also have to thank my 

constituency assistant, Nathan Markwart, as well as Sherry and 

Lynn. They are incredibly dedicated individuals, very 

professional. There is no one that calls my office that doesn’t 

encounter them in a very positive fashion, a very helpful 

fashion, and in a very caring fashion. So I’m deeply indebted to 

them and thank them for their dedication to the constituency of 

Regina Walsh Acres and the constituents of Regina Walsh 

Acres, Mr. Speaker, and obviously their assistance for me 

whenever required, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to thank the constituents of Regina Walsh Acres 

for placing their faith in me in representing them and their 

concerns in terms of the bringing forward those issues to the 

legislature and to various ministers on occasion with respect to 

the situations that arise. So I want to thank the constituents for 

placing their faith in me, and especially the constituents that do 

a lot of volunteer work on behalf of the constituency for the 

people of Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to offer my comments on the budget 

speech, and I want to start off with looking at what it doesn’t 



7050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

offer, Mr. Speaker. And what it doesn’t offer is a lot of 

encouragement and a lot of hope for the people of 

Saskatchewan wanting to see some aggressive and some 

positive action with respect to issues around the environment, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is very little in this budget with respect to aggressively 

attacking the issue of climate change, Mr. Speaker. We have 

seen from the Saskatchewan Party government in the 2000 

election platform targets that they had promised the public of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they promised to stabilize 

emissions by 2010 of greenhouse gas emissions. They promised 

further reductions for two other periods going forward, Mr. 

Speaker. And then we saw them completely renege on that 

promise, Mr. Speaker, and quite frankly tell, well admit, I 

should say because they are not really good about being open 

and accountable when it comes to telling the public much, Mr. 

Speaker, but were certainly having to admit that they were 

breaking that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just a small promise that’s being 

glossed over in the document, the platform that the 

Saskatchewan Party put forward in 2007, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

significant promise that they are breaking to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It’s obvious to the people of Saskatchewan now, 

Mr. Speaker, that despite the fact that they adopted those targets 

from the NDP administration that had put those targets in place 

in the spring of 2007, despite the fact that they adopted those 

targets, Mr. Speaker, they had no plan as to how they were 

going to achieve those targets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, not only did the Saskatchewan 

Party government not have a plan as to how they were going to 

achieve those targets that they put into their election document, 

into their platform document, Mr. Speaker, but they took the 

plan that the NDP administration had in place as to how the 

NDP was going to achieve those greenhouse gas reduction 

targets, Mr. Speaker, and they completely gutted them. 

Completely gutted them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s talk about a few of those examples. For instance, the 

Office of Energy Conservation, that was already in full running, 

Mr. Speaker. The Office of Energy Conservation was 

completely gutted, Mr. Speaker. It no longer exists. They talk 

about some of those employees existing thankfully, but they’ve 

been shuffled off to other areas within the Ministry of 

Environment. But the office that had the responsibility of 

promoting energy conservation, of educating the public on 

energy conservation and on promoting and advocating the 

cheapest form of energy, Mr. Speaker — which is energy that is 

saved, energy that is saved through conservation — is the first 

thing the Sask Party government gutted, Mr. Speaker. So that 

was the first thing they did. 

 

Second thing they did was the office of the climate change 

secretariat, which was introduced by the NDP administration, 

Mr. Speaker, which was already in the process of being set up, 

Mr. Speaker — the hiring process was already going through 

the Public Service Commission — what did they do with the 

climate change secretariat, a secretariat that under the NDP 

administration would have its own deputy minister so it would 

have the clout to be able to deal with truly promoting the issues 

of climate change, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So what did the Sask Party government do after when it was 

elected in 2007? Despite the fact that it said it would reach the 

same targets that the NDP administration had put in place in the 

spring of 2007, it gutted the office, the climate change 

secretariat, Mr. Speaker. It gutted it. So that’s two essential and 

integral parts of being able to achieve those greenhouse gas 

reduction targets, and the Sask Party government decided to gut 

both of them as the first order of business when it got elected. 

 

Now let’s talk about the over $400 million that the NDP 

administration had allocated to ensure that the financial 

commitment was there to be able to achieve those reduction 

targets, Mr. Speaker. What did the Sask Party government do 

with the over $400 million that were allocated to achieving 

those greenhouse gas reduction targets, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s anybody’s guess because they certainly 

don’t exist in that fund any more. It was reduced to $40 million 

under the Sask Party administration. And the rest of it I guess 

was spent on the interesting priorities that the Sask Party 

government seems to have, which obviously are not the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not 

addressed in the concerns of Saskatchewan people when 

especially we’re looking at, for instance, a housing crisis in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are some of the examples, Mr. Speaker, that one can 

give about what’s lacking in this budget document yet again, 

which is the last budget document that we’re going to see from 

the Sask Party government before the election in the fall, Mr. 

Speaker. Once again we see nothing to address any serious 

commitment to the issues of energy conservation or the issues 

around climate change, Mr. Speaker. Once again we see 

nothing. 

 

Now the Sask Party government is very, very good — I will 

give them credit for this, Mr. Speaker — they’re very good at 

spin, Mr. Speaker. Boy they’ve got spin down to a science. 

They can take anything anyone says in a negative way and they 

can spin it so it smells like roses according to them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition, the NDP 

opposition, the other parties that are interested in representing 

their constituents in the government, I mean in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the Saskatchewan electorate 

and the people of Saskatchewan, they’re not duped by this, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re not duped by any of the Sask Party’s spin, 

Mr. Speaker. They know the truth. They see the truth and, Mr. 

Speaker, they will make sure the Sask Party understands that 

they have the truth, Mr. Speaker. They will do that, Mr. 

Speaker. Because as I said, they are not going to accept the spin 

that is put on everything by the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to issues of the environment, 

we’ve seen an absolute lack of ability to meet any expectations, 

Mr. Speaker, whether that’s a fiduciary responsibility to First 

Nations regarding energy policy, whether that’s consulting with 

the public of Saskatchewan on energy policy. 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7051 

Let’s look at an example of that, Mr. Speaker: for instance, the 

flawed process under the Uranium Development Partnership 

which was the future of uranium in Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party’s spin was that, well the process was 

hijacked. That’s the Sask Party’s spin, Mr. Speaker. Now the 

process, Mr. Speaker, that they talk about being hijacked is 

interestingly enough supposedly hijacked by the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now the people of Saskatchewan said loud and 

clear in that process, Mr. Speaker, that they wanted to talk 

about an integrated energy policy. That’s what the people of 

Saskatchewan wanted to talk about. 

 

What did the Sask Party government want to speak about? They 

wanted to talk about the future of uranium in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. The wanted to keep it on a very narrow focus. 

Why? Because they wanted to build large nuclear reactors in 

the province of Saskatchewan because they’d already signed a 

deal with Bruce Power which they’ve still not given us any 

details on, Mr. Speaker. So again we see why the people of 

Saskatchewan had to voice their opinions in a very clear 

fashion, in a very exercised fashion, Mr. Speaker, because their 

government is not meeting the needs that they want to see met, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s being repeated over and over again 

since that process took place — the shammed process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then of course they had to cover that up again, Mr. 

Speaker, with the public hearings which were again so 

condensed, in such a short fashion, that the information 

couldn’t even be provided to the people of Saskatchewan so 

they could involve themselves in the process in a more 

comprehensive way, Mr. Speaker. That’s how the Sask Party 

government likes to handle things. They like to monopolize, 

manipulate, and shut things down when things don’t go their 

way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I find that very interesting because it seems 

that they’re taking their education, shall we say, on how to do 

that from none other than the Harper Tories themselves because 

we’re seeing that very controlled, very strict messaging system 

coming from the Harper Tories for the entire time that they 

were the minority government, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

certainly seeing that now while he’s on tour. Because of course 

Mr. Stephen Harper is allowing a grand total of five questions 

from the media per day with one of those, Mr. Speaker, luckily 

enough coming from the local media. So how fortunate for the 

local media to at least be able to get one of those questions per 

day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, we can see that there are other 

provinces that are doing quite different things, Mr. Speaker, 

like, for instance, Nova Scotia. Nova Scotia is also under an 

NDP government, Mr. Speaker. And what are they promising? 

They’re promising 25 per cent renewable energy by 2015, 40 

per cent renewable energy by 2020, and a promise to reduce 

coal from 75 per cent to 40 per cent by 2020. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that is quite the difference from what we’re seeing 

from a government, a Sask Party government that has already 

had their mandate approximately three and a half years, Mr. 

Speaker. None of those initiatives from the Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, probably the most shocking thing that’s 

lacking in this budget document, Mr. Speaker, is the way they 

are treating the crisis of housing in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have individuals who can’t 

afford their rent any more, Mr. Speaker. We have individuals 

that . . . I mean the prospect of buying a new home seems 

remote and distant, Mr. Speaker. And what did the Sask Party 

government do in this budget document to address that crisis, 

Mr. Speaker? They allotted $1.7 million for housing in the 

budget speech, Mr. Speaker, in comparison to, for instance, 

$5.1 million for beer sales, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, their priorities are very confused, very 

confused. They’re providing an extra $5.1 million out of the 

revenues from Saskatchewan taxpayers, they’re providing an 

extra $5.1 million for beer sales but they’re telling 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, we’re only going to commit $1.7 

million for the housing crisis that exists in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the renters in my constituency of 

Regina Walsh Acres are very upset by this, very upset, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’ve seen their rent increase by up to 40 

per cent in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, by up to 40 per cent. 

 

Now it’s interesting that they get very silent, very silent on this 

topic, Mr. Speaker, because they recognize that they made a big 

mistake in the budget, Mr. Speaker, a big mistake. Big, colossal 

mistake, Mr. Speaker. They recognized that through the 

comments that were coming from the opposition, the NDP 

opposition. They recognized that through their own constituents 

reaching them, Mr. Speaker, because some of those constituents 

that wrote to their MLAs actually gave the copies of those 

letters and emails to us as well, Mr. Speaker, so that we could 

know that those MLAs were contacted about the issue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They decided that they were 

going to slap together a quick band-aid with the help of their 

friends, none other than some, you know, familiar names like 

Merriman and Pringle, for instance. But they were going to 

throw together something really quick to address this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what did they do? They came up with a budget — not a 

budget, sorry — an allotment of funds, Mr. Speaker, outside of 

the budget in the amount of $250 million. Now what’s 

interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is that this came out, not a 

week after the budget document, not a month after the budget 

document, not six months after the budget document but, Mr. 

Speaker, days after the budget document. The budget document 

was released on Wednesday, March 23rd. The announcement 

was made on Monday, March 28th. 

 

Now is this coincidental with the fact that we had five — yes, 

five — Sask Party staffers at the NDP convention on the 

weekend who heard from the microphone on the floor that 

people were most irate that the issue of housing was not being 

properly addressed by their government, Mr. Speaker, by their 

government? Because the Sask Party government is supposed 

to govern for all, but unfortunately the Sask Party government 

doesn’t realize that or doesn’t recognize that or doesn’t want to 

recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party government instead looks out for, for instance, 

the Bill Doyles of the world to ensure that they get their $500 



7052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

million on our potash resource, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact 

that the people of Saskatchewan look forward to five cents on 

every dollar of Saskatchewan’s potash resource that is owned 

by the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely 

reprehensible that this Sask Party government is promising the 

Bill Doyles of the world, and the other potash corporations, that 

they aren’t going to do a potash royalty review for 16 years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I can understand the confusion with the 16 

years, given that that is the mantra of the Sask Party 

government whenever they want to find an excuse as to why 

they shouldn’t be held responsible for something, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s when they come up with their, for the 16 years under the 

NDP administration. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’re very proud of those 16 

years. We’re very proud of the fact that we were able to, under 

the NDP administration, turn the fortunes of Saskatchewan 

around from being in a bankrupt position in 1991 when the 

NDP administration took power, Mr. Speaker, to being in a 

situation when in 2005, under the NDP administration, 

Saskatchewan became a have province, Mr. Speaker. And the 

good fortunes that have continued since then are due to the due 

diligence and the good policies that the NDP administration put 

forward to ensure that once there was a recovery period, that 

there would be significant growth and prosperity in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the NDP administration 

did. 

 

And that is a legacy, Mr. Speaker, that we can be proud of 

versus the legacy that the Sask Party government is wanting to 

hide through a name change, because they couldn’t call 

themselves the Conservative Party any more. Why? Because 

they rang up the $15 billion debt when they were in power in 

the ’80s, Mr. Speaker. That’s why. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened since then? There are still 

true Conservatives in this province, Mr. Speaker, that don’t 

subscribe to the policies of the Sask Party government. And so 

they would like to resurrect a Conservative Party in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, to be able to participate in the 

democratic process that they have a right to in the next election, 

Mr. Speaker. And they have a right to access the funds that they 

believe are coming to them. 

 

Now let’s look at who holds the keys to that $3 million 

Progressive Conservative trust fund, Mr. Speaker. Two people 

have been named from the Sask Party. Who are they? The 

Premier and the Deputy Premier themselves have been named 

in the lawsuit, Mr. Speaker. And that’s how they want to 

control democracy in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about the budget and we 

talk about housing, since I have very little time left, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to talk about the fact that, like I said, we have a 

housing crisis in the province. Now let’s look at this from a 

statistical perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re looking at, for instance, the University of Regina 

Faculty of Education professor, Marc Spooner, who is also 

going to be running in the federal election for the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re very proud that he’s doing that. He quoted 

from a 2009 study that indicated that there were 3,618 homeless 

people in Regina. That was in 2009, Mr. Speaker. And we 

know the situation has gotten worse since then. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we were in a crisis in 2009 already. This isn’t 

earth-shattering news, Mr. Speaker, and this should’ve been 

appropriately addressed in this budget, Mr. Speaker, not $1.7 

million for housing and 5.1 million for beer, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

absolutely deplorable. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, then we will look at for instance, Shawn 

Fraser from Carmichael Outreach who noted again that 

although Saskatchewan is enjoying a booming economy, the 

downside is a 40 per cent increase in rent, Mr. Speaker. So this 

isn’t just anecdotal evidence from the constituency of Regina 

Walsh Acres, Mr. Speaker, constituency I should say, but it’s 

actually documented by the Carmichael Outreach and by 

Shawn Fraser, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the editorial in the Leader-Post from March 

16th by Murray Mandryk, says this: 

 

It also needs to recognize that a lack of affordable 

accommodation is a detriment to growth. If skilled 

construction workers and immigrant families moving to 

this province to take advantage of the boom can’t find an 

affordable place to live, we don’t grow. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what they’re not recognizing is that not only is 

this a housing crisis for people that they don’t feel are going to 

support them anyways, Mr. Speaker, it’s also going to be a 

detriment to what they’re constantly touting as the 

Saskatchewan advantage in terms of growth, Mr. Speaker. So 

they could at least heed that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Murray Mandryk also says this. And you 

know, these are very good quotes, and they should listen: 

 

The Sask Party government needs to get past the partisan 

rhetoric and realize that finding affordable 

accommodation in this province is now as big an issue to 

a hard-working small businessperson who’s sending his 

son or daughter to university as it is to the working poor. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what are they saying? They’re saying that we 

want you to come and work in this province, but we don’t care 

if you find affordable housing. We want your small businesses 

to survive and to thrive and to grow, but we don’t care about 

the fact that you’re going to have to send your son and daughter 

to university outside your community and have to pay an 

exorbitant rent for housing. Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing the Sask 

Party government just doesn’t get it. And they just don’t care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve run out of time, so I’m going to support the 

amendment from my colleague from Regina Rosemont and 

hope that the Sask Party government will do the same when it 

comes to the vote, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7053 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

is going to be my last speech in this House, and I know 

everyone is very sad about that. Anyway I just want to say that 

it’s been an honour and a privilege to serve the citizens of the 

province, especially the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

And they honoured me by electing me. 

 

I have to thank first and foremost my family, my immediate 

family: my spouse, Gary, my children Jarrod and Elise. And on 

my first campaign team, my campaign team was made up out of 

my family, including uncles and aunts and brothers and sisters 

and friends. And that grew, Mr. Speaker. It grew to the point 

now where, you know, there’s 25 active executive members of 

the constituency. And they’re working very hard to help the 

next candidate move forward and keep the constituency in the 

Sask Party family. 

 

Also the most important person in my life through politics has 

been Danielle Velazquez. She’s my constituency assistant in 

Saskatoon Sutherland, along with Judy Peddle, who’s another 

CA [constituency assistant]. They both have worked extremely 

hard and have done so diligently and with caring and 

compassion. I can tell you that there’s a lot of very difficult 

files in Saskatoon Sutherland, given the demographics. And 

these two women have gone above and beyond to take care of 

the constituents of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

I would like to talk about the budget in reference to Saskatoon 

Sutherland. This budget is a great budget. I will be supporting 

this budget. And first and foremost, Saskatoon Sutherland is 

probably the most unique constituency in all of the province. It 

has the University of Saskatchewan, the University Hospital, 

Innovation Place. It’s got an industrial area, it’s got an old 

residential area, and it’s got, you know, relatively affluent 

residential area as well. So it’s extremely diverse. And this 

budget is so good for Sutherland because it meets the needs of 

all of those areas. And all of those areas are reflected in the 

province of Saskatchewan, so I think it’s safe to say that this 

budget reflects the province and supports the province as a 

whole. 

 

First of all to do with health. This budget continues to improve 

on Saskatchewan’s health system by allocating $4.46 billion in 

this year’s health budget, Mr. Speaker. In addition to meeting 

our election commitment of hiring more than 800 nurses and 

providing better patient care, this year’s health budget includes 

funding for physician positions and other health initiatives. 

 

The 2011-12 budget continues with education recruitment and 

retention efforts for health providers, including an additional 

1.5 million for clinical and medical teaching units at the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan], Regina General Hospital to 

ensure students have access to appropriate training. 

 

Now we can all stand up here and talk about budgets. And the 

member from Athabasca should probably listen. He doesn’t 

know this part. 

 

The fact that we’re supporting medical teaching units and other 

health provider positions is important because when one 

doesn’t understand or know or go through the health care 

system as a patient or as a critically ill person, we don’t get just 

how vast our health care system is and how many people it 

takes to create the team to care for you. For example, as a 

patient who underwent open-heart surgery, I had two valves 

replaced. And that took a team of specialists, not including just 

the surgeon, but the perfusionist whose job it was to put you on 

the heart-lung machine to make sure that your blood stays 

oxygenated. Now without him, the patient would die.  

 

So you know, we need to look beyond just doctors and nurses. 

And I think that this government has done that and recognizes 

the importance of the paramedical people in our health care 

system. And so training and extra monies to secure these people 

to come to the province and make sure we retain these people 

are a very, very important piece to our health care system. 

 

We also need to teach our medical people. And we’ve added 

$800,000 for four faculty positions at the College of Medicine 

to ensure a stable supply of pediatricians. Mr. Speaker, with the 

children’s hospital on the horizon, it’s extremely important that 

we have the expertise to staff that hospital to ensure the best 

care for the children of this province. 

 

$10.9 million is to address the increased volume in diagnostic 

imaging services, cardiac care, and chronic kidney disease. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s so important to have proper diagnostic care and 

access to diagnostic care when one is ill. 

 

Medical technology has advanced so much in the last three 

decades that we’re able now to actually do a scan on a person’s 

body to determine if there’s cancerous cells throughout the 

body. That’s called a PET [positron emission tomography] 

scan. And I don’t know what the P-E-T means, but I know what 

the PET scan does. And we were one of the provinces that 

didn’t have a PET scanner, and people were going out of 

province to get them done. And now we’re going to be able to 

do it here in our province. It can give us advance notice of any 

carcinogenic areas in the body, and therefore early treatment 

would give us a much greater chance of survival. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, opened a transplant ward where the air is 

on positive pressure. You have to have a very sterile 

environment and clean air in and out of the rooms. And we put 

in $4.2 million for bone marrow transplants to be undertaken 

here in the province. They’ve started already. A friend of the 

family’s, a friend of my family was one of the first stem cell 

transplant patients in Saskatoon. And the ability to have that 

done at home with a support system in the same city is 

extremely important. 

 

So there’s a lot of human factors in the budget when we take 

away just the money and talk about just the humanness. And 

what does that mean to the people of the province? What does 

that mean to the citizens that put us here in this great House to 

discuss these matters and plan for their future? 

 

We’ve put in $1 million for autism spectrum disorder 

assessments, intervention, and training as part of the children’s 

youth agenda; $600,000 for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder 

prevention, diagnostic supports as part of the government’s 

children and youth agenda. This is fantastic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] is a huge 

issue in our province. It’s unfortunate because it’s 100 per cent 

preventable. And if it’s 100 per cent preventable, then there’s a 



7054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

fix. And that fix is going to come through understanding and 

proper education by way of young women who are maybe 

suffering from addictions or living in poverty and drinking. 

And, you know, that down the road, if we can save one young 

woman from having a fetal alcohol syndrome disorder child, 

we’ve saved the system costs down the road millions and 

millions and millions of dollars. 

 

$2.8 million for additional specialist services, some of which 

will be located in Saskatoon. 2.4 million for electronic medical 

record expansion into physicians’ offices. Mr. Speaker, you 

know, I understand the privacy issue with regard to health care. 

However, you know, just like you can educate people not to 

drink and drive, you can educate people not to take drugs, but 

some people will do it. Is it the government’s fault that they do 

it, or is this a human choice that they’re making? And it comes 

down to choice. Behaviour is choice. We choose our behaviour. 

It’s the only thing we can control is our behaviour.  

 

And so I understand the concern that the opposition had, given 

these files being found. However someone chose to put them in 

that bin and, you know, making another law or whatever isn’t 

going to change the fact that someone down the road may 

choose to put those medical records in a garbage bin, and 

therefore they may be found and read. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So I’m, you know . . . Legislation alone does not change 

behaviour. So I think the work the government has to do is 

maybe some more education or some way of handling those 

records differently. Now what our government has done is put 

$2.4 million into electronic medical record management. So if 

it’s an electronic record management system, I think we’ll have 

a better chance of monitoring and making sure that those 

records, you know, are not sent out into the public. However 

there’s lots of computer systems, CIA [Central Intelligence 

Agency], FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], tax computer 

system, Government of Canada, sometimes those things are 

breached. It’s just the way life is. So we can’t get rid of it 

totally, but this is a very positive step towards that. 

 

What I found extremely disturbing, however, is that when 

watching the news that night where the medical records were 

found and the Privacy Commissioner was there saying how 

awful it was, I noticed that the member from Regina 

Elphinstone was assisting in carrying these medical records . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Dewdney. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Or Regina Dewdney. Pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker. Correction. The member from Regina Dewdney was 

helping to carry these records out. Well I don’t think he has the 

authority to do that, and I would suspect that . . . I mean, what 

gives him the right to have possibly a look at someone’s 

medical record in an open box that he was carrying? 

 

So I think that if people are going to throw stones that they need 

to be looking at their own behaviour and behaving in a fashion 

where they’re respecting privacy also themselves. And I would 

probably say that to the Privacy Commissioner as well. If he’s 

going to have a system to remove documents like that, the 

system should be such that it’s a secure person in a secure area. 

Anyway with respect to housing in Saskatoon Sutherland, there 

is a lot of apartment buildings and a lot of rental properties. Our 

government is building 1,000 new beds through the university, 

in partnership with the university. Those beds are going to take 

the heat off of other rental properties, and therefore supply and 

demand would logically say that the rent should be then going 

down. 

 

One of our new proposals and promises in the budget is funding 

towards affordable housing where the person could purchase 

their own house. This is absolutely fantastic. I’ve talked to 

constituents that are very excited. These are the people that 

make around $72,000 a year, that just can’t save enough money 

for the down payment, Mr. Speaker. There are programs 

through the city of Saskatoon, and the government now will 

have a program to assist these people in purchasing their own 

home. 

 

Imagine that, Mr. Speaker, being a family that could not in their 

foreseeable future be able to purchase their own home now 

being able to look toward actually purchasing their own home 

where their mortgage payment would be equal or less to their 

rental payment. They would be building equity. What a 

fantastic idea. What a wonderful, wonderful move towards 

independence and success for that family. And that is the kind 

of approach we need to affordable housing. We don’t need an 

old-fashioned, old-time fix of, you know, rent controls. We 

need to use imagination, and that’s what our government’s 

done, and it will benefit these citizens better. 

 

The other issue to do with Saskatoon Sutherland, Mr. Speaker, 

is the SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority] and 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] offices are 

in my constituency. The urban reserve, first urban reserve ever 

is in Saskatoon Sutherland constituency. And I must say, 

CreeWay Gas is a wonderful facility, and I gas up there often. 

Excellent service. 

 

And this government recognizes the need for employment and 

education for our First Nations and Métis peoples. So $2 

million to establish a task force on First Nation and Métis 

education and employment, to provide recommendations aimed 

at eliminating the education and employment gaps. This is 

huge, Mr. Speaker. Seven million for adult basic ed and 

provincial training allowance targeted to First Nations and 

Métis students; 2.9 million to increase high school completion 

rates and improve achievement for First Nations and Métis 

students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an untapped resource in young First 

Nations and Métis peoples. They need to be part of the growth 

of this province, and they want to part of the growth of this 

province. This government is recognizing this and instead of 

throwing money at a situation or, you know, talking about, you 

know, poor this and poor that, we’re discussing it as adults, 

sitting down and saying — as leaders — and saying okay, what 

are we going to do about this? Let’s work together, and let’s get 

First Nations and Métis people educated and in the workforce. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, over the last 20 years I’ve noticed 

more and more First Nations and Métis people getting into the 

job force, getting education, becoming role models and leaders, 

and this is wonderful. And they’re becoming more independent 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7055 

and starting businesses. There’s a lot of really, really good stuff 

happening in the First Nation and Métis world. 

 

One of the last things I’d like to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is my 

passion, and that’s policing. Our government promised 120 

police officers would be hired during our mandate. We have 

done that. We have hired, this government has hired and put in 

place 120 police officers. We have met that commitment. In 

this year’s budget, we spent 2.7 million on fulfilling our 

promise, the last 30 officers. 

 

Now some people oppose the idea of having police officers 

because they believe that it’s strictly an enforcement subject 

matter. And it’s not, Mr. Speaker. The work that law 

enforcement does, if done properly, delves into the fabric of our 

society. It protects our society, and it ensures that our society 

stays stable and works toward the safety, security, and human 

rights of every citizen. 

 

As an example, Mr. Speaker, some of the police officers we 

hired made up the CFSEU [combined forces special 

enforcement unit], which is a task force in Regina and 

Saskatoon, and it’s the combined forces selective enforcement 

unit. They primarily focus on organized crime. The 

commitment that our government gave to law enforcement was 

to make this a complete unit so that they could go after 

organized crime. And they have, and very successfully. Just last 

week, the CFSEU, which is a joint forces unit so it has some 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and some Saskatoon 

city police . . . In Regina it has some Regina police and some 

RCMP. So they’re able to work throughout the province. 

 

And organized crime hits the fabric of our society. Organized 

crime brings in the drugs. It does the violence. It encourages the 

gangs. It’s extremely, extremely destructive. The Terror Squad, 

which was a gang that started about 2003, had grown to the 

point where they were a predominant force in Saskatoon and 

other parts of the province. They were distributing cocaine. 

They were doing enforcement through violence. They were 

linked to homicides. This was a very, very dangerous gang, Mr. 

Speaker. And this gang was arrested and charged, 14 members 

of this gang. This gang was not only disrupted but it was 

dismantled, which is huge, to take down an organized crime 

group like that. And they were charged with organized crime 

charges as well. 

 

So there will be a void, but now that we have in place CFSEU, 

the police will be able to monitor and see who comes in to fill 

that void. And when you get on top of it and you target these 

organizations, you can continue to dismantle and disrupt them, 

and they can continue to do less damage. 

 

Now people would say, oh well maybe we should put the 

money into more addictions work. There needs to be a balance, 

Mr. Speaker. Because a drug trafficker and a drug group is 

disrupted and dismantled, it means that there’s less drugs on the 

street for that period of time. So the daughter, your daughter, 

your son that goes to the party where the drug dealer is saying, 

here try some coke, try a line free, you know, give you a 

ecstasy tablet, give you one free so you can try it free, there’s 

going to be less supply. So the chances of someone coming into 

the drug world is affected. So the less chance of coming into the 

drug world and experiencing those drugs for the first time, the 

less chance you’re going to get addicted, the less chance you’re 

going to be in the life. 

 

So this all works together, Mr. Speaker. And without our 

commitment for these extra police bodies to be able to do those 

extra investigations . . . And these are in-depth investigations, 

Mr. Speaker, wiretap investigations. When you write a paper to 

obtain a wiretap investigation, sometimes they’re as many as 

200 pages long. And the police officer writes that. It’s a lot of 

work. When you follow somebody, you need at least five police 

officers. It’s not like in the movies where you can just, you 

know, follow behind someone and they won’t notice. So you 

know, it’s very in-depth. 

 

Another thing that our police officers have been able to do 

because our government gave them the bodies is to complete 

and have investigations in the Internet child exploitation teams. 

Those are the ICE [Internet child exploitation] teams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Internet became available, it is like a 

smorgasbord for pedophiles. Pedophiles can go online and they 

can get pictures of naked children at any age. They can get 

pictures of children being sexually abused online, involved in 

sexual acts online. And these sick offenders are pedophiles that 

abuse their victims, take photographs, and post them online. 

 

The other thing that these pedophiles do is they go into chat 

rooms and they try and meet someone, a child. They pretend to 

be the child’s age and they start to get into sexual 

conversations. And this is a very special area of law 

enforcement where there’s rules around going online, looking 

for target words so that the offender could be rooted out. 

 

And there have been cases, and we know of one in — what? — 

2008. I think there were two from Swift Current or two in 

Saskatchewan where a girl met an older man online and ran 

away with him. And she was eventually brought back home. 

However if she wasn’t brought back home, you can guarantee 

that she would become a sexual slave or sexual victim. 

 

[16:00] 

 

These kind of investigations are international. Our police here 

in our ICE units are working internationally with police officers 

from all across the globe. For instance, a couple of weeks ago, a 

case out of the Netherlands, it was started in the Netherlands, 

there were approximately 600 charges. One of the people 

arrested was from Saskatchewan for possession of 

pornography, child pornography. And they were able to do this 

through the computer system with the co-operation of the ICE 

unit in Saskatchewan. 

 

In that investigation alone, Mr. Speaker, that whole 

investigation was able to save 220 children from regular sexual 

abuse and being photographed and published online — 220 

victims. These are the kind of investigations that the ICE unit is 

entering in in Saskatchewan and this is just fantastic. We 

couldn’t do that before. There were very few special teams, and 

again, the ICE unit is a unit where you need . . . you know, it’s 

not just one officer. You need specialty officers. You need a 

computer specialist. When you do a search warrant on a house, 

when you’re seizing a computer, the computer has to be taken 

down a certain way because a lot of times there’s a 



7056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

self-imploding virus that is in the computer so that if you do the 

wrong thing, the computer will erase itself and you won’t be 

able to capture the evidence from the computer. 

 

So pedophiles, beware. Our government won’t tolerate it. 

We’ve funded against it, the same as drug traffickers and 

organized crime and victimizing people. We will not tolerate 

that. That’s not going to happen. This government will not 

stand for it. Our police will be held to account to do the right 

thing for the citizens of this province and protect them. 

 

The last point I’d like to make is, because of the police officers 

that we’ve put in place, there’s gang enforcement and drug 

enforcement in the Far North. I’ll tell you, when I was in the 

drug unit in Saskatoon it was very difficult to do anything in the 

Far North because the communities are small. If a new person 

or if you try and inject an undercover operator into that 

environment, it’s not successful because that person is known 

right away to be an outsider. So with a larger unit and more 

bodies to investigate and gather intelligence, we’ll be able to 

meet the needs of the northern communities by way of 

disrupting or dismantling drugs going into those communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all in all, I’d like to say again thank you to the 

citizens of Saskatoon Sutherland for honouring me to allow me 

to represent them. Thank you to my colleagues and opposition 

members as well. I think we’re all here for the same reason. We 

want to make Saskatchewan a better place. I have a little 

trouble sometimes in the House when it gets raucous, especially 

across the way. I almost want to make an arrest for public 

disturbance but I held back. So I would just like again to say 

thank you very much and I will proudly stand and vote yes in 

this fantastic budget from this very progressive government. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

very proud to rise today to give my response to the budget 

which I, at the outset, want to tell the people of the North that it 

totally ignores northern Saskatchewan people and it ignores a 

lot of sectors of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, 

this budget is not worthy of northern people’s support, Mr. 

Speaker, and as their MLA and other MLAs throughout the 

opposition, we will stand against the budget in recognition of 

its shortcomings. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I go into detail as to why the budget 

is not good for the North, I want to recognize a number of 

people. I know that I’ve got one of the most supportive families 

around. I’ve got a very big family, but my immediate family is, 

of course, my wife, Beckie, and I’ve got three girls: Michelle, 

Kellie and Taylor. And one of the greatest stories out of the 

North is everybody is very, very happy that all my girls look 

like their mother. And, Mr. Speaker, even my family is happy. 

 

So I think one of the notions I often say is the sign of a good 

salesman is an ugly guy with a pretty wife. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m one ugly guy that has a very beautiful wife, and I want to 

recognize her for all the work and all the sacrifice and, of 

course, all the frustration that she goes through. And as well 

with my daughters, Mr. Speaker, they have always been very 

supportive and again, they have worked very hard and I’m very 

proud of all the things and the careers that they have done. 

 

But what’s the greatest gift that my wife and, of course, my 

daughters have given me, right now I’ve got three 

grandchildren. The oldest one is Mieka and Mieka is six years 

old. Brodey is five, soon to be six. And then we have a little one 

called Nixon. And Nixon is only two years old, Mr. Speaker. 

And just a brief history of my grandkids, like, they’re 

absolutely wonderful people. Brodey is from the Dionne clan 

and Mieka is from the Laliberte clan and Nixon, the little one, 

is from the Roy family. So we have a fairly big surrounding 

family that certainly are proud of these kids as I am. 

 

But Brodey is, just to give you a history of Brodey, he’s one of 

the best looking guys around and right now he is attending 

school in Saskatoon. He is taking French immersion and I often 

hear him speaking French around his mother and also speaking 

English to me. And I do intend to teach him how to speak Cree, 

Mr. Speaker. So I think Brodey with his good looks and his 

charm and his hockey playing skill and also his French and 

English and Cree ability is certainly a person to be reckoned 

with. 

 

And while Brodey is quite exciting, there’s no question that the 

big boss in our family is Mieka. Mieka is the oldest of the 

grandkids and she’s quite intelligent, very pretty, and she’s 

quite bossy, Mr. Speaker. But we blame the other side of the 

family for that. Mieka I know right now is going to be bossing 

both her cousin around, Brodey, and certainly her younger 

brother Nixon. So I want to say to Brodey and Mieka, keep 

going to school. Keep working hard. Because your papa’s very 

proud of you, and I have great hope and great belief in your 

future. 

 

Now the littlest guy, Nixon, Mr. Speaker, is two years old. And 

this guy is trouble. Let me say in the Assembly, March 30th, 

2011 that as his grandpa, I know this guy’s going to be major 

trouble, because right now he’s two years old and he’s arguing 

with his grandmother. In fact he’s got his finger pointing up to 

his grandmother, and we’re not sure what he’s saying, but we 

know he’s arguing. And he’s got some good points, and if only 

I could understand what he’s saying, Mr. Speaker, and then I’m 

sure Nixon would be able to explain a lot of things in this world 

even at the fact that he’s only two years old. But mark my 

words, Mr. Speaker, that I think Nixon is going to be in the 

Assembly in the next 25 to 30 years, because this guy is really 

coming on strong. And he’s two years old and I see his future 

being very, very bright. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the budget itself, I want to 

tell the people out there that have voted New Democrat, the 

people over the years that stuck with the New Democrats, that 

they should be proud of the work that was done. There’s no 

question that Saskatchewan is enjoying a lot of prosperity 

today. There’s no question about that. The economy’s hot. 

People are moving to Saskatchewan. Housing is in short 

supply. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of that work, a lot of that work 

could be attributed to the history and the work that the NDP 

done alongside of the people of Saskatchewan. We can’t forget 

that the taxpayers certainly done their work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you listen to the Saskatchewan Party, 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7057 

you figure the world was created three years ago when they 

assumed power. And nowhere in the history of Canada, 

nowhere in the history of the free world have we ever had a 

government that come into such largesse in terms of the budget 

income and the booming economy. 

 

These guys inherited a gift, Mr. Speaker. It was a huge gift that 

was built on the backs of the Saskatchewan people, but more so 

certainly with the guidance of the NDP government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP has got nothing to be ashamed of their 

history of rebuilding this province and nothing to be ashamed 

of about the opportunity that we provided in terms of listening 

to that guidance by the people of Saskatchewan and developing 

the brand new economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for every New Democrat that’s out there, you be proud of 

that work. Be proud of the sacrifices. Be proud of the decisions 

that were made many, many years ago to rebuild this economy, 

to rebuild our financial position, and to bring in a bold, brave 

new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This work took a good 10, 12 

years, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t take two or three years, as the 

members opposite would like to suggest to people. 

 

And that’s certainly not very fair, Mr. Speaker. People of 

Saskatchewan are a lot more intelligent than that. They know 

that the boom and the opportunity and the money that’s coming 

to the Saskatchewan coffers right now isn’t certainly part of 

what the Saskatchewan Party is doing. They inherited that. It’s 

a gift, and they’re welcome. And we hope, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan will recognize that. 

 

Now let’s look at the issues of the northern roads, Mr. Speaker, 

on the North. What effect did these guys did and what have 

they done to support northern Saskatchewan? And as I stand 

here today, Mr. Speaker, spring is certainly on its way. And 

once again you look at some of the highway conditions in 

northern Saskatchewan. Whether you’re driving down the 

Dillon road or whether you’re driving down the Canoe Lake, 

Jans Bay, Cole Bay road or down the Patuanak road or down 

the Turner Lake road or down to the Pinehouse road, you’re 

going to find wet, soggy conditions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These roads are in terrible shape. And yet this government and 

this minister gets up and says, we have $50 million for northern 

roads. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Forty-nine per cent of that 

are for operating costs, Mr. Speaker — 49 per cent of that 50 

million for operating costs. So there is no grand prize of $50 

million for northern roads. Once again northerners will be 

driving roads that are in terrible, terrible shape, Mr. Speaker. 

And yet they want us to stand up here and support this budget. 

And I say, no way. We’re not going to support this budget 

because you totally forgot about the North and you always have 

and you always will because that’s your politics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I want to point out as well, when it comes to health care, 

Mr. Speaker, there are services that are lacking in northern 

Saskatchewan. We’ve done as best we can to build up those 

services given the time that we have. But one of the most crying 

shames, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan is our elders. 

When the older people travel to southern Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s for medical appointments, whether it’s for dental or 

whether it’s for vision care, many older people have told me 

that, Buckley, given — sorry, Mr. Speaker — Mr. MLA, given 

the fact that we live on a limited income, we only have $1,100 a 

month as our senior pension plan, $1,100 a month. We’ve got 

to pay our power. We’ve got to pay our food. We’ve got to pay 

our housing costs. We’ve got to pay for a number of other 

things, and at the end of the month we don’t have a whole heck 

of a lot of money left. Now when we get appointments to go to 

Saskatoon for our health, because as you get older your health 

deteriorates — whether it’s again, dental care or vision care or 

health care — we’ve got to travel 600, 500 miles to get the 

services and nobody out there helps us. 

 

So once again I look at this budget. There’s no provisions or 

help for senior citizens to help them find some dollars to travel 

south for some very necessary care, whether it’s in health care, 

dental care, or vision care, and nobody seems to care. That 

party doesn’t care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that I’m going to tell the people of 

northern Saskatchewan, in particular the elders, is that, 

remember that you’ve got to pay a lot of extra money to travel 

south for a lot of appointments. And that’s not fair, but that 

party don’t care, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party doesn’t 

care, Mr. Speaker. And I want the old people to remember, the 

elders to remember that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I look at some of what their friends are, Mr. Speaker. 

When you see the Potash Corporation, the CEO Bill Doyle 

making — what? — $350 million in some of his pension offers 

or his shareholdings. One guy gets $350 million from the 

PotashCorp. And the other point is, you look at this 

American-based company, Mr. Speaker. They made $1.8 

billion last year in profit off a Saskatchewan resources. And 

there you see their leader, their Premier, hugging him onstage 

saying keep making all that kind of money — while many 

people travel poor highways, while many people, elder people 

in the North don’t have the kind of support that they need to 

come forward to look for health care, certainly dental care and 

vision care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that I notice in the North is again in the 

budget. One of the crying shames in northern Saskatchewan is 

the amount of suicide we have throughout the North, Mr. 

Speaker. It is not something that families want anybody to go 

through. I’ve been to a number of funerals where young people 

who are bright, articulate, they’re educated, they’re fantastic 

people, and they take their own life because they lose hope. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And this budget comes along and commits $2 million to the 

northern suicide strategy, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not really 

programs. It’s not really programs per se. They’re going to have 

a travelling road show for the next six, seven months to see 

what they can do about it. And I’m not very good at math, Mr. 

Speaker, but if there’s 35, 40,000 people in northern 

Saskatchewan and you look at the $2 million answer that the 

Sask Party’s put forward for suicide, that’s — what? — 

fifty-seven cents for every person. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

our people in northern Saskatchewan are worth a heck of a lot 

more than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I go along, Mr. Speaker. I look at the fishermen, the 

fishermen that were supposed to have been supported by these 



7058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

guys. These guys turned around and they didn’t do nothing for 

the fisherman. They led them down the garden path. Oh we’re 

your friends. We’re going to help you. We’ll get rid of 

Freshwater. And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, not one 

red cent to help the fishermen develop their industries. 

 

Trappers, you might as well get out of the way too. They don’t 

want trappers as well, Mr. Speaker. People that own land, 

leases, people that have leased land for years, they’re trying to 

get rid of them too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, people of the North are sick and 

tired of this government even after three years because: (a) they 

take credit for something they’ve never done; (b) they continue 

to try and fool the rest of the people of Saskatchewan; and (c) 

they know that they don’t serve northern Saskatchewan — the 

young people, the families, or the elders — at all. 

 

And people in northern Saskatchewan know this, Mr. Speaker. 

The fishermen know this. The people that have trouble with 

housing know this. The people that have gone through suicide 

know this. The people that have challenges in commercial 

fishing, trapping, or trying to hold on to their land, they know 

this government don’t care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And right where you start looking at all the options, when you 

start telling people, well stand up and vote and let’s fight these 

guys together, they come along with another Bill, with another 

Bill saying, oh you’ve got to have photo ID [identification] to 

vote now. Now, Mr. Speaker, what kind of system is that where 

a party . . . [inaudible] . . . along and trying to stifle democracy? 

The reason why they want to make sure people have a photo ID 

before they vote, Mr. Speaker, is to stop them from voting. 

That’s what their objective is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we look at the lack of support whether it comes to highways, 

health care, or housing, suicide, fishermen, trappers, protection 

of the land, developing our future, our young people — this 

budget doesn’t do nothing. They put $2 million in the budget 

for suicide prevention and that amounts to 57 cents for every 

man, woman, and child. And that’s a disgrace and that’s 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I again go back to the point that the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan should be called the potash 

corporation of America. The only thing that they have done, 

Mr. Speaker, is given their shareholders $1.8 billion while the 

North gets nothing, Mr. Speaker. Only thing that the CEO, Bill 

Doyle, gets is 350 million in share options — for one guy. We 

get 70 million for well over 1 million people, Mr. Speaker. 

Now is that fair to the northern people or to Saskatchewan? The 

answer is no, it’s not fair. It’s shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one other thing I wanted to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, 

is that this Saskatchewan Party . . . You know, people out there 

tell me, how long are they going to be around? And I tell them, 

so far they’re going to war with the working people. They’re 

ignoring a lot of the health sector people. They’re now ignoring 

teachers. They’ve taken on the chiropractors. They’ve ignored 

the Aboriginal people. They’ve certainly ignored certain sectors 

of the province, including the North. So sooner or later, all 

these little battles that they’re getting into and really showing 

their colours, it’s going to come across and the people in those 

areas are going to unite and they’re going to come back. 

They’re going to vote NDP. They’re going to send the Sask 

Party government packing in 2011, Mr. Speaker. That is my 

prediction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why? Because we certainly worked hard to rebuild the 

economy and rebuild our finances. And this . . . At the time 

when the Sask Party took over, they really had nothing else to 

do but spend money and appear to be a great party, Mr. 

Speaker. And appearance as we know now is certainly 

deceiving all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I kind of looked at an article last week. 

There was two articles I looked at. First one was in The 

StarPhoenix. They had the Telemiracle. There’s a nice picture 

of the Telemiracle. They made a nice chunk of money. There’s 

balloons and people were all having a good time and 

celebrating the great work that the Telemiracle people did. And 

right next to the Telemiracle picture was a picture of the 

Premier. And the headline is, and I quote from the headline: 

“Wall rallies troops.” Front page, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m 

saying, what is up with that? The Telemiracle people should 

have the front page for the work that they do and the work that 

they should have done. 

 

And what I think happened there, Mr. Speaker, is that they got 

their front page simply to build up the hype of the party and to 

help their fortunes along to try and convince the masses. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that kind of front page coverage to try and 

convince people to vote for the Sask Party is not going to work, 

Mr. Speaker. It is not going to work at all because people know 

their record. They know what they’re about and they’re starting 

to be worried about these guys, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I would point out that if you look at the pretend 

government — I call them the pretend government — all 

you’ve done so far is hand out good news, and everything’s 

going great. Pay down debt, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, the 

whole notion is that people out there know that after three years 

in government you can’t do the things you’re doing unless the 

work was done before. They know it; we know it, Mr. Speaker; 

and the people of Saskatchewan are starting to know it. 

 

And that’s why I tell every New Democrat that’s out there, or 

people looking for a party that comes home, that really reflects 

the values of Saskatchewan, that the NDP are proud. They have 

nothing to be ashamed of. And that that party should thank 

them for all the work that was done and the benefits that they 

now enjoy and hand out like they done all the work, Mr. 

Speaker. That is the furthest thing from the truth. And they 

know it, and we know it, and the people of Saskatchewan are 

certainly starting to know it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was kind of amused at the second headline 

that I seen, where somebody mentioned our Premier being the 

most popular premier in the country. And I said, oh okay. So I 

started looking at this. I started looking at their leader. 

 

And I said, okay, let’s go west. The Premier Campbell, I think 

he stepped down, so there’s no premier in BC [British 

Columbia]. I think he stepped down. Then you go to Alberta. 

Well Stelmach, I think he’s on his way out. I think he 

announced he is going to retire. And then as you go west, then 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7059 

you hit Manitoba and then, well that person just started a couple 

months ago, Mr. Speaker. And then as you head further east, 

Mr. Speaker, then you come across Ontario, and McGuinty’s 

been there for a while. He’s got a lot of challenges when it 

comes to the whole notion of the economy of Ontario, so he’s 

not going to be very popular. Then you go further east. Then 

you hit Quebec. And Charest, of course, has his problems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there really is nobody else out there that they 

can compare their leader to right now, because everybody’s 

either coming in or quitting. And that’s why I say to people out 

there, if me and the member from Cumberland entered a beauty 

contest, then just two of us — one of us is going to win. 

Because nobody entered, right? One of us is going to win if 

only two of us enter. One of us is going to win. So when the 

media or the Sask Party says our Premier is the most popular 

premier, not because he’s the only one around right now that 

hasn’t quit or is on his way out so, Mr. Speaker, I go back to 

my point. If there’s a beauty contest and me and the member 

from Cumberland entered and there’s only two of us, one of us 

is going to win. Because nobody else entered. And that’s 

exactly the case with this pretend government and their leader. 

 

The fact is that three-quarters of the premiers that have already 

left — Danny Williams is gone, Campbell is gone, Stelmach is 

gone, and a number of others are gone — and he’s the only one 

left. So guess what? That makes him the most popular premier 

by virtue of nobody else is around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that point that I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that that Sask 

Party has always been a pretend government. They pretend to 

build the economy of Saskatchewan. They pretend to build up 

the population of Saskatchewan. They pretend to pay down 

debt. They pretend to be something that they’re not. They know 

they inherited a gift, every single one of them, and that gift was 

a booming economy, a great financial position on paper, and 

some really, really good savings. And that came as the result of 

a solid NDP government that took over a mess in 1991 and 

built this province up over the last 16 years. 

 

But this budget still forgets the North. It still forgets elders. It 

still forgets to address suicide. It still forgets to address 

housing. It forgets to address the fact that the Aboriginal 

employment rate is going up instead of down as they contend. 

And all the stuff that they say to the media or to the newspapers 

or to the radio station, Mr. Speaker, it’s all pretend. 

 

And that includes their highways budget. The minister going 

and saying $50 million for highways, 99 per cent of that is 

maintenance budget, Mr. Speaker. Very little for new 

construction in northern Saskatchewan. We’ll continue driving 

those soggy, beaten roads, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the end of the day, at the end of the day the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to stand up, they’re going to send 

somebody to fight for them here, not somebody to come and 

kneel in Regina and say, please give us a little bit of things for 

our people. We’re going to stand and we’re going to fight 

together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why I tell people of the North that I will not be 

supporting this budget that ignores their needs and that totally 

disregards them as people, Mr. Speaker, that I will not sit here 

and support any of the pretending that they do to try and solve 

our problems. We’ve seen what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ll never do anything for the North. They never have and 

they never will. And that’s why I stand here today. I’m going to 

be supporting the amendment and voting against this careless, 

uncaring budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

speak and to enter into the debate on the budget, the last budget 

of this government before the next election. And I wanted to 

first of all go back to the budget address from the Minister of 

Finance, Mr. Speaker, which I have to say I think was a 

well-written speech and it was a well-delivered speech. A trifle 

long as these things go, Mr. Speaker, but I would say well 

written and well delivered by the Minister of Finance. 

 

And it’s very important with a budget like this because 

packaging is extremely important when the substance is not 

quite there, Mr. Speaker, and this was a very well-packaged 

and, as I said, well-delivered budget. But as I said, you rely a 

great deal on packaging in a circumstance like that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The budget is packaged under the title of The Saskatchewan 

Advantage, and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve made this 

reference before, the Saskatchewan advantage, and the 

Saskatchewan disadvantage — it’s a two-edged sword — is 

truly geography. And I think every thoughtful resident of 

Saskatchewan knows that. The disadvantage of course is 

geography. It would be very nice to have a seaport, but that’s 

not going to be the case. 

 

But the advantage far outweighs the disadvantage these days, 

Mr. Speaker. This is a very commodities-driven global 

economy, and it is the western part of Canada that has those 

commodities — potash, uranium, oil, natural gas. And in a 

growing and increasingly hungry world, although we may not 

be the breadbasket of that world, Mr. Speaker, still a very 

important supplier of food to the tables of the globe. 

 

And we know that nationally that the West is flowering because 

of these commodities, somewhat maybe to the detriment of the 

rest of the country. Mr. Speaker, you’ll be well aware — and I 

don’t know how the Dutch got caught with this — but the 

Dutch disease, where one part of the country has commodities 

like oil, and that drives up the currency of the country, and 

another part of the country that relies on exports of 

manufactured goods suffers as a result. And so there’s a little 

bit of the Dutch disease in Canada. It makes Saskatchewan in 

particular show up very well in economic indicators because 

what’s lifting us up is helping, unfortunately, push down some 

of our neighbours to the east. 

 

The fact that we have the second highest oil production in the 

country, the third highest natural gas production in the country, 

that we have uranium, that we have 50 per cent of the world’s 

potash reserves, and potash reserves that are very accessible, 

relatively easy to mine, and as I said we are seeing now in the 

last few months, particularly, a rising cost of food across the 

globe. It probably set off the tinderbox in Tunisia, which set off 



7060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

Egypt and which has now set off Libya. It started off as a 

protest about the rising cost of bread. 

 

And in all of these commodities that are in increasing demand, 

but not necessarily increasing supply, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is blessed to be able to export them, provide 

them to the world. And that is truly, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 

think anybody would argue that it wasn’t, that is truly the 

Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And in respect to that geographical advantage, and particularly 

that advantage in geology, there is an ongoing debate now in 

Saskatchewan that was initiated by the BHP Billiton takeover 

attempt, but continues to carry on amongst the people of 

Saskatchewan, not just amongst political parties, Mr. Speaker, 

about the development of the potash resource in particular. And 

the Minister of Energy and Resources was kind enough during 

the debate in the fall on potash to summarize the NDP position 

for us. And he did so as follows. Mr. Speaker, he says, the 

position of the members opposite, the NDP, that the maximum 

amount of value possible for the people of Saskatchewan 

should be extracted from the resource . . . And I think that was a 

fair summation, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Energy and 

Resources seemed to think it was a bad thing, but I think it’s a 

fair description of where we stand. 

 

And so I will return the favour today, Mr. Speaker, and sort of 

summarize what I understand to be the government’s position 

on potash royalties and probably on uranium royalties as well, 

Mr. Speaker, and that would be, don’t rock the boat. That’s the 

position of the government. And they were concerned that if 

there was any change, despite the sea change in potash prices 

and potash profits, that if there was any change to the amount 

that’s recovered by the people of Saskatchewan for the use of 

their resource that that would be in some way devastating, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I want to come back to this idea of exchanging jobs for 

royalties because I think it’s a false trade-off, Mr. Speaker. But 

the opposition, the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, has 

a vision of recovering more from our resources — and in 

particular from potash, which has seen an enormous rise in 

price — and putting some of that money aside for the day when 

perhaps we don’t have as much easily recoverable oil, as much 

easily recoverable natural gas, as we do today, Mr. Speaker, so 

that there’s something for future generations arising from what 

is a non-renewable resource. Although in the case of potash it 

will be a long time before it runs out, when we won’t be so 

fortunate with some of our other resources, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

the vision of the opposition. That’s the vision of the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

The vision of the Premier seems to be that he will maintain a 

nice relationship with CEOs of the potash companies, and some 

day the Premier and the chief executive officer of Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan can share a box seat in a domed 

stadium to watch a football game, Mr. Speaker. That, I don’t 

think, is standing up for Saskatchewan. It simply is not. 

 

And the suggestion from the governing party that if we even 

dare review potash royalties in light of recent developments that 

this would result in losses of thousands of jobs, I think shows a 

misunderstanding — perhaps deliberate perhaps not, depending 

on which member of the government you’re thinking of — as to 

what the potash policy of potash companies in Saskatchewan 

has been. Because it has not been a policy of creating jobs, and 

it’s just been the opposite of that, Mr. Speaker. The position of 

potash companies in Saskatchewan, particularly the leader of 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, is not to increase 

production. 

 

As a matter of fact, when the Minister of Finance and the 

Minister of Energy and Resources made their $2 billion error 

on what revenues would become available from potash a budget 

or two ago, and the issue of cutting back production on the part 

of PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] and potash 

companies in Saskatchewan was raised as evidence that perhaps 

all things weren’t right in the global market for potash, the 

response of the Minister of Energy back to us was production is 

not sales, and it’s all based on sales. 

 

Well eventually you cut production, you cut the amount you 

can sell. But it did make it very clear that the strategy of potash 

companies in Saskatchewan in face of, in face of a reduced 

demand for potash was to lay off potash workers, cut 

production, try to keep the price up. If that had worked, as I 

said at the time, Mr. Speaker, if that had worked then yes, 

profits would have stayed up. Royalties would have stayed up, 

and there wouldn’t have been a $2 billion mistake. But it didn’t 

work. 

 

But there’s no question that it is not the response of the potash 

companies of Saskatchewan on their own to increase 

production. That’s not their response. And that’s why the carrot 

was made by an NDP government to encourage an increase of 

production, Mr. Speaker, because they needed a carrot. In fact 

if the potash companies that are working in Saskatchewan 

wanted to increase production on their own and in a significant 

way, the three pages of potash mines that the minister holds up 

that we’re competing with across the globe, well it’d be reduced 

to one page real quickly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If potash was increased, production was increased in the 

province of Saskatchewan — and that would drop the price of 

potash — but if that happened, a lot of those countries, a lot of 

those mines could not compete because of the accessibility of 

the potash, because of the quality of the potash, or because of 

the state of governance, if I can use that phrase, in a lot of the 

countries that we’re supposedly competing with in this potash 

market. 

 

And that would be . . . An increase in production would be the 

right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people in the world, 

millions and millions and millions of people in the world rely 

on potash to eat. And the energy strategy in Brazil, based on 

ethanol, is based on obtaining potash as well. There is nothing 

particularly moral, just the opposite, about cutting production in 

Saskatchewan so that you can increase, so that you can increase 

the price but increase also the price of food and the price of 

energy around the world. There’s nothing particularly moral 

about that. 

 

But that’s been the position of, and it’s a business position of 

the companies that have been mining potash in the province of 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7061 

Saskatchewan. This is not a strategy to create jobs. It is just the 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. And these companies are quite willing 

to lay off people, as they were doing a year or two ago to cut 

production, because that is their response to a dampening of 

price, a dampening of demand for potash. 

 

So we’re not dealing, and I don’t think anybody believes we are 

dealing with altruistic organizations that come into 

Saskatchewan to create jobs. That’s not what they’re here for. 

That’s a collateral benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, but 

that’s not what they’re here for, Mr. Speaker. They’re here to 

make the greatest profit possible. And that should also be the 

approach of our government, to increase the return to the extent 

possible for the people of Saskatchewan from the resource that 

they own. And that, Mr. Speaker, is not the position of this 

government. That is the position of the New Democratic Party. 

It is not the position of this government, and that is wrong for a 

government that is supposed to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that’s the resource, the revenue side, I suppose, a little bit 

on this budget, Mr. Speaker. On the expenditure side, on the 

expenditure side, the government talks a little bit and the 

Finance minister did — and what I did say, it was a 

well-delivered speech — about this balanced budget. The 

budget document itself states otherwise to the contrary. But 

even if you accept that the budget is balanced and ignore the 

parts of the budget document that point to the rising debt, the 

budget once again does not include any settlement at all for 

people who work in the health services occupations within our 

province. So assuming that they don’t get zero from this 

government, Mr. Speaker, there’s increased expenditures not 

budgeted for. 

 

This budget has nothing for a settlement for teachers. Last year 

the government said, oh no, no, no, we’ll find the money. We’ll 

find the money. Now it becomes quite apparent that the 

government had no intention of settling with the teachers last 

year, so they weren’t worried about that. And now once again, 

there’s no money for teachers in the budget except, except, Mr. 

Speaker, they can put off a settlement with the teachers until 

after the election. But when they do settle with the teachers and 

if they give them more than zero — this is the first year of the 

contract, a new contract, Mr. Speaker — and that would alone 

drive this budget in deficit, if this budget was not in fact in 

deficit, if this budget was not in fact in deficit already, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it’s not a balanced budget. It can’t be a balanced budget. If 

you look at all the health workers that have not received 

settlement yet, and all the teachers who have not received a 

settlement yet, it’s not possibly a balanced budget. And nobody, 

I think, credibly could argue that it is. 

 

Because I want to talk a little bit about the effect of the national 

law and order agenda on the finances of the province of 

Saskatchewan, again on how transparent this budget actually is, 

and how much it actually corresponds with reality. 

 

I can’t help but comment on one of the many, many remarkable 

things that the member from Saskatoon Sutherland said. At one 

point in her speech she said some people don’t believe in police 

officers. I don’t know who those people would be, Mr. Speaker. 

Perhaps a few anarchists. I hope she wasn’t thinking that there’s 

anybody in this Assembly or very many people in 

Saskatchewan who . . . [inaudible] . . . police officers. It was 

one of the remarkable things that she said. And the only reason 

I comment on that is that one of the expenses going forward for 

the Government of Saskatchewan, every government in the 

country, is the cost of the national Conservative law and order 

agenda, as it is called. 

 

There’s been a lot of talk leading up to the contempt motion, 

Mr. Speaker, in Ottawa. A lot of talk about how nobody knew 

what the costs were of this agenda. And there were some 

estimates made of those costs, and eventually the government 

was found in contempt. The national government was found in 

contempt. First time that a government was found in contempt 

by parliament in the Commonwealth, not just in Canadian 

history, but in the history of the Commonwealth. First time a 

government was found in contempt of parliament. 

 

And part of that contempt ruling was respecting the cost of the 

law and order agenda. What wasn’t much discussed about is 

that most of that agenda doesn’t fall on the national 

government. Most of that agenda, Mr. Speaker, falls on 

provincial governments. The restriction of conditional 

sentences almost entirely will be paid for by provincial 

governments. And there’s no indication from this government 

as to what the costs of that are going to be, what cost is this 

province going to bear as a result of an agenda being set in 

Ottawa by Conservatives and not being challenged on fiscal 

grounds, on fiscal grounds by this government, by this 

government. 

 

Now I want to put aside any debate about whether anything in 

that law and order agenda actually reduces crime. Let’s assume 

that it does. And I want to put aside whether that really matters. 

Let’s assume that if a consensus of Canadians believe that some 

crimes should be punished greater than they currently are, 

whether or not that reduces crime, then let’s say that’s a good 

enough reason to bear these costs. 

 

But in fact you can only spend a dollar once, Mr. Speaker, and 

a dollar spent on a correctional space in Saskatchewan can’t be 

spent on a schoolroom, can’t be spent on low-income housing, 

and it can’t be spent on a hospital room, Mr. Speaker. So if the 

people of Saskatchewan want to trade schoolrooms or housing 

or hospital rooms for jail cells, well that’s a public policy 

decision, and I don’t know if there’s a right answer to that, Mr. 

Speaker. But the people of Saskatchewan deserve to know that 

they’re making the trade-off. They deserve to know what we’re 

going to spend money on, and what we’re not going to spend 

money on. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Corrections has today announced that we are going to spend 

$12 million more on corrections, more on jail cells, to build 

more jail cells. And maybe that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, 

because we do have an issue with overcrowding in the province 

in any case. But the full cost, the full cost of this agenda should 

be made known to the people of Saskatchewan because it is the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer that’s going to be paying for it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



7062 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

So, Mr. Speaker, although it was a well-delivered budget 

speech by the Minister of Finance on the issue of resources and 

standing up for Saskatchewan, I can’t support the budget 

motion. On the issue of transparency and whether the budget is 

balanced or not, I can’t support the budget motion, Mr. 

Speaker. And on the issue of disclosure to the people of 

Saskatchewan of the costs of government programs going 

forward and the costs of government contracts going forward, 

again the government has not been forthright. It has not been 

transparent. And I can’t support the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I advise, and I guess it’ll be no surprise to the members 

opposite, that I will not be supporting the motion. I will be 

supporting the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South, 

the Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 

very much. Well our colleagues in opposition have left me with 

only a very few minutes for my remarks so I’ll abbreviate them 

and I’ll get started right away. 

 

It’s a great honour to participate in this year’s budget debate, 

Mr. Speaker, and a great pleasure to take this opportunity to 

explain some of the budget details for Tourism, Parks, Culture 

and Sport, the great ministry that I serve, all part of the 

Saskatchewan Party government’s comprehensive plan for 

moving Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Now I’d like to begin with some well-deserved thank yous, 

starting with the residents of Regina South whom I have the 

great privilege of serving. I thoroughly enjoy listening and 

learning about their opinions on important issues along with 

their thoughts on how to address the challenges and 

opportunities in our great province. And I’m deeply grateful for 

the time that they take to share their insight with me. 

 

Thanks also to Kyle Leonard, the extremely capable young man 

who runs the Regina South constituency office on my behalf. A 

very special hello to Michelle, his wonderful fiancée as well, 

and congratulations to them both on their upcoming wedding 

which is going to take place in the beautifully restored train 

station in Ogema, Saskatchewan. Ogema, a great town. 

 

Next is the incredibly dedicated team in room 345, our office 

here at the Legislative Building, including Heather, Kim, Bob, 

Marg, and Darin. You do a fantastic job, folks, every single 

day. Thank you very much. Sincere thanks as well to the highly 

skilled professionals at the ministry led by our very capable 

deputy minister, Ms. Wynne Young. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll conclude my thank yous by 

acknowledging my incredible wife, Jocelyn, whose love and 

constant support makes my involvement in public life possible. 

Thanks, darling; you’re the best. 

 

I also want to mention the youngsters that we have at home 

because I said that I would. There’s Meko who is 16 and getting 

a little long in the tooth. There’s Bear who’s in great shape for a 

12-year-old, and then there are the girls, Krissy and Katja, who 

are just 11 months and a real handful. Mr. Speaker, part of the 

reason I want to include them in today’s remarks is that I think 

they’re watching on TV. In addition, this just might be the first 

and only time in the history of Saskatchewan that dogs are 

going to be mentioned by name in Hansard, the official record 

of our legislature’s proceedings. So girls, I want you to be on 

your best behaviour, no fighting, and no peeing on the rug. 

 

Mindful of the time, Mr. Speaker, I’ll proceed to my comments 

about the budget and I’ll confine them to a response to our 

critic from Saskatoon Riversdale’s comments about the budget 

yesterday. It’s time to consider her remarks. 

 

I’d like to thank her in advance for acknowledging the 

incredible 75 per cent increase in funding that we’ve provided 

to the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation. Unfortunately she’s 

completely missed its importance to the heritage community 

that works so hard on behalf of all of us in our province. 

 

Interviewed in the Leader-Post on March 29, Heritage 

Saskatchewan CEO described the additional funding support as 

“very critical,” she said, “because it provides funding to the 

grassroots agencies, to small communities and larger 

communities. It was great to see funding channelled in that 

direction . . .” How could the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale possibly not see the transformational nature of our 

budget commitment? I just don’t understand it. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Riversdale also talked about the 

film industry and noted that it’s facing serious challenges. Now 

on that point, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. Then she 

said that the recommendations contained in the recently tabled 

film industry task report aren’t being addressed. On this point, 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree less. The number one priority in 

the report’s recommendations was speeding up the approval 

process for payment of film employment tax credits to film 

production companies. Well we just did that. Increased funding 

for marketing Saskatchewan-made films was another key 

priority. We just did that too. How could the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale not have been aware of all of this? Again 

I don’t know. You’ll have to ask her. 

 

Let’s consider what SMPIA, the Saskatchewan Motion Picture 

Industry Association, had to say about the budget. And here’s a 

direct quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

SMPIA is pleased to announce that our advocacy efforts 

and work on the Film Industry Task Force have had some 

success. In today’s budget announcement we learned that 

our industry will benefit from an increase of $116,000 to 

SaskFilm’s allocation. This represents an increase of over 

9% to the money they receive to support the film and 

television industry in Saskatchewan . . . it is positive 

news [they concluded] to see that funding for our industry 

has not only been maintained but increased. 

 

The member expressed great disappointment, Mr. Speaker, over 

the winding down of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network]. Now this is very understandable. But she doesn’t 

appear to understand at all that with the sale of SCN to 

Bluepoint, the distance education service continues, access to 

the existing film library continues, and there will be millions 

and millions of additional dollars in the future that will be 

invested directly in support of Saskatchewan-based film 

production. How could she possibly not know about these 



March 30, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7063 

important and exciting new developments for our province’s 

film industry? Again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. You’ll have 

to ask her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in commenting about the arts and culture sector, 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale said, and I quote, “All 

these organizations are getting squeezed.” Squeezed, Mr. 

Speaker. That was the word that she used. Our Sask Party 

government has invested 35 per cent more in this key sector in 

its first four years than the NDP did in its last four years. That’s 

an increase of $21 million, Mr. Speaker. How could that fact 

have escaped the member’s attention? I don’t know. You’ll 

have to ask her. 

 

And if you get past page 1 of the TPCS [Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport] budget — and I recommend that she do that 

some day, Mr. Speaker — you will find that part of this 

investment is nearly $1 million in brand new funding for new 

programs she hasn’t even found yet. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was little if any acknowledgement of 

the historic investment in our province’s beautiful provincial 

parks and unprecedented funding and support of our regional 

park system — priorities that were sadly ignored by the NDP 

government in former days. 

 

An Hon. Member: — For 16 years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — For 16 years. Yes, indeed. Mr. 

Speaker, finally we come to tourism, a critically important part 

of our ministry’s budget as demonstrated by the dramatic 

increases in funding to Tourism Saskatchewan since the 

election in the fall of 2007 — a full 50 per cent — but which 

again unfortunately does not seem to have captured the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale’s attention. 

 

At this point I will simply add the following quote from 

Tourism Saskatchewan about our government’s new budget: 

“The significance of tourism to the province’s economic growth 

and employment has been recognized through commitments 

made in today’s provincial budget,” they said. And they 

continued on to say: “Targeted support to highway 

infrastructure and provincial and regional parks demonstrates 

the government’s understanding that tourism is a growing, 

viable sector and that investment will pay dividends.” Again, 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more with that quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of minutes, I gather, just to review 

some of the more interesting other features of the budget, but 

we’re going to have to be brief. Five and a half minutes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Five minutes and 25 seconds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Okay, five minutes and 25 seconds. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to offer this, this following 

observation. During the Finance minister’s speech, his budget 

address last Wednesday, I had the opportunity to watch the 

NDP members on the other side of the aisle, and here’s what I 

saw. It was an amazing sight. Never have I seen them more 

disappointed. Never have I seen them more despondent, and 

never, Mr. Speaker, have I seen them more desperate. Every 

time the Finance minister outlined yet another key budget 

initiative, yet another component of the Saskatchewan 

advantage, you could almost hear them muttering to 

themselves, we are so pooped. 

 

No doubt it will disappoint our opposition colleagues even 

further — and I hate to do that, Mr. Speaker, because we like to 

be kind on this side of the aisle — I’m going to say right away 

that I like this particular budget. I like it a lot. All of us on the 

government side of the House do. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Great things for agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Great things for agriculture, says the 

member. Great things for small businesses. Cutting business 

taxes. Absolutely. Raising exemption platforms for tax 

exemption for income taxes — all of these good things, Mr. 

Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well we’ve just given 

you all the good news you can handle. You’re looking more 

disappointed than ever, I’m sorry to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s probably time for me to wrap up. We only 

have about two minutes left. Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Keep going. Keep going. Keep going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Keep going? They’re urging me to 

keep going. Members are urging me to keep going, and I will 

for a minute or so. 

 

Now traditionally, Mr. Speaker, as you may recall, this is the 

time when I invite members of the opposition to set aside party 

rhetoric. This is the time traditionally when I invite them to set 

aside petty jealousies and animosities. This is the time 

traditionally, Mr. Speaker, when in a bipartisan spirit of true 

partnership, I invite them to join us in supporting a budget — a 

budget that lowers taxes, a budget that reduces debt, and a 

budget that adds immeasurably to the quality of life of 

Saskatchewan people, their families, and their communities. 

 

However as the member for Biggar always reminds me at about 

this time, he says, Hutch, they’re not going to vote for the 

budget. I can almost hear him now. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

see why the NDP feel compelled to vote against lower taxes. I 

don’t see why they feel compelled to vote against paying down 

the debt, and I certainly don’t understand why they feel 

compelled to vote against better quality of life, but I guess they 

will anyway. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to simply say this at 

this point, I’m proud to support this government’s 

Saskatchewan Advantage budget. I’m very proud and confident 

that it will maintain the momentum in our strong economy, and 

I’m certainly confident it’s going to enhance our enviable 

quality of life and keep Saskatchewan moving forward as we 

grow the population. 

 

We have the strongest economy in the country. Our job, Mr. 

Speaker, as I explained to a number of folks at the Chartered 

Accountants of Saskatchewan meeting the other morning, is to 

keep it that way. And I remember in addressing recently a 

meeting of the Regina Engineering Society, I said, you know, 

people sometimes ask, what do governments do anyway? And I 

said, in order to answer that question, I need to ask you one. 

Here is the question, I said. Hands up, everybody who’s busy in 



7064 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2011 

their office today. All over the room, hands went up. Everybody 

is busy in their office today in the engineering society, Mr. 

Speaker. And I said, our job is to keep it that way. 

 

That’s what this budget will do, Mr. Speaker. It lowers debt. It 

reduces taxes. It increases quality of life for individuals and 

families all over the province, and it’s certainly going to keep 

the momentum of Canada’s strongest economy moving 

forward. 

 

Apparently we have another minute left. I’ll say at this point, 

Mr. Speaker, in the last few remaining seconds, that I’ve got to 

go home and feed and walk the girls. I thank them for their 

attention. I hope they’ve left the carpet the way that it was when 

we left this morning, and I certainly expect to have a very 

pleasant evening with them. They too are happy about reduced 

taxes. They too are happy about lower debt . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . That’s right. We’ve retired $3 billion of debt in 

the last little while, Mr. Speaker. That’s about $2 billion, and 

better highways, Mr. Speaker. There’s just no question about it. 

 

I wish that we had a critic from Saskatoon Riversdale who 

would take the time to read the budget . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . STARS ambulance — absolutely — a fantastic 

new initiative, Mr. Speaker. What else can we talk about? Let’s 

talk about health care. Let’s talk about infrastructure. And let’s 

talk about unprecedented provincial revenue sharing in support 

of municipalities all over this province. Mr. Speaker, in Regina, 

my community, it’s risen from $13 million to 33. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly will 

adjourn until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7033, 7035 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7033 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7033 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7033 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7034 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7034 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7034 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7034 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7034 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7035 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7035 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7035 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7035 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7035 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7036 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7036 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7036 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7036 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7037 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Nurses Practising in Saskatchewan 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7037 

 Senior Civil Servant Retires 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7037 

 Davidson Cyclones Win Provincial D Championship 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7037 

 The Battlefords Junior Citizen of the Year 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7038 

 Spectra Place Fundraiser in Estevan 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7038 

 Vote for The Sheepdogs 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7038 

 Royalty Policies 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7038 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Emergency Medical Services 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7039 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7039 

 Contract Negotiations with Teachers and Funding for Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7040 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7040 

 References to Ministry of Justice 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7041 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7042 

 Payments Regarding Parkridge Nursing Home 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7044 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7046 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7049 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7053 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7056 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7059 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7062 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


