




















































Hansard: March 21, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 34B  MONDAY, MARCH 21, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6821 

 March 21, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 7 p.m. the House will reconvene. I 

recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

this evening to enter the debate on Bill 162 for a number of 

reasons, fundamental reasons, very important reasons, Mr. 

Speaker, because this Bill speaks directly to the fundamental 

right of Saskatchewan citizens to vote. 

 

Now with virtually any piece of legislation that comes before 

the Assembly, as an opposition — whether it‟s the 

Saskatchewan Party that was in opposition or the New 

Democratic Party in opposition — you want to look at why a 

Bill is being brought forward. And so you have to ask yourself, 

okay what is the impetus for having brought this Bill to the 

Legislative Assembly to become law? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you ask yourself that question and 

when you apply that question to this Bill, the answers are 

disturbing and sad. Because certainly democracies all over the 

world — and we are all members of the Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association, or most of us anyway if we pay our 

dues, and so we understand somewhat how it works in terms of 

the Commonwealth democracies around the world by extension 

— but certainly democracies all over the world, Mr. Speaker, 

are attempting to increase the number of people who take part 

in their elections. And if you look certainly in the example of 

North Africa today, there are people there who are literally 

dying for an opportunity to vote. And so what happens here 

with Bills 161 and 162, Mr. Speaker? We have a government 

who introduces a Bill that actually is aimed at reducing the 

number of people who are eligible to vote in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so again when I mentioned earlier that you want to ask 

yourself, well why would this Bill be brought forward? Why 

this legislation and why now? And I would argue that it‟s 

become clear. It‟s transparent in terms of why the government 

would bring this Bill forward at this point in time. Mr. Speaker, 

if you look specifically at who this affects, who are the people 

who are least likely to have a piece of photo identification to 

take with them to the polls to vote on election day, well, Mr. 

Speaker, I would argue that the vast majority of those people 

are people who choose not to support this government and their 

actions. 

Quite simply, Mr. Speaker, it‟s seniors throughout the province, 

people on fixed incomes because this government has increased 

the cost of their ability to live through SaskEnergy, SaskPower, 

and the rent that they might pay. The government‟s done 

nothing to control those costs for seniors, so they‟ve got 

absolutely no incentive to vote for this government — none, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so what other group, what other group is targeted by this 

government that might not have identification, photo 

identification to bring with them to the polls? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, many Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan don‟t have 

photo ID [identification]. And so if you look at what this 

government has done to disenfranchise Aboriginal people in 

Saskatchewan, well you look at a few things. 

 

You look at the duty to consult, where they‟ve ignored their 

duty, their obligation, their legal obligation to consult with 

Aboriginal people on a number of occasions. And they have 

actually stated in second reading speeches that on certain Bills 

they‟ve consulted with Aboriginal people specifically, certainly 

with The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act where in the 

Minister‟s second reading speech, she said that she had 

consulted and spoken with the Aboriginal community with 

respect to that Bill. We do our consultation and learned that 

that‟s not true, and so they‟ve been disrespected entirely. 

 

If you look at what‟s happening in forestry in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Métis people are entirely left out 

of any agreement when it comes to moving forward in the forest 

industry, and they‟ve had no consultation on it. They‟ve been 

widely ignored by this government, and so they‟re another 

group who this government has failed in the province of 

Saskatchewan and are now targeted in a specific way to reduce 

their numbers in voting in the next election. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, housing is at a crisis point in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Certainly it gets worse and worse with the 

inaction by the government. And so you might ask, who else 

would be negatively affected by this Bill, Mr. Speaker? Who is 

it that might not have a fixed address? Who is it that may not 

have photo ID that has an address on the identification? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that the estimated 2,200 homeless people 

in Saskatchewan would be targeted by this government in the 

attempt to ensure that they will not be able to vote in the next 

election. 

 

Now when I say homeless people, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people 

get the image of somebody who‟s pushing a shopping cart full 

of bottles and trinkets and something that‟s out of a Hollywood 

movie, Mr. Speaker. That‟s absolutely not what‟s going on in 

Saskatchewan today. The profile of homeless people that come 

to my constituency office are people that are sometimes 

working two jobs and they have children and they‟re living out 

of their vehicle. They‟re living at a friend‟s place for a few 

nights and then another friend‟s place for another few nights. 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s the profile of a homeless person in 

Saskatchewan today. That‟s the profile. And so these are people 

who are working as hard as they can to move forward in 

Saskatchewan today, and this government targets them and 

specifically wants to dissuade them from voting in the next 

election. 



6822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

We heard in last week‟s private members‟ day, which is a direct 

response to Bill 162 by the Government of Saskatchewan, 

where they put forward something that was absolutely baseless 

and, Mr. Speaker, wasn‟t true. And it was an attack on the 

democracy that we live in because they‟re trying to compare 

this to something that happens at a constituency function, Mr. 

Speaker, in a way that was not straightforward. It was 

disingenuous at best because the Government House Leader, 

the member for Cannington, said specifically that the New 

Democratic Party demands that there is photo identification at 

constituency association nominations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the recommended — recommended — 

piece of identification, what is the best. However at each of 

those nominations that were referenced by the member for 

Cannington, it has a caveat. You can also bring a bill that has 

your address on it. You can also bring a piece of 

correspondence from Immigration Canada sent to your address, 

or there are a number of other ways, Mr. Speaker. Also you can 

swear an oath. You can swear an oath and say that this is who I 

am and this is where I live. And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation 

wants to prohibit that. It wants to prohibit people from actually 

voting. 

 

Jurisdictions all over the world are trying to increase the 

amount of people taking part in their democracy by voting. This 

is the only jurisdiction that I know of in the world where the 

government of the day is trying to disclude people from the 

democratic process, and it‟s shameful and unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I had spoken earlier about the desire of a government to 

disclude people from voting. I talked about what might be the 

impetus for a Bill. Certainly when you look at Bill 162, you 

can‟t imagine why it would be brought forward. But I did note 

that again, the member from Cannington suggested that this Bill 

was something that was recommended by SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we learn again as we did with The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, when you actually contact the people that they 

say that they consulted, that brought forward the legislation to 

begin with, you find out it‟s something entirely different from 

what we‟ve been told. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have with me a quote from a SUMA worker, 

somebody that actually is employed at SUMA, working on 

policy for SUMA. That person says, and I quote, “The decision 

to include amendments regarding voter identification was 

arrived at exclusively by the provincial government.” Mr. 

Speaker, hard to believe. We had The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, where they said that we consulted these people 

— First Nations people, Aboriginal people, Métis people. We 

phoned the groups of people specific to who they said that 

they‟d consulted. We found out that they were not consulted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 162, the member for Cannington says that we 

consulted, and not only did we consult, the reason we‟re 

bringing forward this legislation is because SUMA wants it. It 

was a demand of SUMA to bring this legislation forward. And 

what do they say? Voter identification amendments were 

arrived at exclusively by the provincial government. 

 

So again, who are you going to believe, Mr. Speaker? Are you 

going to believe the organization themselves or a government 

that has an agenda to keep people from voting, what is their 

fundamental right in a democracy — to elect the person that 

they want to elect in office, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So again, if you look at what‟s going on with Bill 161 and 162 

and 160, Mr. Speaker, where they want to take away your 

fundamental human right against somebody who‟s done 

something against you in a very personal way, they want to take 

away that right. They also want to take away your democratic 

right to vote, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s not a government that the 

people of Saskatchewan should support. That is not something 

that our democracy should be interested in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other issues with this Bill 

that are unfortunate. This government has stated that they want 

to harmonize with the rest of Canada and the way that they 

operate in terms of voter identification, and they named a few 

jurisdictions where this currently exists. What they failed to 

mention when they referenced those jurisdictions is that this is 

under a court challenge. This very legislation in other 

jurisdictions is under a court challenge. The government of 

British Columbia is under a constitutional court challenge 

because they‟re requiring people to have photo identification. 

And so that is another thing that‟s troubling. 

 

You know what else is troubling, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan 

has become a very expensive place to live. The cost of housing, 

if you can find it, is through the roof. The attainability of 

owning your own home for young people is virtually 

non-existent. And so we have a situation where we have 2,200 

homeless people in the city of Regina. There are literally 

thousands more people, 20 per cent increase in the number of 

people that are using food banks. 

 

So it‟s obvious through those statistics and through people that 

are working on the ground that this has become a very 

expensive place to live. And certainly if you‟re on a fixed 

income, it‟s very expensive. So you have to ask yourself, Mr. 

Speaker, why is it that when other jurisdictions are wanting to 

increase the number of people taking part in their democracy, 

and where in Saskatchewan there are a number who aren‟t 

taking part in this so-called boom, that you would actually 

charge them to vote? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you do not have identification currently, 

and you don‟t need it for any other purpose but to vote, how can 

you surmise anything but that there is a charge to vote, that it‟s 

an expense? Because there are a number of people in 

Saskatchewan who don‟t require photo identification to live day 

to day. Certainly there are a number of seniors, including my 

own grandparents, who don‟t need photo identification for any 

reason. But now what they‟re going to have to do is go down to 

their local SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] dealer, 

and they‟re going to have to pay to vote in the next election. It‟s 

going to cost them. 

 

And so you have a government here who is dissuading people 

from voting altogether. The implications of the Bill are that it 

absolutely discriminates against certain members of our society, 

and then they want to implement a course of action where it 

actually costs you money to vote in your own democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s unacceptable and unfortunate. 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6823 

[19:15] 

 

Now the members opposite have also suggested that the reason 

for this legislation is because there‟s some nefarious record in 

Saskatchewan for voter fraud. Mr. Speaker, they point to a case 

in southern Saskatchewan, some . . . I think it was 1999 in that 

election, as being another reason that this Bill was brought 

forward. 

 

Now if you look at what happened in that case, Mr. Speaker, the 

system worked. We found out through a review that there was 

some irregularities that should‟ve been caught on the day of the 

election but weren‟t, and so there was a by-election because of 

that. Mr. Speaker, the system worked. It caught what was 

wrong and righted it. The only example in the over-100 years of 

our democracy in Saskatchewan that they could cite, and it 

wasn‟t a relevant example, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And so with all of that, as you may be able to tell, I‟m certainly, 

definitely 100 per cent against this Bill 160, Bill 161, because 

they are fundamentally taking away the rights of Saskatchewan 

citizens. And it‟s wrong and it shouldn‟t happen today in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with that, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise in my place and speak to second reading of 

Bill No. 160, a Bill dealing with the Saskatchewan human 

rights legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I was thinking about this legislation and what has 

happened to human rights legislation across Canada and around 

the world, Mr. Speaker, I thought about a quote that I had heard 

recently. And I‟d like to put this quote on the record, Mr. 

Speaker, before I begin my formal remarks. And you‟ll find, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that the quote is incredibly relevant to the 

direction that the government is taking on the human rights 

legislation in front of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the members opposite are old enough to 

remember a television personality by the name of Sid Caesar. 

Sid Caesar had a television program. He wrote comedies. He 

was quite active, he was quite an active personality and actually 

quite a thinker, Mr. Speaker. Sid Caesar was quite a thinker. So 

I think it‟s very appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to just put this 

thought on record. It‟s not mine; it belongs to Sid Caesar. He 

said, the person, the individual who invented the wheel was 

very smart. The person who invented the other three was 

brilliant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is all about practicality. This is all about 

practicality. There‟s no question the invention of the wheel 

changed the way the world looked at itself and led to an 

evolution of technology. The ability to put the other three 

wheels together, Mr. Speaker, with that first one meant we 

could now move things. It was Sid Caesar said, this is all about 

practicability. It‟s all about practicability. It‟s taking something 

that‟s good and making it better and moving things forward. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the history of human rights legislation in 

Saskatchewan and Canada is pretty much that process, Mr. 

Speaker. We have always seen the development of a very good 

idea, and that good idea has evolved, Mr. Speaker, to be 

something that serves the community, the province, the country 

very well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what Bill 160 seems to be doing in this evolution of 

practicality is moving us back one step, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Justice has actually taken one wheel off this wagon. 

So instead of the sturdy, straight-ahead evolution of human 

rights legislation, Mr. Speaker, that goes along on four wheels, 

is moving ahead very strongly, Mr. Speaker, we are now 

moving back to a three-wheeled vehicle, Mr. Speaker, 

something that is a little slower going and is not going to serve 

the heavy weight of our economy and our quality of life well 

going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I happened to be walking through the 

building from one meeting room to another. And on one of the 

desks, Mr. Speaker, I came across this pamphlet. And I‟d like to 

read a little bit from this pamphlet to set the stage for my 

specific comments on Bill 160. The pamphlet, Mr. Speaker, was 

prepared specifically to deal with the legislation in front of us, 

Bill No. 160. 

 

The headline on the pamphlet is “Protect our Human Rights!” 

The secondary headline is a question: “Are you aware of the 

proposed changes to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code?” 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a pamphlet that is put together by an 

ad hoc human rights committee with representatives from a 

number of different organizations in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you open the pamphlet, the first column is 

titled “STOP Bill 160.” And I‟d like to read the three 

paragraphs that are on here, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re basically 

bringing us to quotes from Alex Neve, secretary-general of 

Amnesty International, who spoke at the University of 

Saskatchewan just a couple of weeks ago on March the 2nd. I‟ll 

get to that quote in just a minute. 

 

This panel in this pamphlet reads, and I‟ll quote: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has introduced Bill 

160, legislation that would amend The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code. Bill 160, if passed this spring, would 

seriously undermine how human rights are protected in 

our province. The changes include: eliminating the 

Human Rights Tribunal and moving cases to the 



6824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Provincial Courts, directing mediation, giving the 

Chief Commissioner the power to dismiss complaints 

without an opportunity for appeal, and withdrawing 

the requirement for transparent reporting by the 

Commission. 

 

I‟ll continue the quote, Mr. Speaker: “These changes create 

more barriers for victims of human rights violations to have 

their complaints heard, investigated, and resolved!” 

 

Mr. Speaker, now the quote from Alex Neve, and I‟ll quote 

further from him later in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, because he 

spoke at greater length than this with some very important 

things that I think members of the government and the public 

should take into account. But here‟s the quote in the pamphlet 

on Bill 160, and I quote: 

 

Human rights legislation, perhaps more so than most other 

legislation, truly should be subject to extensive and 

meaningful public consultation. The public needs to 

understand what is at stake, have a reasonable opportunity 

to contribute to shaping any changes and ultimately — in 

the end — have confidence that the changes lead to a 

stronger framework for protecting their rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is indeed the basis of what we‟re talking 

about today. 

 

Now before I get into a little more substance, I also want to 

address this issue of consultation because, Mr. Speaker, one of 

the things that we do in this Chamber at second reading is to 

debate the principle of legislation. And frequently, Mr. Speaker, 

you will hear members of the opposition talking about those 

who introduce legislation saying, we have consulted on this 

legislation, we have talked to this number of people, etc., etc. 

But when debating the principle of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

you are frequently doing it in advance of specific consultation. 

At the end of second reading of a Bill, the opposition members 

have had time to do some consultation and take those questions 

into committee for a more clause-by-clause study of any piece 

of legislation. 

 

One would assume that before introducing legislation, members 

of the government who write those pieces of legislation consult 

widely, Mr. Speaker, so they know what they‟re putting into the 

Bills and, Mr. Speaker, that indeed those Bills will have the 

support of those who will be most affected. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve already heard today in reference to other pieces of 

legislation in the Chamber that this government has failed 

frequently to consult with those most affected by legislation in 

advance of drafting and presenting the legislation. The onus has 

then come to the opposition to do that consultation and, Mr. 

Speaker, ultimately bring the results of our consultation into the 

Chamber and discuss that with the government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, because the opposition takes its job 

extremely seriously, we do consult, Mr. Speaker, on every piece 

of legislation that is brought before us for debate. And we do 

that, Mr. Speaker, while we are engaged in this second reading 

debate process, debate in principle on the Bill. Well the one 

thing that we have learned on Bill No. 160, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the more people we talk to, the more people who understand 

what the legislation does, the more people who are opposed to 

this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we just took the Minister of Justice on his word 

when he introduced this legislation, Mr. Speaker, we‟d all be 

fine today, and we‟d be passing this legislation and saying what 

good work we‟ve done. But, Mr. Speaker, nothing could be 

further from the truth, the more consultation that we do. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re talking to individuals who were in the 

Chamber at the time this legislation was introduced. And on 

that day they were here to support the Minister of Justice. They 

were here to support the Minister of Justice when he said this 

legislation will improve education, will improve the process, 

Mr. Speaker. And they went out into the lobby and they talked 

to the media and they talked to members of the Sask Party 

saying, this is good legislation, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will 

really help the educational process around human rights. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they hadn‟t read the legislation. The 

government hadn‟t made it known at that point what was in the 

legislation. It would appear very clear that the government‟s 

consultation process was limited very much to a consultation 

with people about general ideas but none of the specifics. Now 

that people are looking at the specifics of this legislation, they 

are coming forward, Mr. Speaker. They are writing letters to 

our newspapers. They are appearing at forums at the university 

campuses across this province. They are calling, emailing, and 

addressing members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, to make it 

very clear that this consultation on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, was 

not an open and broad or specifically based consultation on 

what this government intends to do with human rights 

legislation in the future. 

 

Everybody in this province, Mr. Speaker, believes strongly in 

the continued evolution of human rights legislation in this 

province, and we‟ve got a very proud history in this regard, Mr. 

Speaker. Let‟s just review some of that history before we get 

into the specifics of Bill 160 because, Mr. Speaker, the 

argument that I want to make is we have always been moving 

forward. We have always been adding a wheel, Mr. Speaker, to 

this process of delivering on the rights of Saskatchewan 

residents, Mr. Speaker. And we can‟t afford to take any steps 

backwards. 

 

Human rights cases in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, well 

documented and very interesting. Members may remember 

some of this, Mr. Speaker. Some of this may be new to some 

members of the legislature. But let‟s go back to 1907 in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 1907 was a time when 

married women in Saskatchewan were given the same legal 

rights as men or the same legal capacity — I think was the term 

used at that time — as men. Mr. Speaker, in 1916, women were 

granted the right to vote in Saskatchewan. Let‟s keep in mind 

that human rights legislation is about removing discriminatory 

barriers. 

 

1947, very important year in the history of human rights 

legislation or processes in Saskatchewan — 1947 we saw the 

introduction of The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act, Canada‟s 

first general law prohibiting discrimination, Canada‟s first 

general law prohibiting discrimination, Mr. Speaker, something 

that made Saskatchewan or established Saskatchewan as a 

leader in the field of human rights legislative development. 

 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6825 

[19:30] 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, how about 1952? 1952 was a very good 

year, Mr. Speaker, for a number of reasons, but 1952 was The 

Equal Pay Act. Now members opposite should pay very close 

attention to this. The Equal Pay Act in 1952 mandated that a 

woman be paid the same wage as a male doing the same work. 

Now here we are — how many years later, Mr. Speaker? — and 

we‟re still having these debates, not only in chambers like this, 

Mr. Speaker, in the federal parliament but in human rights 

tribunals all across the country. 

 

Now we‟ve got to recognize, Mr. Speaker, talking about Bill 

160, how important the tribunal is because there isn‟t, based on 

what we‟re seeing here, there isn‟t an end to disputes regarding 

discrimination. 1952 in Saskatchewan, The Equal Pay Act 

mandating that a woman be paid the same wage as a male for 

doing similar work, Mr. Speaker, we‟re still dealing with that 

issue today despite the legislation out there. Thank goodness we 

do have human rights legislation and a tribunal in place that can 

publicly adjudicate matters that go against the law. 

 

1956, The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, Mr. Speaker, 

provided in Saskatchewan access to accommodation without 

discrimination. And again, Mr. Speaker, we‟re still seeing 

challenges in this regard. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, how about 1979? Saskatchewan gets The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, reinforcing the province‟s 

position, leadership position, in the field of human rights, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan has a very proud history of recognizing the 

negative effects of discrimination on quality of life, on the 

quality of life in our communities and our province, and in the 

ability of people to participate in their communities and in their 

economy. Saskatchewan has a very proud history, Mr. Speaker, 

a history that has always been moving us forward. 

 

Bill 160, as I will outline in some further remarks in a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker, can clearly be seen as taking us 

backwards. This is not the time that Saskatchewan wants to take 

a leadership role on the national stage of reversing the trends in 

human rights legislation, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a leadership role 

we want nothing to do with, Mr. Speaker. We want to be 

moving this forward, and we want to ensure that Saskatchewan 

continues to have that moving forward process. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to come back to this little pamphlet 

that I found in the building yesterday, Mr. Speaker. Currently 

the human rights tribunals in Saskatchewan operate in the 

following manner: 

 

Human Rights Tribunals may hear your complaint 

(informal procedures, informal „appropriate‟ evidence can 

be admitted even though it would not be admitted in 

formal court, human rights expertise, maximized 

accessibility including hearings in rural and remote areas, 

less costly, type of representation selected by 

complainant). 

 

If your complaint is dismissed by the Commission, you 

can appeal it to the Human Rights Tribunal. 

Investigations are made by the Human Rights Commission 

if you have reasonable grounds to believe that your human 

rights have been violated. 

 

Mediation is an informal option you may choose. 

 

[There is a ] Limitation period to file your complaint is 

two years after a violation. 

 

Offers to settle during mediation can be accepted or 

rejected by you, without danger of dismissal. 

 

Commission releases an annual report outlining the 

number, nature, and outcome of all cases. 

 

Currently, Mr. Speaker, the process is highly transparent and is 

generally seen as a good model. 

 

So what does Bill 160 do to the tribunal, Mr. Speaker? What is 

being proposed by the Sask Party in this legislation in front of 

us right now? Here‟s what‟s proposed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Human rights tribunals are abolished. The Court of Queen‟s 

Bench hears your complaint. It‟s a formal process, governed by 

the rules of Court of Queen‟s Bench. Judges are not experts in 

the breadth of human rights issues and violations. There is 

limited access for rural and remote areas. It‟s more costly. 

Lawyers must represent you or likely will represent you unless 

other representation is allowed by judges: 

 

[The] Chief Commissioner can dismiss your complaint if 

he or she believes a hearing is not warranted, and you can 

no longer appeal it. 

 

Investigations only commence if you can provide 

sufficient evidence that a human rights violation has 

occurred. 

 

You can be compelled to enter mediation against your 

will. 

 

Deadline for filing your complaint is reduced to one year. 

 

During mediation, if the Chief Commissioner decides a 

settlement offer is reasonable, you cannot refuse the offer 

without risking having your complaint dismissed. 

 

[The] commission is not required to issue an annual report 

outlining the number, nature, and result of complaints. 

[There‟s] no transparency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can you put the current plan against the 

proposed plan and not conclude this is a step backwards? 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the key words here is voice and secrecy. 

We have understood, over the course of many, many, many 

years of human rights development, Mr. Speaker, we have 

understood that the Human Rights Commission, the Human 

Rights Code, the Human Rights Tribunal is a process that gives 

voice to the victims. It brings the discrimination, Mr. Speaker, 

to the public eye. It puts the process of removing discrimination 

in our society in the public realm, Mr. Speaker. 

 



6826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

The entire proposal of Bill 160 takes the voice away from 

victims, Mr. Speaker. It‟s built around secrecy. Mediation is all 

about secrecy. The Chief Commissioner reviews the complaint. 

The Chief Commissioner says this goes forward or this does 

not. Mr. Speaker, there‟s no public process here to be engaged 

in. When the mediation takes place, Mr. Speaker, it‟s to reach a 

mediated settlement, not to get rid of discrimination, not to 

provide any sort of embarrassment process, Mr. Speaker, that 

says to somebody, you did wrong. It‟s not a matter of you‟re 

trying to do something for somebody else, Mr. Speaker, which 

is what mediation does. It‟s about removing the discrimination 

itself. So the bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, mediation ensures that 

a settlement is reached or tries to ensure a settlement is reached, 

and that is done behind closed doors and in private, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then finally, to add insult to injury, the commission is not 

required to issue an annual report. There‟s no indication 

whatsoever therefore, publicly, how many complaints were 

made, how many were dealt with, how many were pushed 

aside, how much resolution was achieved, Mr. Speaker. We‟re 

moving from a public process that assures a voice for the 

victims, Mr. Speaker, to a process of complete secrecy, a 

cover-up, a hiding of the issue, something that takes 

discrimination and puts it back behind the barn, Mr. Speaker. If 

you can‟t see it, it doesn‟t exist. We‟re way beyond that in 

human rights legislation over the width and breadth of this 

country, Mr. Speaker. We‟re way beyond that. 

 

I‟m going to give you now, Mr. Speaker, a few other comments 

about that process. The Human Rights Commission, Mr. 

Speaker, under current legislation, The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code has a number of duties that it is responsible by 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan. I just 

want to read for the members opposite, members of the 

government, and for the public who are watching what the 

Human Rights Code says the duties of the Human Rights 

Commission are. And remember, Mr. Speaker; it‟s the Human 

Rights Commission and the commissioner that will play a pretty 

significant role in the new legislation, 160, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think we‟ve got to keep all this in mind. 

 

Let‟s just also remember the fact that human rights are 

fundamental. There‟s just no getting away from that, Mr. 

Speaker. Human rights are fundamental. That‟s why the 

commission itself is meant to be independent from any other 

body, Mr. Speaker, especially the government. 

 

So what are the duties of the commission? Under The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, section no. 25, “The 

commission shall . . . ” “Shall” is important in legislation. I 

think members here know — the public may not know — 

“shall” means, this is what the commission is mandated to do. 

This is their statutory duty. This is what you are required to do. 

 

So section 25: 

 

The commission shall: 

 

(a) forward the principle that every person is free and 

equal in dignity and rights without regard to religion, 

creed, marital status, family status, sex, sexual 

orientation, disability, age, colour, ancestry, nationality, 

place of origin, race or perceived race or receipt of 

public assistance; 

 

These are the principles that the commission must forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

25(b) promote an understanding and acceptance of, and 

compliance with, this Act; 

 

So the commission is responsible to ensure that the principles 

are complied with. That‟s important when we go forward and 

take a look at Bill 160, Mr. Speaker. Compliance is a critical 

part of the statutory duty of the commission. Also: 

 

(c) develop and conduct educational programs designed to 

eliminate discriminatory practices; 

 

Enshrined in legislation in The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code, Mr. Speaker, is the principle of developing and 

conducting educational programs. 

 

You will recall a few moments ago I talked about members of 

the public who were in the Chamber at second reading, hadn‟t 

seen the Bill, but were supporting the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 160 in 

front of us, because it had an educational component to it. 

When we read Bill 160, Mr. Speaker, not a single word relating 

to education. 

 

The statutory duty, Mr. Speaker, of the commission: develop 

and conduct educational programs. So education is already a 

statutory responsibility of the commission, Mr. Speaker. They 

don‟t need new legislation to do any of that. They have the 

authority, and in fact they are required to develop and conduct 

educational programs as part of their mandate. 

 

I continue on the duties of the commission, section 25: 

 

(d) disseminate information and promote understanding 

of the legal rights of residents of the province and 

conduct educational programs in that respect; 

 

(e) further the principle of the equality of opportunities 

for persons, and equality in the exercise of their legal 

rights of persons, regardless of their status; 

 

(f) conduct and encourage research by persons and 

associations actively engaged in the field of promoting 

human rights; 

 

(g) forward the principle that cultural diversity is a basic 

human right and fundamental human value. 

 

The statutory responsibilities of the commission, Mr. Speaker, 

forward the principle, promote the understanding and 

compliance with those principles, develop and disseminate 

educational programs and other matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

This is a powerful piece of legislation, the Human Rights Code, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s a powerful piece of legislation in that it 

actually overrides other legislation in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is a powerful piece of 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6827 

legislation, and we have to recognize that every change to it 

will have consequences somewhere down the line, Mr. Speaker. 

So we have to ensure that every word is scrutinized, both in 

terms of what is in the legislation and what the intent of the 

legislation is, Mr. Speaker. And we‟d better be able to pull the 

two of those things together. It‟s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, 

for a consultation process to be held generally about human 

rights legislative development and actually delivering a Bill 

which may in fact be different than that which is brought 

forward. 

 

So what is the commission‟s job? I‟ve just outlined to you what 

is required by the commission. Now, Mr. Speaker, one other 

section here that I think is relevant and important to us as we 

look at The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, it‟s section 47, 

which is subtitled “Programs, orders or approval of by 

commission.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me just read you the first couple of 

sentences of section 47 of The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code, and I quote: 

 

On the application of any person or on its own initiative, 

the commission may approve or order any program to be 

undertaken by any person if the program is designed to 

prevent disadvantages that are likely to be suffered by, or 

to eliminate or reduce disadvantages that are suffered by, 

any group of individuals when those disadvantages would 

be or are based on or related to the race, creed . . . [etc. 

etc., the principles of the legislation]. 

 

So what we‟re seeing in section 47 is that the commission 

basically has no limits as to what it can create or have done, Mr. 

Speaker. No limits on the application of any person or on its 

own initiative, Mr. Speaker. The legislation says, “. . . the 

commission may approve or order any program to be 

undertaken by any person . . .” Very clear in the legislation that 

the commission has the ability to do all sorts of things on its 

own initiative. And, Mr. Speaker, one could argue that, if the 

tribunal isn‟t succeeding at 100 per cent of its activities, that the 

commission can order and the government will fund an 

initiative that helps to correct those inadequacies. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, because of course the Sask Party 

government is saying there‟s an inadequacy in the tribunals. 

They aren‟t working fast enough. They aren‟t moving things 

through the tribunal process fast enough. Well, Mr. Speaker, do 

we eliminate the ability of victims to be heard in order to 

expedite the process? Do we eliminate the public hearing or the 

public information or the public reporting and accountability in 

order to facilitate or expedite the process? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commission has the ability, and the 

government must fund the commission‟s initiative to deal with 

slow process through the tribunals without giving up any of 

these other things, Mr. Speaker. It‟s already in the legislation. 

There‟s nothing here that says the government needs new 

legislation in order to do something that the commission already 

has the ability to do on its own. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the last point that I wanted to make 

with regards to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is 

something under the heading “Objects.” And this is section 3, 

the objects of the Act that put The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code in place: 

 

The objects of this Act are: 

 

(a) to promote recognition of the inherent dignity and 

equal inalienable rights of all members of the human 

family; and 

 

(b) to further public policy in Saskatchewan that every 

person is free and equal in dignity and rights and to 

discourage and eliminate discrimination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is about as clear as you can get about what the 

commission is supposed to do, Mr. Speaker: eliminate 

discrimination. How does an Act that removes the voice of 

victims, covers up the arguments and the debate, hides the 

discriminatory practice itself, refuses to document for the public 

or even number them, Mr. Speaker . . . How many cases have 

been heard? We wouldn‟t even hear that, Mr. Speaker. How do 

we eliminate discrimination if at the end of the day we don‟t 

know it exists? 

 

Bill 160 is designed to ensure that we will not see 

discrimination in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

We know it exists. We know from our history, Mr. Speaker. In 

1952 we passed The Equal Pay Act, mandating that a woman is 

paid the same wage as a male for doing similar work; 1952 we 

passed that legislation, Mr. Speaker. Did it cease to exist? Did 

the problem, the discrimination cease to exist because the Act 

was passed? No, Mr. Speaker, because there are individuals out 

there who will try to get around the Act by discriminating. And 

thank goodness for the public process because, Mr. Speaker, we 

are still fighting that debate. We are still fighting that argument 

today, Mr. Speaker. I think we can say that progress has been 

made. But in those immortal words of the Saskatchewan Party 

in the last two years, there‟s more work to be done, Mr. 

Speaker. There‟s more work to be done. 

 

Darn rights there‟s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, because 

we have to monitor, we have to make public the information. 

And we have to carry that information forward, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that when the public knows what‟s going on they can 

hold the government accountable, and we can ultimately work 

towards that object of the commission “to further public policy 

. . . that [ensures] every person is free and equal in dignity and 

rights and to discourage and eliminate discrimination.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, human rights in Canada as defined by 

Wikipedia, which everyone has access to. I see lots of 

scrambling around on little devices that we have in the 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker. We can visit Wikipedia on a regular 

basis. Wikipedia says human rights in Canada, this is the first 

paragraph off the Wikipedia website: 

 

Since signing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 

in 1948, the Canadian government has attempted to make 

universal human rights a part of Canadian law. There are 

currently four key mechanisms in Canada to protect 

human rights: the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms, the Canadian Human Rights Act, the Canadian 

Human Rights Commission, and provincial human rights 

laws and legislation. 



6828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Provincial human rights laws and regulation. Mr. Speaker, the 

pillar, the fourth wheel on this vehicle, Mr. Speaker, is the 

provincial wheel. As far as Canada is concerned, you‟ve got 

three federal wheels. You‟ve got one provincial wheel. And this 

government is wanting take that fourth wheel off, Mr. Speaker, 

reduce the Saskatchewan or the provincial component, Mr. 

Speaker, and weaken not just Saskatchewan human rights, but 

weaken all of human rights across Canada, Mr. Speaker. We 

cannot have this. We cannot have this going forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for the last couple of weeks — the 

legislature‟s only been sitting for a couple of weeks — I‟d 

mentioned earlier about the duty to consult and the fact that the 

government had not actually brought forward legislation on 

which there had been specific consultation. 

 

But for the last couple of weeks, as we have consulted more 

broadly and we are finding more and more people who have 

objected to Bill 160, Mr. Speaker, we‟re also finding that 

Saskatchewan residents are signing petitions right across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin has been presenting those petitions, Mr. Speaker, on 

a daily basis here in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that when we present petitions in the 

legislature we read the prayer and not the whereas clauses. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s important that members of the 

Legislative Assembly here during debate on Bill 160 actually 

get to hear everything that‟s written in the petition that‟s being 

presented in the Chamber. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read 

the petition in its entirety here during debate, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure there is this complete understanding. 

 

People of Saskatchewan are reading this petition in their 

hometowns, in their coffee shops, on the desks of certain 

lawyers across the province, Mr. Speaker, and at the kitchen 

table of their friends and neighbours. They are reading the 

petition on Bill 160. They are signing the petition on Bill 160. 

They are sending it to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s 

being presented by the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. And 

this is what this petition reads: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: 

 

The citizens of Saskatchewan are concerned with the 

fact that Bill 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code Amendment Act, 2010, was introduced into the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan despite the fact 

that it will make the system for hearing human rights 

complaints less accessible to victims of human rights 

violations. Furthermore, the citizens of Saskatchewan 

are concerned with the fact that Bill 160 was introduced 

into the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan without 

first being subject to an extensive and public 

consultation process. Still further, the citizens of 

Saskatchewan are concerned with the fact that the 

Government of Saskatchewan has been supporting an 

information campaign that explains the abstract aims of 

the Chief Human Rights Commissioner, but not 

substantive portions of Bill 160 itself. 

 

Then there‟s the prayer . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the member from 

The Battlefords is giving a very sound explanation of his views 

of the Bill, but I‟m having a hard time hearing him because 

there‟s members that are entering into private discussion. I‟d 

ask them to go behind the bar and have that discussion. I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So as I 

was saying, I was reading the petition that‟s being signed by 

Saskatchewan residents right across the province. And now the 

part of the petition, Mr. Speaker, that members are familiar 

with, it‟s the prayer that‟s read daily, Mr. Speaker, in the House 

by the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan withdraw 

Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public consultation 

informed by a public policy paper before any amendments 

to the Human Rights Code, the law that supersedes all 

others in our province, are even considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again this is very clear direction from the people 

of Saskatchewan presented daily in the Chamber. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we know this is presented daily, as I said in coffee 

shops across the province, at kitchen tables, in law offices, and 

in other locations, Mr. Speaker. The message from 

Saskatchewan people is very clear: withdraw the Bill, do the 

public consultations that were said to have been done but 

haven‟t been done, tie it to a policy paper, Mr. Speaker, that 

tells us where all this stuff fits in the continuum of that which is 

human rights legislative development and, Mr. Speaker, ensure 

that The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code in the province of 

Saskatchewan continues the leadership shown by this province 

in so many years in the past. Mr. Speaker, this is all very, very 

important as we move forward. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of other things that I wanted to ensure 

gets on the record here before I conclude my remarks tonight. I 

had mentioned earlier this process about representation when I 

was reading from the pamphlet that I read from earlier. When I 

was reading from that pamphlet, Mr. Speaker, the pamphlet 

indicated that we need to spend some time thinking about 

representation. 

 

Human rights legislation is meant to provide voice to victims. 

Victims, Mr. Speaker, are sometimes articulate; sometimes they 

are not. Sometimes they are educated; sometimes they are not. 

Sometimes victims have an emotional capacity to express their 

feelings; sometimes they don‟t. Mr. Speaker, sometimes a 

person who feels they‟ve been subject to a discriminatory 

practice needs help. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, that help is legal 

representation. Sometimes that help is a friend or a neighbour. 

Sometimes that help, that representation is a relative. 

Sometimes that help, Mr. Speaker, is a community advocate. 

That representation or that help is very important, Mr. Speaker, 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6829 

to someone who is unable, for one reason or another, to give 

voice, his or her individual voice, to their complaint. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what‟s happening today with representation 

compared to what will happen tomorrow if the Saskatchewan 

Party gets their way and passes Bill 160? Well, Mr. Speaker, 

let‟s just think about this for a minute. Some human rights cases 

proceed with the complainant having the right to a friend or a 

community advocate representing them. Will these 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, remove the right from complainants 

to have their representative appear on their behalf in court, is a 

question that‟s being asked in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we get rid of the tribunals, move these cases 

into a courtroom, the judges will decide whether or not 

representation must be from a member of the bar or not. 

Depending on the judge, depending on the mood of the day, 

depending on any number of circumstances, Mr. Speaker, it is 

possible under Bill 160 that an individual‟s right to be 

represented by someone other than a lawyer is in jeopardy. Mr. 

Speaker, the ability of someone who is emotionally challenged 

by the complaint that they‟ve brought forward, and they rely on 

their friend or a community advocate to represent them, Mr. 

Speaker, could be jeopardized by Bill No. 160. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Code specifies that 

tribunal members must have human rights expertise. Let‟s 

remember there is a tribunal in place right now. The tribunal 

will let you make your own complaint, will let you have 

representation from anyone you wish, and more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, the code specifies tribunal members must have 

human rights expertise. 

 

Not all judges today, Mr. Speaker, have got human rights 

expertise, and human rights is sometimes subjective, Mr. 

Speaker. Human rights . . . The reason why there‟s a tribunal 

and a mediation process, Mr. Speaker, is because sometimes 

there is a little give and take, there‟s a little bit of understanding 

that‟s not formalized by the rights of the court. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if all cases specified and moved forward by 

the commissioner are now going to be heard by the Court of 

Queen‟s Bench, what guarantee will we have that those cases 

will be heard by individuals with human rights expertise? This 

is really important, Mr. Speaker, because legislation and 

practice has already evolved to the point where it‟s not just the 

letter of the law that‟s important. It‟s the intent of the law, and 

it‟s the goal, Mr. Speaker, to eliminate discrimination that‟s 

behind the evolutionary process of human rights law; eliminate 

discrimination, not simply recognize it, and establish a 

mediation process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to come back to Wikipedia that I talked 

about a little earlier. Not that I get all my information from 

Wikipedia, but sometimes I like to review what‟s at Wikipedia 

before I search out and research other information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From Wikipedia again, they talk about the history of human 

rights legislative development in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to quote two paragraphs, maybe a third one if I‟m really 

feeling good about this, Mr. Speaker, from the Wikipedia. This 

is from the History section of “Human rights in Canada”: 

 

From the 19th Century to the advent of the Canadian Bill 

of Rights and the first provincial Human Rights Act, the 

laws of Canada and provinces did not provide much in the 

way of civil rights and it was typically a limited concern to 

the courts. 

 

Before we developed this process, Mr. Speaker — and this is 

me talking now, not Wikipedia — before we developed this 

process of adjudicating publicly human rights complaints, they 

were dealt with by the courts. Bill 160, I might note, is taking 

us back to the courts. Is this a step forward, Mr. Speaker, or a 

step back? That may be clear in a moment. 

 

Here I will quote again from the next paragraph from 

Wikipedia‟s history section, and I quote: 

 

During this early period there were a number of legal 

cases arising from discriminatory or repressive conduct. 

The courts typically dealt with these cases strictly as a 

matter of law with no explicit consideration to the social 

element of the matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I had said just a few minutes ago: is the letter 

of the law all you want from human rights legislation or is there 

something more? That‟s why expertise in human rights law and 

practice, Mr. Speaker, is so important. 

 

And let me move to another area of interest here, Mr. Speaker, 

before I wind myself down on this. Let‟s talk about the 

adequacy of resources, Mr. Speaker. I had mentioned earlier 

that the commission by statute has the ability, on its own 

initiative, to do anything it wants to, Mr. Speaker, and the 

resources will be provided by the government. Obviously there 

would be some consultation back and forth, but if the goal is to 

eliminate discrimination, then what do we need to do to take us 

forward in that regard? 

 

It is clear, crystal clear, Mr. Speaker, just as it is from some of 

the media stories in the health care field, Mr. Speaker, the 

Human Rights Commission is presently underfunded and 

understaffed, and it does not currently have the resources to 

carry out its full mandate as stated in the code concerning 

investigations, education, initiating complaints, ordering 

programs on its own initiatives without a complaint, enforcing 

equal pay provisions pursuant to The Labour Standards Act, 

and generally doing workplace and community monitoring for 

the “eradication of discrimination in the province.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are resourcing, financial resourcing 

challenges facing the Human Rights Commission. And it would 

appear — I don‟t want to try and say this is what‟s going on 

over there, Mr. Speaker — but it would appear that this 

government that‟s starving health regions and schools of funds 

to operate is also starving the Human Rights Commission and is 

bringing forward legislation that removes the victim‟s voice and 

puts into secrecy human rights complaints in order to save a few 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, in order to save a few dollars at a time 

when this government has advertisements on television across 

Canada claiming that Saskatchewan is undergoing boom times, 

has more money than it knows what to do with, Mr. Speaker, 

and is demonstrating that we have more money than we know 

what to do with by promoting these major projects like a domed 

stadium in Regina when we can‟t get long-term care beds open 



6830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

in smaller communities across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Commission is presently 

underfunded, and it‟s understaffed. It does not have the 

resources to carry out its full mandate, a mandate that‟s clearly 

outlined in the statutes of this province. This suggests, Mr. 

Speaker, a shift to less stable funding for an already badly 

underfunded body. The government, instead of sending human 

rights complaints behind the barn, away from the prying eyes of 

the public — Mr. Speaker, instead of sending it out — properly 

funding the Human Rights Commission, doing the educational 

component that‟s required, opening the doors, Mr. Speaker, 

holding more hearings in more public locations will do more, 

Mr. Speaker, to eradicate discrimination in this province than 

Bill 60 even purports to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other piece that I think that we‟ve got to keep in mind as 

we look at Bill 160, Mr. Speaker, and this is another thing that 

is significantly important to anyone who cares about human 

rights in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and that is this whole idea of 

who‟s in control? Who‟s going to determine how things move 

forward, Mr. Speaker? And of course, Bill 160 makes the 

gatekeeper or provides for gatekeeping authority to rest with the 

Chief Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the justification for making it mandatory 

for complainants to mediate their complaints? Why has the 

government taken away the right of citizens to appeal a 

dismissal of their complaint? Remember what was said earlier, 

Mr. Speaker. The Chief Commission can decide that we‟re just 

going to dismiss this case off the bat; it‟s not even going to go 

court, Mr. Speaker. Or if it goes to court and there isn‟t success 

in the eyes of the victim, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no appeal 

process. The Chief Commissioner decides all these things. Begs 

the question, why did the Sask Party government give the Chief 

Commissioner the power to dismiss a complaint in the 

beginning and especially if the complainant does not agree to 

accept the settlement that the Commissioner finds reasonable? 

Think about that for a second, Mr. Speaker. We go back to what 

this legislation, the power this legislation gives to the Chief 

Commissioner. 

 

If the Chief Commissioner reviews a case — remember, not a 

tribunal yet, not the court but the Chief Commissioner — 

reviews the case and says, I think there‟s a settlement that needs 

to be reached here, you should accept this settlement. If you as 

the complainant, Mr. Speaker, under the rules of Bill 160, say to 

the Chief Commissioner, I don‟t accept the settlement, I‟m not 

keen on a settlement that benefits me. I‟m keen on a settlement 

that helps to eliminate discrimination, that helps the collective 

out there that‟s affected by this same issue. I don‟t want the 

settlement, Mr. Speaker. For the individual who says that, the 

Chief Commissioner then dismisses the case. 

 

There‟s no right of appeal and the public doesn‟t even know 

this has happened, because it has all taken place behind closed 

doors. There is no annual report, no reporting of any kind, Mr. 

Speaker, to indicate that this activity even took place. How is 

this adding a fifth wheel to our vehicle, Mr. Speaker? It is 

taking a wheel off of our human rights trailer, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is wrong. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Chief Commissioner is also given a new 

catch-all phrase or reason to dismiss a case, Mr. Speaker, 

because the legislation says to the Chief Commissioner that if 

you want to dismiss a complaint, all you have to say is, and I 

quote, “having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, 

a hearing of the complaint is not warranted.” Simple phrase 

given to the Chief Commissioner. That‟s it — you‟re done. So 

long. Goodbye. The discrimination may still exist, but nobody 

knows anything about it because the gatekeeper is the Chief 

Commissioner. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So we‟ve got a lack of transparency. We‟ve got all the power 

resting in the hands of an individual. We‟ve got no duty to 

consult. We‟ve got no access to representation. We have an 

underfunded body. We have the voice of the victim being 

silenced. Mr. Speaker, how can the Minister of Justice stand in 

his place and say to the people of Saskatchewan, we are taking 

human rights legislation to next level? We are moving this 

forward, Mr. Speaker, when every clause in this piece of 

legislation in and of itself is taking us backwards. Sid Caesar, 

Mr. Speaker, would not say that there is any smartness or 

brilliance or practicality in Bill 160 or in the government‟s 

attempt to prove or to give us reason to believe that anyone in 

the Sask Party understands what human rights legislation is all 

about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are all equal under the law. We all have equal 

rights under the law. We all have the right to be treated with 

dignity under the law. And, Mr. Speaker, we all have the right 

to be judged under the law in the same way. Discrimination by 

its very definition means some person, some group of people is 

treated differently than another individual or group under the 

law. Human Rights Commission, the Human Rights Code, the 

human rights tribunals are all mandated to work towards the 

elimination of discrimination. 

 

Bill 160 does not take us there. Bill 160 doesn‟t even come 

close to addressing the issues that need to be addressed to allow 

human rights legislation to continue to evolve, to make 

Saskatchewan a leader again in the field of human rights 

legislation development, Mr. Speaker. We are moving 

backwards. We are taking a giant step backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An award-winning, Nobel Prize-winning human rights advocate 

came from somewhere in the world to the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because Bill 160 angered him. 

Alex Neve, for my friends at Hansard, last name spelled 

N-e-v-e. Alex Neve, Mr. Speaker, came to Saskatchewan to tell 

us that this legislation doesn‟t work across the world, Mr. 

Speaker. An award-winning, world-recognized expert and 

advocate on human rights across the world, Mr. Speaker, he had 

a wealth of knowledge of human rights violations all over the 

world. And he chose to come to Saskatchewan at this moment 

in our history, Mr. Speaker, to tell us not to take this step 

backwards.  

 

And the public is responding, Mr. Speaker, all across this 

province. People the Minister of Justice thought were 

supporting Bill 160 are not supporting 160 anymore. The more 

they learn about the Bill, the more they read the clauses, the 

more they understand these various pieces of it, Mr. Speaker, 

the less they are supporting it. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6831 

gone to the point of saying, I oppose the legislation. And 

they‟re signing petitions that say, withdraw the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m here today to say that I am disappointed, I am 

saddened, and to a certain extent I am angry that all of the work 

that has been done in this province, all of the work that has been 

done across Canada, North America, and the world, working 

towards the elimination of discrimination is being set back, that 

victims are being denied a voice, and the Saskatchewan Party 

doesn‟t seem to understand. They haven‟t taken the time to 

understand the needs of people who are being discriminated 

against and the needs of our society to ensure that 

discrimination is eliminated ultimately for the benefit of all of 

us. There is no understanding of this. 

 

The presentation is we have to move cases faster through the 

system. Faster doesn‟t mean the goals are being achieved. 

Faster doesn‟t mean we‟re making it better, Mr. Speaker. For 

somebody whose case is not resolved adequately is not happy it 

got done faster. Somebody whose case that could be reviewed 

by someone with expertise and adjudicated adequately will not 

be happy if that case is not adjudicated well but is done faster, 

Mr. Speaker. We cannot silence the victims. We must ensure 

we continue to develop human rights legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I say to the members of the Saskatchewan Party, listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Listen to the experts. Withdraw the 

Bill. Broadly consult if you want to do something more for 

human rights. Broadly consult, put the money necessary into the 

commission to do the job it‟s mandated to do by law, and then, 

Mr. Speaker, see how the people of Saskatchewan respond. 

 

A simple understanding and some of the new resources of this 

province will go a long way, Mr. Speaker, to improving the 

circumstances of everybody who lives in this province. I call on 

the members opposite to do what the Saskatchewan public is 

saying to them: withdraw Bill 160. Move forward, not 

backwards. Let‟s put another wheel on this wagon, Mr. 

Speaker. We can‟t afford to take one off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on Bill 160 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill 160, The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure tonight 

to rise and speak to Bill 147, An Act respecting the Protection 

of Public Servants who make Disclosures. I am particularly 

pleased to be making this speech this evening following the 

tremendous speech made by the member for The Battlefords on 

the Bill he was speaking to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 147 is ostensibly . . . The government claims 

it‟s there to protect public servants who make certain 

disclosures, and yet the very Bill itself seems to be all about 

internalizing any disclosures so that they‟re made internal as 

opposed to external. It‟s in some ways contrary to what they 

had promised during their . . . in their last election platform. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 147, I will be outlining some of the 

concerns that I have with it, that members on this side have, and 

certainly that I have. But I want to pick up on TV personalities 

because the hon. member for The Battlefords talked about TV 

personality Sid Caesar. And he quoted, it said something about 

that Sid Caesar said that the individual, the person who invented 

the wheel was brilliant, was smart. And the person who 

invented the other three was inspired, absolutely brilliant. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Bill 147 for Saskatchewan public servants is 

more like the Wayne and Shuster version of the Caesar thing, 

where the quote goes something like this. I told him, I said, 

“Julie, don‟t go. Julie, don‟t go.” So talking about one Caesar to 

another and TV personalities. 

 

Now I will use the remainder of my speech, Mr. Speaker, to say 

why we say, Julie, don‟t go there. Don‟t do this. Don‟t, don‟t, 

don‟t weaken the whistle-blower protection that‟s already in 

place. We support . . . And in fact in the last two sessions, we 

have had not one but two Bills proposed by members of the 

opposition dealing with this very issue. Not one, but two Bills 

dealing with this very issue. So don‟t for a minute think that it‟s 

New Democrats are somehow opposed to strengthening 

whistle-blower legislation or to protecting individuals, workers 

from their employers wrongfully firing them when these 

workers see a wrongdoing and blow the whistle. We think this 

is a perfectly logical thing. 

 

You don‟t want to have the whistle blown on you, don‟t do 

something that‟s illegal or morally wrong or just, just plain bad. 

If you do good works every day, you‟ll find that your 

employers, the public servants will support those good works 

that you do, and in fact you‟ll have virtually no incidences of 

whistle-blower legislation being needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party election platform was fairly, fairly 

clear on what it was promising and fairly straightforward. Page 

42 of Securing the Future, it says, “Strengthening protection for 

public servants and whistle-blowers in the workplace by 

establishing a Public Integrity Commissioner.” That‟s the 

promise, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a very straightforward promise. And 

yet we have the different situation now where in this Bill we 

hear, according to a Leader-Post November 10th, 2010 story: 

 

There won‟t be a large budget requirement, she said, 

[referring to the minister responsible] noting there are 

three other provinces with similar offices and they 

sometimes field just a few complaints a year. The 

government is considering having the commissioner role 

as part of the existing office of the ombudsman, she . . . 

[said]. 

 



6832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2011 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not what the more accountable 

government document, “Securing the Future”, of the Sask Party 

said prior to the provincial election in 2007. The words are 

different and the results are clearly different. And that‟s part of 

why I say, Julie, don‟t go there. 

 

Do, if you must, do what you promised in the election booklet. 

Do what you promised there, but don‟t water it down and call it 

an election promise that is another promise made, a promise 

kept, I think is what the Premier and government members 

opposite are fond of saying. Because it‟s clearly not another 

promise kept. It is clearly not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of having the public integrity commissioner office, what 

we have is the potential of maybe a desk in the Ombudsman‟s 

office, maybe a desk rather than a public integrity 

commissioner as promised in the previous election. And we 

have the minister saying, and really it‟s not a very busy job 

anyway because we don‟t expect civil servants, public servants 

to be blowing the whistle. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I have to question is, why was it such a 

big issue in their minds previously and now it‟s not an issue at 

all? And I know that the flippant and easy answer is to say, well 

it‟s because they‟re in office now and it‟s not the big, bad NDP 

[New Democratic Party] in office doing things wrong. And I 

know this is the easy and the flippant answer, but governments 

do know this, and I know that the Sask Party know it too. 

Governments are to introduce and pass legislation that will 

stand the test of time, not simply be a piece of legislation that‟s 

convenient for the government this day. It should stand a longer 

term test of time, and I submit that this piece of legislation fails 

in that regard, Mr. Speaker. So again, how can we believe that 

this Bill protects public servants from their employer when it‟s 

a different version than what they had been promising? 

 

[20:30] 

 

And I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that last year we were fighting 

Sask Party government legislation on essential services and on 

union-busting in the construction, the building trades industries. 

There was a number of pieces of anti-democratic things that we 

were busy fighting that legislation on last year. And now 

they‟re going to pretend to be somehow the saviours of public 

servants. Somehow they‟re on the side of the working people. 

Somehow they‟re on the side of some of the health care workers 

that are getting an inadequate contract offer as we speak. Mr. 

Speaker, it is difficult to be on both sides of the fence at the 

same time. It just tends to feel a little bit like there‟s a picket 

stuck somewhere that it doesn‟t really belong. 

 

We have a situation where we have a government introducing 

what should be a good piece of whistle-blower legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. But it‟s a government that‟s difficult to trust on that 

regard because it‟s a government that fired a OH & S 

[occupational health and safety] officer, fired because that OH 

& S officer was advocating for safer and better working 

conditions in that workplace. And they had to hire her back. 

They were proven wrong, but they went ahead. They fired and 

then had to hire her back. 

 

In another case, we have a situation where the Sask Party 

government fired a Corrections worker in Regina. And they got 

the wrong person, if there is such a thing as the right person. 

They fired the employee that they incorrectly, incorrectly are 

determined was the whistle-blower, was the person that 

provided some information that led to some, frankly, 

embarrassment for the government. Well, Mr. Speaker, instead 

of firing people, we should have a government that is more 

determined to deliver the services of the . . . I call them 

departments, but ministries is the term that the Sask Party 

government has used. They‟ve switched it to ministries. So for 

the sake of simplicity, I‟ll talk about ministries. 

 

You want to have good programs? Well have your ministries 

deliver good programs. Give them straightforward directions. 

Give them the tools they need to deliver on the job and the 

direction needed to deliver it efficiently and safely and 

effectively and, without fail, with integrity, Mr. Speaker. 

Always with integrity. So that‟s not where we‟re at right now. 

 

And Bill 147, the Act respecting the protection of public 

servants who make disclosures, again I say it‟s a Bill whose 

title we support wholeheartedly on this side, having twice in 

recent years proposed legislation dealing with whistle-blowers. 

Twice on this side we‟ve made proposals; twice it was flatly 

rejected by the Sask Party government. Now there is a Bill 

before the Assembly that, my fear is, weakens whistle-blower 

protection for public servants in Saskatchewan. 

 

It takes me back, and I don‟t like to go there because it sounds 

like I‟m just dealing with ancient history. But the previous right 

wing government that we had was the Devine Conservative 

government where the Premier was a chief of staff in that 

particular administration. It‟s where he cut his teeth and where 

he claimed to have learned some things about politics. And 

indeed I suspect he did learn some things. 

 

But in the 1980s we had a situation where, certainly in Regina, 

if you met a public servant they would just sort of clam up as 

soon as they found out that you were in any way involved in the 

political world because, Mr. Speaker, they were terrified of 

losing their jobs. They were afraid that the word would get out 

and they‟d wind up terminated, fired. And what I learned then 

was that public servants need protection from their employer, 

and they need that protection to be effective. They need to be 

able to count on it, they need to know unequivocally that when 

the need is there — which should be very seldom — but when 

the need is there, when they have an issue, that they‟ve got a 

legal protection. They‟ve got some ability to in fact blow the 

whistle on whatever the wrongdoing is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have outlined in a nutshell my concerns with 

this Bill 147, An Act respecting the Protection of Public 

Servants who make Disclosures, commonly known, called the 

whistle-blower Act. I‟ve made my case, and I do know, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have other colleagues that are yet interested in 

having their opportunity to speak to the Bill. So at this time, I 

move to adjourn debate on Bill 147. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 21, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6833 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:38.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6821 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6823 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6831 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


