
















































Hansard: December 05, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 1A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2011, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

December 5, 2011 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

Clerk: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I’ve received a 

communication from the private secretary to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour will open the first 

session of the twenty-seventh legislature at 10 a.m. today this 

5th day of December 2011. 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

10:01.] 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — I am commanded by His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 

until later today when the Legislative Assembly shall be 

convened to elect a Speaker according to law. 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:02.] 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 

Clerk: — Please be seated. Members of the Legislative 

Assembly, pursuant to the rules of this Assembly, it is my duty 

to call upon you to elect a member to preside over your 

deliberations as Speaker. 

In accordance with the procedures specified under rule 42, the 

following members have declared their intention to stand as 

candidates for election of Speaker. I will call the names in 

alphabetical order: Mr. Dan D’Autremont, the hon. member for 

Cannington; Mr. Don Toth, the hon. member for Moosomin. 

In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will now 

bring in the ballot box and the Pages will distribute a list of 

candidates to the members and post the list in the polling booth. 

The ballot box will then be inspected and the sealed ballots 

opened, and then I will announce the beginning of the voting 

procedure. 

Members, I’ll ask you now, all of you who wish to cast a ballot, 

to proceed to the registration tables which are behind me to 

receive your ballot paper, to sign the registration sheet, and then 

proceed to the polling booths which are in front of me. 

May I remind all hon. members to please print the first and last 

name of the candidate on the ballot paper. Thank you. The 

voting may now proceed. 

[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 

Clerk: — Members, may I bring the House back to order. 

Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty to inform 

you that you have elected a Speaker. The Speaker is Dan 

D’Autremont, the Hon. Member of the Legislative Assembly 

for the constituency of Cannington. 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish 

to express my gratitude, my grateful thanks and humble 

acknowledgement of the high honour the Assembly has 

conferred on me. While I leave the floor of this Assembly to 

take the Speaker’s Chair, I leave behind all political partisan 

biases in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all, and 

to the best of my ability, the various and important duties 

pertaining to the high office of Speaker. 

It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 
traditions of the Assembly; secure for each member the right to 

express his or her opinions within the limits necessary to 

preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of the 

hon. members, the political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 

facilitate the transaction of the public business in an orderly 

manner; and above all, to seek to be fair and impartial in the 

decisions you entrust me. 

I would like to thank the Premier and the Leader of the Official 

Opposition for their support to the dais. 

I would like to thank all the members of the House for their 

support in allowing me to serve this Assembly and all 

Saskatchewan people. It is a humbling experience to be selected 

by your peers to represent and to speak for them. 

Thank you to my family for their love and support in my 

political career. It is their support that has allowed me to serve. 

I would also like to thank the people of Cannington for the 

privilege of representing them once again in this legislature. 

This legislature is a respected institution of democracy in our 

province. It is the focal point of political passion and 

partisanship in this province and yes, I have been an active 

participant in that passion and partisanship. However now is the 

time to put aside that partisanship to work for the benefit of all 

Saskatchewan people without favour to any party. I will do my 

best to serve in a non-partisan manner, but should I fail it is my 

failing, not that of the office of Speaker. 

I pledge to serve this historic legislature, all members, and the 

people of Saskatchewan with honour and integrity. Thank you. 

Mr. Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. May I 

be the first to congratulate you on your success in this election 

by the members of this House to be the Speaker for this session 

and for our Assembly. I have a few things I’d like to share with 

you, Mr. Speaker, and with members and guests about you. 

First though, I would like to thank our former Speaker, the hon. 

member for Moosomin, if I may infringe on the rules, Don. The 

former Speaker of the Assembly, the current member for 

Moosomin has been a member, obviously continues to be a 

member, but has been a member now through seven elections, 

and that speaks mightily for one’s ability to do the duties of an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] to represent your 

constituents, to be in touch with them and with many others 

across the province. Because of course we have our MLA 

duties, but whether it’s through committee or in the last four 

years you’ve been as Speaker of this Assembly, the member for 

Moosomin has touched many in this province and has 

represented all of Saskatchewan well from the position that you 

now hold, sir. And so on behalf of the government members, I 

just want to say to the member for Moosomin, thank you so 

very, very much for your able service and leadership in this 

Assembly. 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2011 

I want to thank the Leader of Her Majesty’s Official Opposition 

for assisting in your escort to the Chair, sir. Depending on how 

much of a fight you were prepared to put up, I was grateful to 

have the hon. member there in case some assistance was 

needed. 

 

I think everybody in this House who has known you as an 

MLA, sir, has recognized your passion for this Assembly. And 

for anyone in this House, especially for new members who may 

wonder about your commitment you’ve just made about leaving 

partisanship behind, they ought not to because we have seen it 

on this side of the House, and members have seen it on the 

opposition side of the House as well, when for example 

together with the former member for Regina South, Mr. 

Thomson, and others you led significant reforms in this 

Assembly — I think improved the operation of the Assembly, 

the procedures here, the rules by which we operate. 

 

The fact that we now have a fall sitting, a regular fall sitting. 

and a spring sitting and a regular calendar is in large measure 

owed to you and to members of the then-governing New 

Democratic Party who worked together, setting aside 

partisanship to benefit this particular institution. We have every 

confidence that that is how you will now conduct your affairs, 

sir, as Speaker of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

We on this side of the House know that from time to time 

during debates in our own caucus about how long session 

should go and how many hours we should sit, there was always 

a clarion voice advocating for more days of session and more 

hours of sitting, and that voice will now come from your 

general direction, Mr. Speaker. I remember early on as a brand 

new caucus when we met for the first time after the most recent 

general election, you seemed to be, well more than tacitly, I 

think pretty much directly advocating that December 24th 

would be a good end date for this current sitting of the 

Assembly. We’re grateful for the fact that you will listen to 

members and take counsel from the House leadership on both 

sides before making any arbitrary decisions about the calendar, 

sir. But it does speak to the passion you have for this place, that 

you have always had as long as I’ve known you. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the chance in March, if I can conclude, I had 

the chance in March to go on a trade mission, and while we 

were there, we took a chance on the weekend to go to the 

palace at Westminster and see the original parliament. And 

there on the tour you can stand on the place where they believe 

Speaker Lenthall withstood the pressures from Charles I to 

divulge the name of certain members that the king was not 

happy with. I think the tradition is, the legend is he rode into the 

parliament on his horse and demanded the names of these 

members. 

 

And we know now the tradition, much of the tradition that 

guides your office, sir, in proceedings of this Assembly, stem 

from that very historic moment when of course Speaker 

Lenthall would refuse to give up any of the names of the 

members. To this day we have an anonymity here, known by 

our districts, by our constituencies. But his was an example for 

all of us, and it’s a story from our history we should all be 

familiar with, especially if we are members of a House like this. 

And that’s the tradition that we know you’ll bring to this, to the 

Chair. That’s the tradition we know you’ll bring to the rulings 

that you’re going to make and to the fact that you’re also the 

presiding officer for the Assembly building, for the Assembly 

itself, for this building, and for many of the services that’ll be 

found here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to say congratulations to you on this 

achievement. We’re interested in working with you for constant 

improvements in this Assembly, both in terms of rules and 

proceedings and perhaps even the tone and the demeanour with 

which individual members take part in debate. And we look 

forward to the passion you have for this place manifesting itself 

in fair rulings and an effective presiding over this precinct, in 

this particular Assembly. Mr. Speaker, congratulations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a pleasure to 

be able to say that to you as somebody who I’ve served with all 

my years here in the legislature. And so it’s a great honour to be 

able to say congratulations to you. 

 

It’s also a great honour to say thank you to our member from 

Moosomin who over the years has served us very well, and we 

know that he will continue to serve the members in Moosomin 

in his role as an MLA. But on behalf of all of us here and all of 

us who worked in the last legislative session, thank you very 

much for the good work that you’ve done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you end up having a very important role, as 

you know, because as you’ve indicated on many occasions, you 

go to sleep at night reading Beauchesne’s. And part of the 

problem though is that sometimes Beauchesne’s gets you off so 

far into other worlds, like the Premier was talking about with all 

these historical precedents, that we forget about the fact that 

we’re here in Saskatchewan. And we’re very practical people in 

Saskatchewan. We’re very straightforward people. And I know 

that you have that skill as well, to put all that stuff over there 

and say, okay, in Saskatchewan we have this kind of a problem; 

this is how we solve it. You didn’t survive in your previous 

occupation without having that kind of an attitude. 

 

So I’m looking forward to working with you, and I know our 

House Leader is looking forward to working with you as we 

proceed in this place. I’m also pleased to be able to say that my 

family and your family know each other and have worked 

together in a number of different ways, and a real pleasure to 

see your wife and your son here today and there may be other 

family members here as well. But we’ve spent many hours 

together on the volleyball stands watching our children play 

volleyball, and it’s amazing how much you can learn in that 

kind of a context about a family and about how they work 

together. And so I’m looking forward to continuing that kind of 

thing. 

 

And also I would say that my brother and his wife — that’s my 

brother Ralph and his wife Suzie — gave very fine reviews of 

your brother’s restaurant in Connecticut. And I know that when 

you came to speak to us in our caucus, you talked about food 

and about how it’s served in this place. And that you’re now in 

charge of this legislature, and so I’m looking forward to seeing 

whether you compete with your brother, kind of like I compete 



December 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

with my brother, so that we can see even more dramatic things 

around the food and the hospitality in this place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to working with you. I 

know all my colleagues are looking forward to working with 

you, and we will be happy to support you in your work. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to introduce 

guests. All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — If I may be so bold as to introduce very 

special guests who have joined us on the floor of this Assembly 

to witness an important date of someone important to them and 

someone important to all of us. Mr. Speaker, if I may introduce 

and welcome your wife, Heather, and Nicholas to this 

Assembly and just acknowledge the fact that none of us can do 

any of this without the support that you have mentioned in your 

remarks we get from family. So welcome to Heather and 

Nicholas here today. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I can very quickly 

introduce some special guests in your gallery today. We have a 

couple of individuals from BHP Billiton, who are here 

witnessing this morning’s historic proceedings. Tim Cutt who 

has taken over and is running the offices for BHP Billiton in 

Saskatoon — that’s become their Canadian headquarters for 

diamonds and potash, which we’re grateful for — moved from 

the Vancouver to the city of Saskatoon. And joining him, 

originally from Melville, Saskatchewan, Chris Ryder, also with 

BHP Billiton. I’d ask all members to join in welcoming these 

individuals and the company they represent to the Assembly 

here today. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Before I move the recess, I would 

like to make a couple more comments. I’m in an unusual 

position of being the Speaker and not being allowed to speak. 

But I would like to thank the Premier and the Leader of the 

Official Opposition for their kind words. And I was remiss in 

not thanking the member from Moosomin for the diligent and 

excellent job he did over the previous four years as Speaker. 

It’s a tough job and he did it well. 

 

The Assembly will now recess until 2 p.m. later today, when 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor will present the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 10:53 until 14:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 

  Clerk ..............................................................................................................................................................................................1 

  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................1 

  Nilson .............................................................................................................................................................................................2 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................3 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 




