




















































Hansard: March 14, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 30B  MONDAY, MARCH 14, 2011, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6679 

 March 14, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House now being back in 

session, debate will continue on Bill 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a personal point of 

order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — What is the member’s personal point 

of order? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just to 

respond to the House Leader on the government side and 

charges against me in terms of the language I used yesterday. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will let you continue. I recognize 

the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I was quite surprised today in terms of the charges made by the 

House Leader on the government side in relation to, in his 

words, the profane language I used in the Assembly. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, before I withdraw that comment, I want to 

assure the people in the Assembly and certainly a number of 

other people that may be listening, the fact . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will remind the member that if you 

wish to withdraw the comment there is no remarks with it. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the comment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I was speaking on Bill No. 157, An Act to amend the 

Oil and Gas Conservation Act at 5 o’clock when we were 

interrupted by the clock. And I was, in a nutshell, saying that 

this Act, it takes 44 pages of explanatory notes alone, 44 pages 

to explain essentially that anything that the oil and gas industry 

want to make their job easier in the search for oil and gas is a 

good thing according to the Sask Party government. And 

anything that’s for constituents like a reduction in the price of 

fuel at the pump or a reduction in the price of diesel fuel for 

farmers about to be seeding, a reduction in home heating, 

natural gas, that’s not anywhere on the Sask Party government’s 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I was pointing out the difference. Everything for industry 

that seems to want something, they could get it, and nothing for 

the people of Saskatchewan. And while I laud — I think it is a 

good thing that we keep an eye on industry and try to enable 

industry to do its job better — it can’t be as one-sided as it has 

been. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also noted that . . . I didn’t note this before, 

but I’m getting to this new point in my speech. In the second 

reading speeches, the minister responsible said that, and I quote 

from — as soon as I get my glasses — from page 6145, 

November 22nd, 2010. The member says that “Becoming a 

registry partner was one of the government’s early deliverables 

out of the New West Partnership.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the New West Partnership is a watered 

down TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement]. It involves three provinces as opposed to a larger 

group. But what this New West Partnership is all about is a 

drive to the lowest common denominator, that is, you would not 

have any jurisdiction that has an environmental hoop this high 

to jump through when another one has a hoop this high. Instead 

you just go to the lowest common denominator, lowest 

environmental hoops or hurdles threshold for industry to jump 

over, or to trip over in the case of the New West Partnership. 

 

The New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker, is very arguably an 

undemocratic partnership because it was never brought to this 

legislature. Never have we had a discussion and a vote on the 

New West Partnership. That’s something that the Sask Party 

dreamed up. And the minister proudly says, this is one of the 

early deliverables that we have. An early deliverable, but not 

once, not once have we voted whether Saskatchewan should 

join the New West Partnership. Not once have we had that 

debate in this legislature. And yet here we have a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is coming before us. We’re 

expected to say, oh yes, let’s go with this piece of legislation 

that meets some artificial hoop set by the Sask Party 

government, without any comment, without any opportunity for 

the opposition to say the New West Partnership is great or it’s 

terrible or it’s somewhere in between. No opportunity at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing could be less democratic than that. 

Not since 1990-91 when Fair Share was being introduced by the 

then Devine government have we seen things so 

anti-democratic. And at that point, the Tory government of the 

day actually prorogued the House without having passed the 

annual budget of the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what 

right wing governments are all about. They say, elect us and 

we’ll show you, prove to you that government doesn’t work. 

And every once in a while they get elected, and sure enough 

they prove that government doesn’t work. They make it a 

self-fulfilling prophecy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I say, shame on the minister for saying that this is one of 

the earlier deliverables of the New West Partnership proudly in 

his second reading speech without bringing it to the legislature 

for comment. We need to have things like the New West 

Partnership brought here for . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 



6680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

the minister says, I’m commenting right now. It’s a tad late 

when this is November of 2010. And here we are now some 

months later and we’re still, we’re dealing with a piece of 

legislation that follows from the New West Partnership, the 

watered-down TILMA, if I can call it that. They couldn’t quite 

get TILMA passed, so they came with the New West 

Partnership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a nutshell this Bill, this Bill No. 157, An Act to 

amend the Oil and Gas Conservation Act is troubling in that it 

is symptomatic of a government that just cares only about 

industry and not about the people that elected you, not about the 

people that put you here and brought you to the dance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a shame when we see gasoline prices at a 

buck twenty a litre right now and on the way up. It is a shame 

when we see the price of diesel at the pump is even higher than 

that. And mark my words, with spring seeding just . . . It 

doesn’t seem like it’s just around the corner. We’ve had a total 

of one melting day and that was today. But spring seeding will 

be here for farmers, you know, before you can say 

Rumpelstiltskin very many times. 

 

And the price of diesel is going to continue to go up, and the 

government is going to continue to sit on their hands and do 

nothing for the people of Saskatchewan with respect to high 

fuel prices. They’ll do nothing with respect to the price of 

natural gas for home heating and for other purposes, and yet 

they’ll pass this Bill if they can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve outlined the major concerns that I 

have. I’m tempted to carry on because I know the minister 

responsible doesn’t like to hear any, any, any, any plea on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The minister doesn’t 

want to hear about the people of Saskatchewan who have had 

their rents go from 500 to 700 and $800 a month, the people of 

Saskatchewan who every time we buy groceries we see the 

price just escalating at an atrociously high rate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the government says, but it’s not ours to do anything about, 

is what the Sask Party government says. Well that’s a different 

story than what they said in opposition. And they either were 

being deceitful then or they’re being deceitful now. And, Mr. 

Speaker, take their pick. 

 

I’ve outlined my concerns with Bill 157. I think I’ve coupled it 

with a plea for a little bit of sanity for regular people, my 

constituents and the constituents of everyone else in this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 157, An Act 

to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to rise tonight to speak to Bill 159, An Act to 

amend The University of Regina Act. And I’ve just been taking 

a moment to read some of the previous speeches. I mean this is 

a . . . on this Bill. 

 

And you know, the role of the universities in Saskatchewan 

have been huge. And we look at our two universities and 

they’re very different. As my colleague from Saskatoon 

Meewasin said, they’re not twins. They shouldn’t be treated as 

identical. They come out of different circumstances. The 

University of Regina in the 1960s, it has a long history prior to 

that, but really gave birth in the early ’70s to the U of R 

[University of Regina]. In fact I was a student. I took my 

Bachelor of Education at the U of R, so I have a good feeling, a 

good sense of what the U of R’s purpose was and how it relates 

to the community. Likewise University of Saskatchewan — 

long history in Saskatchewan’s history in Saskatoon. And the 

role it did and it played in the development of Saskatchewan 

continues to play a real leadership role. They both do. 

 

But in many ways this Bill seems to be in many ways mirroring 

a Bill that we’ve seen in the past year or two and the changes 

around the visitor section and also the election of the chancellor 

and senate representatives. And so we understand that there is 

widespread support but not universal support. I’m not sure how 

the consultations went on this, and we know that this 

government’s track record in terms of consulting with all 

interested parties, I’m not sure if I’d use the word stakeholders 

because quite often we think of stakeholders as having a vested 

interest, that there’s some sort of maybe funds or money, some 

sort of major role. 

 

But you know, people in Saskatchewan have a real interest in 

the health and well-being of their universities here. They have a 

real interest in post-secondary education. We take a lot of pride 

in our school system here in Saskatchewan. And after kids 

graduate from their schools, we want to see them succeed in 

their adult life. And whether it’s in the trades or a more 

academic background, our post-secondary offers great, great 

opportunities for our young people. And we see that with 

University of Regina and we see that with University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So the two changes really relate to, as I said, the removal of the 

visitor clause and repealing that with a new process of 

appealing disputes. And apparently the visitor clause was never 

used. And I remember when we had this discussion, when the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] wanted it and asked for it, 

they had some challenges prior. They had much more 

involvement in it, and so it was really a big issue for them. 

 

And I have to . . . I had some reservations that I continue to 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6681 

have. I’m not sure if that’s how you solve the problem. When 

you have issues that need to be resolved, you should really get 

to the heart of the issue. And it’s not the process that’s a 

problem, it’s the issue itself. And when there’s a tradition like 

that, I think that it has served many universities well. I know 

that many universities are changing. And I haven’t taken a real 

deep look at this, but I know neither have a lot of people. Not a 

lot of people have. 

 

And so I do think that while we have some questions, I know 

when we get into committee, I’ll be interested in hearing what 

the minister has to say about this because we understand that 

there’s not universal support for this. He would characterize it 

as broad support, but not universal. 

 

And so I’m curious about who he has been consulting with, 

particularly the students. Students more than ever now need to 

have confidence in their institutions so that if there are issues 

that there are fair appeal processes that are quick and get to the 

heart of the issue and will serve everyone well in a fair manner. 

The problem is, if it doesn’t, these students, especially . . . well 

I think all students. I was going to say especially some over the 

other, but that’s not true. In fact all students need to have 

confidence in the system because they’re investing a lot of time 

and a lot of money to get themselves well-educated. And so in 

this case I think that I’m left with some question marks on the 

visitor section. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And in regard to the new processes for the election of the 

chancellor and the senate representatives, I understand that 

there has been some discussions about that. I understand, and 

particularly the member from Battlefords made quite a logical 

argument about the challenges in the new system. It’s not quite 

as straightforward as it might appear to be. So we’ll be 

interested to hear what people have to say, the minister has to 

say in committee because clearly there is . . . We want to make 

sure things go well. 

 

You know, I think I can speak, for all members on this side of 

the House anyway, when we say we are deeply committed to 

making sure that our post-secondary institutions and our 

universities are world-class institutions. And that people want to 

come here, study here from around the world, but also the kids 

and the folks who are students in the university here, when they 

succeed, they can succeed anywhere in the world. It’s a 

two-way, two-way street. We want people here to do amazing 

things around the world, but also people from the world to 

come here. 

 

We know that this is the case, especially around the climate 

change piece, that the U of R has really shown some real 

leadership and educationally shown some real leadership. And 

so we have a lot of faith, and we think they’re heading into 

some really positive directions as a university. They represent 

our province well. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m looking forward to 

seeing this move into more discussion about this. And we’ll 

have questions further on down the road . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I’m glad I caught the eye over there because I 

thought, somebody’s listening very carefully. And so with that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 159, The University of 

Regina Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

here tonight to rise to enter the debate on Bill 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. I want to start here tonight, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, by talking a little bit about the Bill, about the 

history of the Bill in fact. 

 

The Litter Control Act was originally passed in 1973, and its 

purpose was to provide or set out to provide the government 

with legislative authority to address litter-related issues, to 

create related regulations, and to establish a provincial beverage 

container collection and recycling program. I think for me the 

interesting thing going back to 1973 — well I was three — but I 

grew up in the ’70s and that’s interesting when you think about 

that time. I remember being an elementary school student in the 

’70s, and the big deal at that time was litter, litterbugs. I 

remember being a little kid and heaven forbid someone threw a 

candy wrapper on the ground. And we liked to call people 

litterbugs. 

 

I also remember all those times where, during school, the 

teachers would organize a cleanup. The biggest, most pressing 

issue around the environment I think in those days seemed to be 

litter and having to deal with it. So just thinking about that time 

period, 1973, the most pressing issue was controlling litter, 

unlike right now where in the environment we have the issue of 

global warming. We have the issue of, well of global warming, 

and we have a government actually who has been unwilling, for 

all intents and purposes doing absolutely nothing about 

greenhouse gas emissions. It’s been tokenism. So it’s 

interesting how in the ’70s the biggest thing around the 

environment seemed to be litter, but little did we know just a 

few decades later our environment, the world would be in 

serious peril because of human beings. 

 

So I think the thing that’s interesting to me as well, just last 

year this legislature, this government passed a Bill, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act that 

actually says very little. So that this Bill says very little, but I 

remember when speaking to that Bill last year and doing some 

research, this is a government who has members who didn’t 

even believe in global warming. I remember doing some 

research and being quite surprised that there were members of 

our sitting government who don’t believe (a) that global 



6682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

warming exists, and the second part of that, (b) that global 

warming even has anything to do with what we humans do to 

our environment. So anyway, back to Bill 144. I digress here a 

little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So in 1973 we had the passing of The Litter Control Act. So in 

1988 The Litter Control Act was amended to create the program 

for recycling designated containers. Designated beverage 

containers included all sorts of things — non-refillable alcohol, 

wine, beer, soft drink, water, tea, and juice containers. The 

program at that point imposed an obligation to pay and collect a 

refundable deposit and an environmental handling charge on 

any designated beverage container. The money that’s collected 

through this program is the funding source for the beverage 

container collection and recycling program operated by Sarcan. 

 

I think the thing for me about this, the forethought in this, the 

idea that government actually has a role to play in shaping and 

impacting our behaviour. Government . . . You go to, you travel 

around, around the world or even around Canada, where if there 

isn’t a deposit, people tend to throw those kinds of things, or 

you can’t see a garbage can not overfilling with cans or milk 

containers, those kinds of things, where government hasn’t had 

the forethought to put in place something like this. So that was a 

wonderful thing. It even amazes me though, even though there 

is this deposit on refillable containers or on beverage 

containers, even here in Saskatchewan where this is the case 

and we have a very good rate of recycling here, but we still 

can’t help but see that people still tend to throw things out. 

 

But government definitely has a clear role to play in public 

policy that encourages certain behaviours. So I thought 1988 

was a good time here in Saskatchewan when it comes to making 

sure that we are becoming better environmental stewards. 

 

So this last spring, this last spring this legislature passed 

amendments to The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act that will see the incorporation of The Litter Control Act into 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act. And at 

this time, amendments to the existing litter control Act are 

needed to address a lawsuit, outstanding lawsuit against the 

Government of Saskatchewan related to environmental 

handling charges. So these amendments that are being proposed 

today, there is a positive side to them. The amendments will 

provide clarity to the original intention of the government 

regarding environmental handling charges for the purpose for 

the provincial beverage container program. But these 

amendments also . . . The lawsuit that’s outstanding, the claim 

asserts that the environmental handling charges collected by the 

province under The Litter Control Act are actually a tax and not 

a fee. So these proposed amendments retroactively negate the 

lawsuit and future lawsuits. 

 

So the piece that’s positive is the fact that it will provide clarity 

to the original intention of the government regarding these 

environmental handling fees. But there is some concern. You 

always have to think. It’s very unusual to make a Bill 

retroactive, and not retroactive a year or six months in the past. 

We’re looking back to 1998. That’s 13 years ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So what are the implications of a retroactive Bill? What 

precedent are you setting in saying that basically these 

amendments will mean that this lawsuit can’t proceed? So what 

message are you sending? Are you taking away an individual’s 

or an organization’s right to say to government and to pursue 

and sue government and say what you’re doing is incorrect? So 

I think that before you pass a law retroactively — and 13 years 

retroactively, Mr. Speaker — you really need to consider the 

implications of what message that’s sending. What are the long 

term implications? Is government able to do this for multiple 

pieces of legislation? So I think that that would be something 

that we need to be concerned about. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that I have other colleagues 

who are interested in entering the debate on this. So with that 

I’d like to move adjournment on Bill 144. I would like to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment 

Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The 

Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise tonight to participate in debate on Bill No. 155, An Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act. It is with a certain sense of 

irony that I rise tonight and to take part in the debate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because of course I haven’t been in this House 

forever, but I have been here long enough to see some of the 

actions of this government as it pertains to this file and as I 

believe, as I believe brings to this legislation being brought 

forward. 

 

Of course there are certain measures in here that are 

housekeeping. There are certain measures that are about 

clarifying. There are certain measures that are about changing 

the title of the steering committee to the advisory council, and 

we’re advised in the explanatory notes that this is to enhance 

the profile of the committee. Oh fair enough, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there are some changes that allow for a bit more scope 

in terms of the steering committee as it comes to the operation 

of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. Again, not 

necessarily a bad thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In the minister’s speech when he introduced this measure in the 

House this past fall, he talked about, well this amounts to about 

$3.5 million annually, the fact that the fund to date has acquired 

through purchase or donation approximately 212,000 acres of 

land for wildlife habitat purposes. And again, you know, all 

good stuff. 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6683 

He talked about who’s on the committee, being the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the Saskatchewan 

Bowhunters Association, the Saskatchewan fly fishers 

association, Nature Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Trappers 

Association, and the Saskatchewan Outfitters Association. 

 

Now I guess here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is where we start to get 

into what I find ironic about this Bill. This Bill took place 

against a backdrop where, in the year previous, this government 

had chosen to remove 3.5 million acres of protected habitat 

from legislation, did so in many cases without advising or 

consulting with the very kind of stakeholders that we find 

enumerated in this steering committee that has now been 

renamed an advisory council. In many cases did so without, you 

know . . . This legislation comes forward to re-profile and to 

add to the esteem accorded to these organizations that 

participate in this advisory council. But when it came to 

removing 3.5 million acres of protected habitat, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, did so without consulting many of these organizations 

that they now seek to curry favour with. 

 

I guess the irony is that perhaps if they had done the job of 

consulting with those organizations in the first place, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we wouldn’t be here today to talk about 

the need for that government to re-profile and to curry favour 

with the groups involved. 

 

Again with the groups involved in the advisory council which, 

you know, the new name under this legislation, one of those 

groups of course is the Trappers Association, the Saskatchewan 

Trappers Association. There was a small fee that . . . or a small 

bit of funding that had been accorded to that organization by the 

provincial government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And of course 

what we saw is this government not only take that funding 

away, but to not have the guts or the decency to show up to tell 

them why this was such a great idea to take their funding away. 

So I guess the trappers remember that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

believe you me, they will have something to say about it and 

something to act about in the days and months ahead. 

 

The 3.5 million acres that were removed from protected habitat 

status that again this legislation, the minister’s introductory 

comments shines up the fact that this legislation involves just 

north of 200,000 acres of land — 212,000 acres compared to 

3.5 million acres. It brings to mind that the Sask Party taketh 

away and then the Sask Party giveth a little bit back, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So again what we see at the base of this legislation is the need 

for that government opposite to try and shine up their 

credentials to try and mend some fences, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And again this may work for people that have short memories, 

but for those of us that pay a bit closer attention to what that 

government says and then what happens in actual fact, the irony 

is not lost, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I guess the last irony that this legislation brings to mind is that 

the work that that government had done, unilaterally 

withdrawing funding from the environmental protocol that had 

been shared with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, and again did not do so in consultation with that 

organization but dropped it on them on budget day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Again when it comes to this government’s capacity for 

consulting, we’ve seen a pretty definite pattern when it comes 

to First Nations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where they say one thing 

but they do something entirely different. 

 

So different members, I’ve heard them give speeches over the 

years about the importance of working in partnership with First 

Nations, about the importance of consulting, genuinely 

consulting with First Nations. But again when it comes to 

something like the environmental protocol, which had been 

built up over years between the province and the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, we see something else entirely 

different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I guess in sum there’s some fine measures in this legislation. 

We are vigilant in terms of what we’ll be looking for as this 

plays out over time, as this legislation plays out over time. We 

think there are some fine groups involved in it. And again, in 

enumerating the committee representatives, I would note again 

that there’s no First Nations representation on that body, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But again that’s in keeping with the way that 

this government very cavalierly approached the ripping up of 

the environmental protocol and the way that they approached 

the removal of 3.5 million acres from protected habitat status. 

 

So I’m sure that certainly my colleagues have been able to 

speak on this previously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m certain 

that a number of my colleagues will want to speak in this debate 

as well. And in that regard I will now move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 155, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It gives me great pleasure to join the debate and to talk about 

Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to point out that the Minister of Finance that 

introduced this Bill primarily indicated that the Bill implements 

a five-year tax holiday for mining corporations making 

investments of at least 125 million and maintaining at least 75 

full-time employees. And that’s of course in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And on the face of it, the opposition is supportive of 

this measure. 

 

And I want to point out to the people of Saskatchewan that as a 

government, you know, we look at everything that the Sask 



6684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

Party does. And we certainly want to also point out that, that as 

the New Democratic opposition party we are in totally in favour 

of building this economy to greater heights and to greater 

opportunities for all people, Mr. Speaker, in all the corners of 

our province. And we want to invite as many corporations and 

as much activity and have these corporations and business 

people invest in our province, and something that we embrace, 

and something that we really truly want to see happen every day 

and continue to happen for many, many years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give a history lesson to the 

Saskatchewan Party because a lot of times they tend to think 

that history was written when they took over government, Mr. 

Speaker. And the fact of the matter is, the hard work, the burden 

that was carried by the former NDP [New Democratic Party] 

administration was great, Mr. Speaker. Not only the debt 

burden was difficult but rebuilding the economy, which these 

guys enjoy now, was something that took a lot of elbow grease, 

took a lot of hard work, took a lot of determination, took a lot of 

sacrifice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now when the Minister of Finance gets up and proposes Bill 

149, of course as an opposition, we’re going to look at it. Does 

it do exactly what the Bill intended it to do? And I look with a 

bit of amusement at some of the recent announcements, one of 

them being from the Minister of Resources when he talks about 

a plan for PA [Prince Albert] of bringing in jobs 18 months 

from now, Mr. Speaker. And again I go back to my earlier 

point, they lose 500 jobs from the original plan and it’s 18 

months away. So is this Bill 149, the income tax amendment, is 

it typical of the Saskatchewan Party where you talk about 

something but really don’t deliver anything for Saskatchewan? 

And that’s what we’re trying to find out with this Bill and many 

other Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when it goes down to trying to build an economy, Mr. 

Speaker, we will not take no lessons from the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, primarily because the true and tried method of what 

we’ve done in the early 2000s, and certainly the years before 

that, is we helped put the base in for this economy that that 

party enjoys, Mr. Speaker. They inherited every bit of good 

luck that they got, Mr. Speaker. And some of the measures that 

they talk about today in Bill 149, Mr. Speaker, is merely adding 

on to the great base of work that was done by the former NDP 

administration, Mr. Speaker, alongside of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go out earlier and I looked at some of the 

plans. And I remember some of the names that we had. One of 

the names that pops out certainly is a gentleman by the name of 

Eric Cline. And of course Eric Cline is now in the private 

sector, but he was the minister of Finance as many of the 

colleagues here were also ministers of Finance. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can remember the day that Mr. Cline said, well today 

is our final year of our four-year personal income tax plan 

where we reduced the personal income tax of all people of 

Saskatchewan dramatically over four years. Why? Because we 

could afford to do it, Mr. Speaker, at the time. We could afford 

to do it. 

 

And I can remember when the debt surcharge tax was 

eliminated, Mr. Speaker. That was done by the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. I can remember the corporate review 

of all the taxes being paid. That was done by the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. And finally, Mr. Speaker, the 

royalties and all the royalties that are out there, it was done by 

the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I look at some of the added on . . . And one of the 

things that people ought to know is that they are merely 

following the path that was blazed before them. That path was 

built on a solid base of a personal income tax plan that reduced 

the taxes of all people. That’s the plan that was put in place by 

the NDP government. So whether it’s a debt surcharge tax or 

whether it was a corporate review or the royalty taxes and 

people’s personal income tax, Mr. Speaker, they are merely 

following the path that was laid out before them, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Now we obviously as a government are quite proud, quite proud 

of that work. And they are the benefactors. But they tend to 

come along and say, look what we’re doing here, folks. And I 

think everybody in Saskatchewan — and they know it as well 

— everybody in Saskatchewan is in debt to the previous 

administration called the NDP for putting many of these 

measures in place that complement Bill 149. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that when the review 

was done on the royalties, we wanted to stimulate the economy. 

And things started moving. We started seeing more and more 

activity, and people were coming to Saskatchewan and all of a 

sudden we seen this great move. And I can remember articles in 

the paper that talked about Saskatchewan being a rising star, 

Saskatchewan going to be the place to be. And this went back to 

2005, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today now these guys come along, and they say, oh look, 

we’re reinventing Saskatchewan. Look at all the great things 

we’re doing. You shouldn’t be taking any credit for something 

that you have not done. You should not be taking credit for the 

inheritance that you got. So I tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

you’re riding on the coattails of what the NDP done whey they 

assumed power in 1991 and built this province up. You know it, 

we know it, and 90 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan 

know it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we come along, Mr. Speaker, and talk 149, Bill 149, 

and I say to the people of Saskatchewan, the history of the NDP 

is very, very promising to many, many people that’ll look at us 

as a party that can deliver many, many economic benefits to our 

province, Mr. Speaker. We want to see corporations. We want 

to see businesses thrive. We want see things really move, Mr. 

Speaker. But we shouldn’t pretend something that we’re not. 

And that’s exactly what that party opposite is doing. Under a 

pretend government they are telling everybody, we’re doing all 

these wonderful things, when simply Bill 149 is merely an 

add-on to some of the great work done in the early 2000s and 

even before that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government had over the past four 

years, I would estimate, maybe $40 billion in all their budgets 

combined. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for people to know 

that when the NDP were in power they maybe had about 24 

billion over those four years, or even less before that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we could’ve done a tremendous amount of more work 

for the people of Saskatchewan in building that brave new 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6685 

economy and continuing that particular work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at Bill 149, I look at Bill 149 and I 

say to myself, well that’s great. We applaud that. We applaud 

efforts to bring people into our province. We applaud the effort 

of having corporations and businesses come because as many of 

us have said, we cannot have a social agenda without having a 

corporate agenda in place. You can’t have people profit if you 

don’t have businesses here. We agree with that. We support 

that. And as our leader said, there’s three or four planks in a 

great new economy, and part of that’s having a thriving 

business community. And this Bill merely complements some 

of the work that we did in the early or late 1990s and the early 

2000s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’ll look at the Bill itself. We have a lot of questions. We 

have a lot of answers that need to be given, certainly to the 

opposition and to the people of Saskatchewan. And any time we 

done anything, Mr. Speaker, we always looked at a number of 

issues before we proceeded with the Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s environmental considerations. What is the 

environmental imprint or the footprint on this particular Bill? 

Does anybody know exactly what the implications are? 

 

Mr. Speaker, on worker safety and paying our workers a fair 

share and a fair salary, is that consideration part of this Bill, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? The net benefit to our province, is that in 

consideration with this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker? Is there any 

reference to the strategic resource that this Bill may implicate or 

certainly complicate? So those are some of the questions 

offhand that we always, typically always assess at the start of 

any process when we are trying to attract businesses to our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I say it loud and clear, and I say it to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that from our perspective, we will always, 

always be proud of the work that we did. We’ll always be proud 

of the personal income tax measures we put in place. We’ll 

always be proud of the efforts around reducing the debt 

surcharge tax. We’ll always be proud of the reviews that we did 

when it comes to corporate tax. We’ll be proud of the revenue 

sharing and the royalty scheme that we looked at when we 

talked with different companies. We’ll be proud of our balance 

on the economy. We’ll be proud of our balance when it comes 

to the environment, when it comes to worker protection, worker 

pay — all these things that we balanced, Mr. Speaker, in 

relation to anything we brought to attract business to the 

community was always part of the mix. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is one small step with many more 

questions that we have to answer before we support any Bill 

that that Sask Party presents in this Assembly. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

for me this evening to enter the debate at second reading on Bill 

No. 150, An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation has been debated for a 

short while in the legislature. There are still a number of 

questions that need to be answered about this Bill, as there are 

with so much of the legislation that this government introduced 

in the fall and is expecting the legislature here, Mr. Speaker, to 

move through these Bills quickly. 

 

But just to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, Bill 150 has two 

main provisions. The first provision is to clarify how spousal 

survivor benefits are to be calculated in the case of a person 

who may have been married more than once or who may have 

both current and former spouses who could claim to be 

qualified to receive some type of survivor benefit. Mr. Speaker, 

the opposition members have enunciated this in remarks 

previous. The opposition wants to have a better understanding 

of the potential impact of this provision, particularly on 

vulnerable people. However, on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, this 

provision may have some merit. And with some continuing 

consultation, we may be able to support that. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the second provision continues this 

government’s pattern of hiding important information from 

public view. This government proposes to remove from public 

reporting the amount of money and benefits paid out to 

individual superannuates and, Mr. Speaker, we cannot support 

this provision. Mr. Speaker, this is a provision, and I’ll read it 

specifically in the legislation in front of us. It calls for a new 

section 50: 

 

Section 50 is repealed and the following substituted: 

 

“Annual report not to disclose personal information 

 

So new section 50, this is the legislation as it reads: 

 

The report transmitted by a board to the president of the 

Executive Council must not show the names of individuals 

who retired or died during the period to which the report 

applies, the amounts of superannuation or other 

allowances or benefits granted in individual cases or in 

any other personal information respecting any of those 

individuals”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, when he introduced this 

piece of legislation on November the 15th of 2010, Mr. 

Speaker, made it very clear in his remarks. And I’ll quote from 

page 6038 of Hansard, the Minister of Finance said very 

clearly: “This amendment will remove the requirement to 



6686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2011 

disclose personal information in the . . . [financial] reports.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is one piece of legislation that the 

government is quite clear on what it is doing, and that is to 

protect from disclosure a number of individuals, protect from 

disclosure a number of individuals. This government knows 

already, Mr. Speaker, that any amounts over $50,000 paid to 

individuals or organizations in one year by government have to 

be publicly disclosed. The public accounts annually, Mr. 

Speaker, show the lists of people who work in the departments 

of government who are remunerated greater than $50,000 per 

year, and that remuneration, Mr. Speaker, is compiled and 

presented in an accumulated manner. 

 

The salaries of everyone who works for a minister of the Crown 

or Executive Council, and who make more $50,000 a year are 

indeed publicly disclosed each year in Public Accounts and it’s 

a requirement, Mr. Speaker, of this legislature. The same holds 

true for all other employees in the public service.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation is trying to do, with the 

specific direction of the Sask Party government, is allowing 

former employees to be held to a different standard. In other 

words, Mr. Speaker, it’s possible to leave the Public Service, 

come back under contract and not have to disclose the amount 

of funds that have been provided to you. The opposition of 

course, as I indicated, believes that this could result in former 

employees being able to collect their pension benefits while 

continuing to work for government on a contract basis. This is 

what most people call double-dipping, and nobody, Mr. 

Speaker, would be the wiser of this. Nobody would be the wiser 

of this because the Sask Party is by law saying this will be 

exempt from disclosure. 

 

We know that this government likes to contract out services to 

its friends, Mr. Speaker. This is happening more and more 

frequently. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we learned today in 

question period — actually we learned a couple days ago, but 

the minister was called to account today in the legislature — 

contracted out health services meant to reduce the wait times in 

Saskatchewan are not producing the results, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what this government has been doing in contracting out 

services, Mr. Speaker, providing funding but getting very little 

benefit for the people of Saskatchewan in return. Starving the 

public health system for the funding that it needs, Mr. Speaker, 

to benefit Saskatchewan people while at the same time 

providing funds that could be used in the public sector, Mr. 

Speaker, to their friends in the private sector, Mr. Speaker, with 

no discernible results for the people of Saskatchewan. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we know that on this contracting out 

they’ve signed a $27 million loan guarantee to Sask Party 

friends for the development of Amicus, a privately developed 

and to be delivered long-term care facility in the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

They’re trying to pretend, Mr. Speaker, that this 

help-your-friends-out-with-contracts process is something new 

and innovative, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not new at all, Mr. 

Speaker. Old-line governments, conservative governments in 

particular, have been doing this for tens, dozens, maybe 

hundreds of years, Mr. Speaker, worldwide: rewarding their 

friends with public money. And, Mr. Speaker, the only way to 

ensure that the people are protected in circumstances like this is 

simple — full disclosure. That’s what protects the public purse, 

Mr. Speaker. Full disclosure. That’s what protects the public 

from a government that simply wants to use public resources 

for private benefit, Mr. Speaker. Public disclosure is the key to 

ensuring confidence of the public in the government that they 

have entrusted to manage the public resources. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill is allowed to pass, the government 

could contract services out to former employees. Those former 

employees could receive payments from the government for 

that contract. At the same time, those people can collect pension 

benefits from the public purse and nobody would be the wiser, 

Mr. Speaker. Nobody would know about it. Specific, that’s 

what this Bill is all about. There’s only two provisions in the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. This provision of non-disclosure is very 

clearly set out and very clearly defined by the Minister of 

Finance in introducing the legislation to the House back in 

November. 

 

The government claims, Mr. Speaker, or may claim, if anyone 

else decides to speak on it, that this is an innocuous Bill. But 

this the same government that tried to bring in what we in the 

legislature know of as Bill 9. This would have raised the bar for 

non-disclosure of government spending from 50,000 to 

$350,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will remember that there was a short debate, and the Bill 

seemed to have disappeared, Mr. Speaker. This government 

decided that the law which requires the government to disclose 

any payment over $50,000 for services — Mr. Speaker, not for 

wages and remuneration but for services, disclose any spending 

over $50,000 — well, Mr. Speaker, this government early in its 

mandate thought, oh gee that’s a lot of disclosure, Mr. Speaker. 

Let’s up the limit to $350,000. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government was trying to give itself the 

right to hide every cheque it wrote under $350,000 and, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s not right. The people of Saskatchewan knew it 

wasn’t right. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we haven’t seen much 

of Bill 9 since the government got part of that message. 

 

This is the same government that fires employees for trying to 

raise issues in the public interest, and this is the same 

government that pretends to fix the problem by bringing in a 

new public interest disclosure Act that keeps allegations of 

wrongdoing private. And some people, Mr. Speaker, who pay 

attention to the legislature would know that this legislation that 

I’m talking about, The Public Interest Disclosure Act, is doing 

for public interest or whistle-blowers what the Bill 150 in my 

hand, Mr. Speaker, is doing for the finances of this province — 

trying to ensure that the public doesn’t know what’s going on. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is completely unacceptable. 

 

This current pattern of secrecy and lack of accountability and 

transparency that defines this government has to stop, Mr. 

Speaker. We can’t support this legislation because of that. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s lots here that the government has to clarify, 

maybe even backtrack on, Mr. Speaker. And therefore in order 

to ensure that the government has time to think about this 

legislation, to rethink the position that they have taken on this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, I would move that debate on Bill No. 150 be 

now adjourned. 



March 14, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 6687 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 

the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 19:57.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

  Belanger (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 6679 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6679 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6680 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6681 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6682 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6683 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6685 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


