




















































Hansard: April 05, 2011


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 43A  TUESDAY, APRIL 5, 2011, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7101 

 April 5, 2011 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour for me to be able to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of this Assembly, and to our guests, a hero of the 

Jeux Canada Games, the Winter Games, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Her name is Aerial Arthur, and she is from the constituency of 

Saskatoon Sutherland. Her MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] will be talking about her in a little bit. She’s joined 

by her parents, Shelley and Scott, also obviously from 

Saskatoon Sutherland, Mr. Speaker. And she was a gold 

medallist in terms of her individual efforts; as well, she earned 

team gold, Mr. Speaker. She has big dreams as well for the 

future, and obviously the chance of those dreams coming true 

look pretty good from this perspective and from her vantage 

point today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we had a chance to meet a little 

bit earlier on and she gave me one of her targets, one of her 

winning targets. And to say that it was an absolute bull’s eye is 

an underestimation, an underdescription of exactly what that 

target looked like. So we’re all very, very proud of her as a 

great Saskatchewan young athlete. We want to wish her the 

best, and we want to welcome her and her parents to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, in the west gallery is a 

long-time friend who is visiting us from afar. I see Margo Weir 

has joined us in the gallery. Not long ago her not-quite-as-good 

half, John Weir, joined us, and we had the chance to say hello 

to him. And Margo is a friend from a number of years back — 

not too many years back. And we just want to tell her how great 

it is to see her even from this distance, and maybe we’ll get a 

chance to talk a little bit later on. We want to welcome her to 

this Legislative Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Premier and welcome Aerial and her family here 

to the legislature. It’s young people like Aerial that really leaves 

us with the comfort that Saskatchewan is in good hands and the 

future of Saskatchewan is in good hands. And we wish her well 

in future endeavours, whether it be sports or academic, 

whatever she chooses. And also a congratulations on the gold 

medals at the Jeux Canada Games. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I 

want to introduce 35 students from McLean School. They’re 

grade 5 and 8 students. They’re seated in the west gallery. Mr. 

Speaker, their teacher is Alexis Zerr and their chaperone is 

Crystal Hrbachek, Mr. Speaker. They’ve come in from 

McLean, which is not too terribly far out of the city of course 

down the No. 1 Highway, to see the proceedings. I look forward 

to meeting with them after and hopefully a picture on the steps, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I understand that later on this evening, they’re putting on a play 

in their school. It’s called A Nose for the News, Mr. Speaker. I 

think that’s very fitting that they would be in this place today, 

and then doing the play later on this evening. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like all members of the Assembly to welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce someone that’s very special in my life. Seated in your 

gallery is my sister Edna, and she is no stranger to this gallery. 

But I must say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s often said that you can’t 

choose relatives, but even if you could, she would be number 

one on my list. I’d like all members to join me in welcoming 

Edna to her legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, 17 grade 

12 students from Sheldon Williams Collegiate who are in the 

east gallery. It’s a law 30 class that’s taught by Helen Sukovieff 

and they’re also accompanied by a chaperone, Brennen 

Schmidt. And so we welcome them here to this legislature. I ask 

all members to welcome them. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition signed on behalf of residents that wish to 

bring to the government’s attention a very serious matter, that is 

the issue of facing ever-increasing rents that are simply making 

life in Saskatchewan unaffordable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition also speaks to the issue that a majority 

of Canadians now live in provinces with rent control guidelines, 

including Manitoba, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and 

Prince Edward Island. Mr. Speaker, the petition also touches on 

the public policy paper, Increasing the Affordability of Rental 

Housing in Canada, which calls for both incentives for building 

new rental properties and instituting rent controls. The authors 

say, and I quote, “The greatest attraction of second-generation 

rent control is the protection it offers sitting tenants against the 

severe deterioration of housing affordability caused by high rent 

increases — in effect, it protects against economic eviction.” 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 



7102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2011 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

immediately enact rent control legislation that protects 

Saskatchewan tenants from unreasonable increases in 

rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed on behalf of residents in 

La Ronge, Radville, Weyburn, Regina, Yorkton, Veregin, 

Saskatoon, Manor, Maple Creek, Rouleau, and Stanley Mission. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again with 

a petition in support of maintaining quality health care services: 

 

And the petition of the undersigned citizens of the 

province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: that the 

Government of Saskatchewan ought to recognize the need 

for timely access to comprehensive and quality health 

care services for all communities within the province, 

including Wakaw and surrounding areas, and that the 

disruption of emergency services and in-patient services 

at Wakaw Hospital will not serve the needs of the 

residents of this community or the surrounding area; and 

 

That the cuts in access to timely and accurate diagnostic 

and laboratory services within the community of Wakaw 

and the surrounding area will also not serve the needs of 

the residents. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintain quality health care 

services through the commitment of necessary funding to 

address critical retention and recruitment issues. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Saskatoon, Wakaw, Vanscoy, Waldheim, and Cudworth. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on behalf of my constituents who live in the 

neighbourhood of Hampton Village. And it’s about the need for 

a new school for their children: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that Hampton Village is a rapidly growing 

community in Saskatoon with many young families; that 

Hampton Village residents pay a significant amount of 

taxes including education property taxes; that children in 

Hampton Village deserve to be able to attend school in 

their own community instead of travelling to 

neighbouring communities to attend schools that are 

typically already reaching capacity. 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to devote the necessary 

resources for the construction of an elementary school in 

Hampton Village so that children in this rapidly growing 

neighbourhood in Saskatoon can attend school in their 

own community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

residents of Hampton Village. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today and present a petition in support of potash royalty 

review because, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are the 

owners of a 1,000-year strategic resource; the owners of this 

resource benefit and deserve the maximum possible benefit on 

the return of this resource; and also that there is a new norm for 

potash in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

begin a comprehensive, transparent, and public review of 

Saskatchewan’s potash royalty system with a view to 

maximizing the return from this strategic resource for its 

owners, the people of Saskatchewan, who wish to use 

these additional potash royalty revenues for needed 

investments in health care, child care, education, 

affordable housing, infrastructure, and other social 

programs, as well as public initiatives such as debt 

repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Churchbridge and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again today to present a petition on restoring funding equity to 

Regina Catholic schools. Regina Catholic schools received 

$275 less per pupil than Regina public schools, amounting to a 

funding inequity of $2.7 million in total. That funding inequity 

places program delivery and staffing levels at risk and we’re 

already seeing some of the effects of that, Mr. Speaker. The 

Government of Saskatchewan has denied Catholic school 

boards in the province representation on the 

government-appointed committee mandated to develop a 

long-term funding formula for Saskatchewan school boards. 

And the petitions reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to address the funding inequity between 

Regina Catholic schools and Regina public schools that 

provides $275 less per pupil funding for Regina Catholic 

school students, totalling $2.7 million, and make known 

that the continuation for another school year of funding 

inequity places program delivery and staffing levels at 



April 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7103 

risk in Regina Catholic schools; and in so doing, 

immediately restore funding equity to ensure that every 

student in Saskatchewan, whether enrolled in a Catholic 

or public school, receives equitable resources to ensure 

every student in Saskatchewan has access to a quality 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 

concerned about the detrimental effects that Bill 160 would 

have on human rights law if enacted. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

withdraw Bill 160 from consideration by the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and hold extensive public 

consultations informed by a public policy paper before 

any amendments to the Human Rights Code, the law that 

supersedes all others in our province, are even considered. 

 

And today the petition is signed by residents of Davidson, 

Saskatoon, Warman, Langham, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of our 

finances by the Sask Party. They allude specifically to a record 

that includes running of deficits and increasing debt at a time of 

exceptional highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker, historic highs in 

revenues, this year alone increasing our debt by $548 million, 

Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Yorkton, Kamsack, Esterhazy, and Sturgis. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Youth Receives Terry Fox Award 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Terry Fox 

Award is presented each year by the city of Prince Albert to an 

individual under the age of 21 who best emulates the ideals and 

inspiration of Terry Fox. At the Prince Albert City Council 

meeting last week, 16-year-old Catlin Anderson was presented 

with his award and is the 2010 Terry Fox Award recipient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Catlin has a degenerative disease which affects his 

central nervous system. At one time he could walk and talk as 

most of us do. Now he’s confined to a reclined wheelchair and 

can only communicate through nodding and shaking his head. 

 

Catlin was nominated by Michelle Handstede who is his EA 

[education assistant] support teacher at St. Michael Community 

School, a school where I have previously worked, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s situated in Prince Albert Northcote. Michelle states that, 

despite his disability, Catlin comes to school every day with a 

smile on his face. And on his nomination form, Michelle wrote 

that “Catlin exemplifies Terry Fox because he perseveres 

despite the obstacles that disability put in his way. Like Terry 

Fox, Catlin does not give up. Through each new obstacle and 

each new challenge, he continues with determination and greets 

the world with his warm, beautiful smile.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating Catlin Anderson on being the 2010 Terry Fox 

Award recipient. Additionally I would like to ask that we 

acknowledge Sharon Anderson, Catlin’s mother; Michelle 

Handstede, his EA support teacher; and all of the students and 

staff at St. Michael School. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Daffodil Days 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Cancer is blind 

and encompassing. It affects people of all ages. Mr. Speaker, in 

one way or another, everyone in this Assembly has dealt with 

the cruel reality of the effects of cancer. 

 

Far too many families suffer tragic losses due to the disease that 

can be highly treatable. For this reason, April marks cancer 

month in Canada. During this month there will be multiple 

initiatives that will be enacted, not only to raise awareness of 

the disease but also promote advocacy, fundraising efforts, 

research, and treatments. Many of these initiatives are 

spearheaded by the dedicated volunteers of the Canadian 

Cancer Society. 

 

The Daffodil Days fundraiser is an excellent example of the 

advocacy work done by the Cancer Society. Throughout the 

month of April, volunteers will be busy delivering and selling 

bright yellow daffodils and daffodil pins to help raise money to 

support the fight against cancer. 

 

I invite all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

recognizing the hard work and dedication of the Cancer 

Society. And further, Mr. Speaker, fundraisers such as Daffodil 

Days epitomize the giving and empathetic Saskatchewan spirit. 

These daffodils are a symbol of life and hope, and I hope and 

pray we can all encourage our friends and family to buy a 

bunch. 



7104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2011 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can also use Daffodil Days as an 

opportunity to keep the survivors, along with those currently 

fighting the disease, in our thoughts and prayers and keep in our 

memories the ones we have lost. I’m thinking of you today and 

every day little buddy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Green Lake Remembers Leslie Sayese 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month the 

town of Green Lake held their second annual fish derby. The 

community’s rallying around the event to fundraise as well as 

honour the memory of a loved one. 

 

Leslie Sayese was a resident of Green Lake, Saskatchewan. 

Leslie worked for Saskatchewan Environment and Leslie loved 

to work both outdoors and play outdoors. He made it both his 

occupation and recreation. After succumbing to cancer three 

years ago, the community planned a fishing derby to honour 

Leslie’s memory. 

 

Jeff and Cindy McKay, also of Green Lake, have spearheaded 

the event. The couple decided that something needed to be done 

to help heal the community but to also carry on their friend’s 

passion for the outdoors. In its first year, the derby raised more 

than $800. This year, Mr. Speaker, the proceeds doubled to just 

over $1,600. All the proceeds raised are donated for cancer 

research. The event started out small, but the organizers hope to 

expand and grow the derby. They hope to further their 

sponsorship and build on the success each year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Green Lake is showing their community spirit, 

volunteerism, and compassion for each other. I knew Leslie 

from our high school days and he was always friendly and 

outgoing. The local arena is also named after his father, Mervin 

Sayese, and I know that his mother, Alice, and the entire family 

are very proud of the work and the memory of this father and 

son. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Green Lake is a stronger community because of 

this event, the volunteers, and of course, the memory of Leslie 

Sayese. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Athlete Wins Double Gold 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to rise in the House today to recognize Aerial Arthur, a 

Saskatoon Sutherland constituent. She’s accompanied here 

today by Shelley and Scott, her parents. 

 

Aerial won two gold medals for Saskatchewan in air rifle target 

shooting at the recent Jeux Canada Games held in Halifax on 

February 14th and 16th. Although she is just 13 years old, she 

was competing against other air rifle high performance athletes 

from other provinces in Canada. The age limit for these athletes 

is under 21 years of age and she was one of the youngest. 

 

Aerial competed in air rifle in the women’s individual and team 

events. There were 17 other athletes in the individual event and 

nine provinces in the team event. Her score for individual was 

103.7 out of a possible 109. And her first team match, she 

scored 392 out of 400. Mr. Speaker, female Olympians must 

shoot 393 out of 400. Not only is her young age significant in 

attaining this lofty goal, but also of note is that Aerial has only 

been in this sport for a year and a half. 

 

It is a well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, that participating in sports 

can improve our youths’ physical and mental fitness as well as 

improving their social skills. Mr. Speaker, Aerial is just getting 

started. We wish her well in all of her future endeavours, and 

maybe one day we will be cheering Aerial on at the Olympics. 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all in the Assembly to congratulate Aerial 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the week of April 17th to 24th is 

National Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week in 

Canada. This week gives us an opportunity to show our support 

for the thousands of Canadians waiting for organ transplants. 

As we speak, there are over 3,100 people in Canada who are on 

waiting lists for the most precious gift that a person could 

possibly receive, the gift of life in the form of one or more 

organ donations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year, according to the Canadian Institute for 

Health Information, 247 Canadians died waiting for that gift of 

an organ transplant. Seven of those were in Saskatchewan. 

Every one of those deaths was an ultimately preventable 

tragedy. While we remember those who have died waiting for 

the gift of life and express our gratitude to those who have 

given that gift, we also recognize that more needs to be done to 

ensure that these preventable deaths are prevented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all Saskatchewanians to make the 

noble decision to give the gift of life by placing the orange 

organ and tissue donor sticker on their provincial health 

services card. And during this coming week, I call on all the 

people of Saskatchewan and the members of this Assembly to 

remind the Saskatchewan Party government that stalled 

transplant programs and Saskatchewan transplant patients being 

forced to seek their care in Alberta is not acceptable in this 

so-called new Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan patients and 

Saskatchewan families deserve better. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Wednesday the 

2011 Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards were 

held right here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, the awards were a great 

night that honoured the entrepreneurial spirit in Saskatchewan. 

The banquet gave the attendees the opportunity to encourage 

the next generation of business leaders and innovators that will 

lead our economy. 



April 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7105 

I would like to thank the entire board of directors for their work 

in organizing this event in honouring the enterprising youth of 

Saskatchewan. As our provincial economy continues to lead the 

nation, it is very important that our young entrepreneurs are 

given the support that they need to help build the future of our 

province. Congratulations to the students for their remarkable 

achievements, and thank you to everyone who supported Junior 

Achievement in the goal to inspire and prepare young people to 

succeed in the global economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to advise the Assembly 

that Mr. Gavin Semple was inducted into the Junior 

Achievement Hall of Fame. Mr. Semple is the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the Brandt Group of Companies, a 

business that is located right here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in 

congratulating all the winners and nominees, and that we may 

continue to encourage our young entrepreneurs. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

National Wildlife Week 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, long 

before the term nature deficit disorder was coined, the Canadian 

Wildlife Federation recognized the need to celebrate Canada’s 

species and spaces. National Wildlife Week, a flagship program 

of the Canadian Wildlife Federation, was proclaimed by an Act 

of parliament in 1947. The primary purpose is to connect 

Canadians with nature and pay homage to our country’s natural 

heritage and contribute to its conservation through awareness 

and education programs nationwide. 

 

This year during National Wildlife Week, the Canadian 

Wildlife Federation is urging Canadians from coast to coast to 

get outside and go for a walk. Health Canada estimates that 

Canadians spend close to 90 per cent of their time indoors, and 

indoor air can be 10 times more polluted than outdoor air. Mr. 

Speaker, by making this connection with nature, we will be 

supporting the Canadian Wildlife Federation and its mission to 

celebrate what we are so lucky to have an abundance of here in 

Canada — vast spaces and wildlife to learn about and enjoy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, National Wildlife Week isn’t going to change the 

world or slow the pace of video game obsessions. But it does 

provide an opportunity to introduce a little balance, something 

most of us strive for day to day. I would ask all my colleagues 

to congratulate the Canadian Wildlife Federation and the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation for all their efforts in making 

a world a better place to live. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Affordable Housing Issues 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Sask Party 

announced it was borrowing money, more than $200 million to 

lend to home developers to build housing in the range of 

$300,000 a unit. Currently there are many houses on the market 

in this price range. Why is the Premier using taxpayers’ money 

to finance developers to build housing stock that already exists 

on our market? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this seems to be a change 

of tune for the members opposite because we’ve been talking 

about affordable housing, and they’ve been saying there’s a 

need for more. And that’s what we are definitely doing is 

making sure that this province is going to have 4,600 new 

homes in this province over the next five years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important initiative, one that we’ve been 

hearing about not just in the cities but in the rural areas as well. 

As our population increases, we do need more units. And that’s 

what we’re doing, and working not just with government but 

with municipalities and stakeholders to make sure there are 

units right across the province for the people that not only live 

in our province but are moving in. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, for that minister to speak 

of $300,000 houses as affordable houses just speaks to how out 

of touch that government is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Affordability and accessibility of housing is a major issue 

across this province. Families and people across the province 

cannot afford the massive rent increases that they’re facing, 

such as just this past Friday here in Regina where many families 

and individuals faced rent increases between 60 and 100 per 

cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Many families can’t save the down 

payment to enter into the homes that this member is speaking of 

and are simply losing ground, Mr. Speaker, yet this Premier’s 

plan does not deal with either of those problems. Instead he is 

financing developers with taxpayers’ money to build housing 

that is already available. Why has this Premier failed to address 

the real challenges for renters and prospective home buyers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the statement just made by 

the member opposite underlines the fact that they don’t 

understand that as we build units then they actually free up the 

rental supply. People can actually have some home ownership 

themselves. They’ll move out of spaces, and it’ll make rental 

units more affordable for people in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re doing it right across the 

province. That’s why we’ve opened up student units in 

Saskatoon. That’s why we’re working with people right across 

the province to make sure if people can own a home they’ll 

move out of a place that’s now rented, and there’ll be places for 

people to move into in this province as they increase the 

population in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 



7106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2011 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, those houses are already 

on the market, and people can’t afford to enter them. The Sask 

Party is not dealing with the actual problem and are in fact 

using taxpayers’ money to depreciate the value of their homes. 

Remarkably the Premier stated this purpose in his budget 

speech just last week, and I’ll quote the Premier from his 

budget speech last week. I quote, “It’ll probably lower housing 

prices down . . . That’s what happens when you increase the 

supply of housing . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, causing a house that was worth 295,000 to 

depreciate to 275,000, for example, does not address the fact 

that prospective homebuyers can’t save up the down payment. 

And it does nothing to deal with the many families and 

individuals dealing with massive rent increases, Mr. Speaker, 

and it creates a whole host of problems of its own. How does 

this Premier honestly believe that this is good policy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, part of the housing policy 

that we put forward, or the plan that we put forward, actually 

helps people with the down payment. There’s two initiatives 

that we’re putting forward. They’re actually based on what the 

city of Saskatoon is doing, that it’s going to allow people to 

work towards the down payment. At the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, we understand that a $180,000 home, if we can put 

some down payment toward it, will allow people to actually 

have home ownership. 

 

I think the members opposite are very confused because the 

member from Fairview said last week that they’re concerned 

about driving house prices down in the province. So really, the 

only criticism the NDP [New Democratic Party] have of our 

affordable housing plan is that it’s going to create affordable 

housing. I don’t understand what they’re talking about. They’re 

very surprised all the time. They’re acting like we’re cancelling 

Christmas. What we’re really doing, Mr. Speaker, is giving the 

people in the province an opportunity to have what most people 

in the world want, and that is a home. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, highlighted again, it just, it 

focuses in on the fact that this Premier and this government 

simply don’t get it, Mr. Speaker. This Premier authored and 

doubled down on a failed policy, this failed policy. And it 

doesn’t fix the problem for renters or homeowners, and in fact 

uses taxpayers’ money to lower the values of their own homes 

and remove personal equity. This is neither good policy nor 

fair. Many families have utilized equity in their homes and 

many new homeowners, for example, have no interest in seeing 

the value of their mortgage exceed the value of their home. 

 

The impact of the Premier’s plan could be devastating. The 

policy fails in so many ways. Mr. Premier, how do you believe 

this is fair? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what is fair in this province 

is allowing people to actually own a home, allowing people to 

have a place to live in their, maybe it’s a rental unit where they 

can be proud of where they’re living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite tried to talk about our 

housing announcement last week when speaking for the mayor 

of Saskatoon, when he said the mayor is not very happy. Well I 

think maybe they should understand that Mayor Atchison can 

speak for himself. And he does expect that the members 

opposite will allow him to do that. And maybe he expects that 

people should apologize when they use their words that is not 

complete, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want the members opposite to realize that what we’re 

doing has increased the vacancy rate in Saskatchewan now. It 

was 1.2 per cent under those people; it is 2.5 per cent under us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — So, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

$200,000 for a program to assist a few families in Saskatoon 

with some down payments. But they have over $200 million to 

build housing stock that already exists with taxpayers’ money. 

And we have a Premier who stated in his speech just last week 

that the stated goal of that program is to reduce the price, the 

value of homes, Mr. Speaker. The fact that taxpayers are going 

to fund the depreciation of their own homes, Mr. Speaker, does 

not solve the problem at all. And it creates a whole host of other 

problems. 

 

What’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that this Premier in this case 

advocates intervention into a market that’s already well served, 

but won’t intervene when families are facing rental increases of 

63 to 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier: 

how do you justify this to Saskatchewan people, using their tax 

dollar to reduce the value of their home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is obviously NDP logic 

or lack of logic. What we need to do is have more homes in this 

province, make sure that people that are coming into these 

homes can actually have ownership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve built new units. We have new units under 

construction at this time. Housing starts are up by 115 per cent. 

You know why? Because everybody knows it’s a value to 

living in this province. There’s an advantage in this province, 

and we want to make sure that everybody shares in what we 

know is the Saskatchewan advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in this province need to have equity in 

their homes, and we are helping them do that so everybody can 

have a standard of living they’re proud of. And the members 

opposite obviously don’t understand it. What they’d like to do 

is go back to the days when people were leaving the province in 

droves, when we only had to build highways with roads going 

out of the province because nobody was coming back in again. 



April 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7107 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Funding of Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen the Sask Party 

government undermine our education system and treat 

education professionals with disrespect in many ways over the 

last few years, and this pattern of behaviour is continuing. 

Recent internal correspondence shows that the Sask Party 

government has broken its earlier commitment and is now 

threatening locally bargained teacher benefits. 

 

To the minister: why is the government so intent on showing 

that it does not value teachers, that it has now flip-flopped on 

funding area-specific teacher agreements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have said time and time 

again that this government is committed to fund teachers once 

the agreements have come to the end, in which case we will 

have the money available. We will not leave the school 

divisions so that they cannot afford to keep the positions of 

teachers that they have, Mr. Speaker.  

 

We have also continued to increase funding to the school 

divisions so that they can have a full complement of staff that 

they feel would best serve the students within this province, Mr. 

Speaker. In addition we have, in a very short three years, 

dedicated more money for capital funding so that they have 

better and safer schools in which to hold classrooms, Mr. 

Speaker, than was done in the last eight years. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may wrap up her remarks. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have dedicated more 

money to capital funding within our province to ensure safe and 

great schools for our teachers and our classrooms. And so 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have committed a lot of dollars 

towards education in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the Deputy Premier 

said on May 7th, 2009, about locally bargained teacher benefits: 

“If there are additional expenses because it’s been a negotiated 

contract done in good faith, those will be recognized by the 

ministry.” But a couple of weeks ago, the Minister of Education 

had her deputy send a letter to school boards saying, “School 

divisions are to budget assuming there will be no incremental 

funding forthcoming as a result of any future increased costs 

related to locally bargained teacher benefits.” 

 

So the government rips away the ability of school boards to 

raise money and breaks its promise on a funding formula. And 

the same government says to those school boards, by the way, 

when we promised there would be money for locally bargained 

teacher benefits, we didn’t mean it. 

 

To the minister: what kind of message does this send to teachers 

to break a promise to fund their local agreements? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As he has in 

the past, this member takes something out of context. So I will 

help him understand this better. Mr. Speaker, the letter was sent 

because we are in transition funding. While we’re in a transition 

funding model, Mr. Speaker, we have told the school divisions 

we will fund their LINC [local implementation and negotiation 

committee] agreements as they are negotiated for that year. 

 

What they need to be mindful of, Mr. Speaker, as was done in 

the past with the previous government, as will be done when the 

new formula is implemented, the LINC agreement will be part 

of the entire funding. It will not be incremental funding in the 

middle of the year. That is only going to happen while we’re in 

transition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is the final year that there’ll be incremental funding for 

LINC agreements as they increase. After that, Mr. Speaker, we 

will go back to the way they were done under the NDP, which 

one member from Walsh Acres is saying is ridiculous. Well 

that’s what they did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re in a situation of transitional 

funding because that minister broke her promise about 

providing a stable funding agreement. Let’s look at this 

government’s shameful track record on education. They took 

hundreds of EAs out of our classrooms. They broke a promise 

on a new education funding formula. They’ve allowed 

provincial negotiations with the teachers to collapse because the 

teachers bring a fair, reasonable, and competitive offer to the 

table. And now they’re threatening local negotiations of teacher 

benefits too. 

 

The lesson could not be more clear, Mr. Speaker. The Sask 

Party does not value the work of teachers and is not committed 

to excellence in our education system. To the minister: when 

will she put an end to this pattern of behaviour? When will she 

properly value the work that teachers do in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I need to 

remind the member opposite the promise that was made by the 

Saskatchewan Party government was that we would reduce the 

reliance on property to fund education. We kept that promise, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We said we would work towards a new funding formula that 

would see more equitable funding among the school divisions, 

something that was totally ignored by the members opposite, 

even though they thought they’d fixed it because they had a 

minister previously, Mr. Thomson, who said that he had fixed 

it, but in fact it wasn’t so. But we have a funding formula that’s 

very complex. We need to work with the stakeholders, which 

we are doing, Mr. Speaker. And they understand that it needs, 

it’s going to take a lot of work. They want a good formula and 

they recognize that it’s going to take some time to get it in 

place. 

 



7108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2011 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, everyone knows the minister is 

dragging her heels on the new formula because of political 

considerations, not because of considerations what’s in the best 

interest of Saskatchewan students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister’s failed leadership is hurting our 

education system. Here’s a rundown of the Sask Party 

government’s track record. They ordered a reduction in the 

number of educational assistants. They broke their promise on a 

long-term educational funding formula. They’ve caused 

negotiations with the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] 

to crash, and now they are breaking their promise on meeting 

the financial needs for locally bargained conditions. 

 

Through it all, the minister hides behind the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association, despite taking away the ability of 

boards to collect taxes. Her government now controls all of the 

purse strings for education, but she and her seatmates assume 

none of the responsibility when it comes to the decisions. To 

the minister: when will she stop the blame game and admit that 

her actions are causing problems in our education system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I know the member 

opposite has this insatiable need to put the blame game into 

every one of his questions, and I have blamed absolutely 

nothing on anybody. We’re working together with all the 

stakeholders, and there is some understanding of what needs to 

be done, Mr. Speaker, unlike when they had an Education 

minister, Mr. Speaker, who in the past said, and I quote: 

 

We have fixed the equity in the system so we no longer 

have an education system that the rich being able to 

provide a system 25 times better than those in the poor 

ridings. 

 

That was in 2006. The NDP claimed that the system was fixed. 

Mr. Speaker, well that wasn’t true. We have a quote from this 

particular year where we’re again in transition that says, and I 

quote: 

 

We have managed past budget cycles without a funding 

formula and we would do so again this year. One more 

year of uncertainty is better than a flawed funding 

mechanism that we will have to live with for a long 

period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was from the Good Spirit School Division. 

They had to live with a flawed system for a long period of time. 

They’re willing to get the system right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is not passing the 

buck, why does she defer every question to the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association] when given the 

opportunity to provide a comment? If the minister is not passing 

the buck on responsibility, why does she blame the trustees and 

the school boards when it comes to failed negotiations when 

everyone knows she has the majority at the table? Mr. Speaker, 

let’s be clear about this government’s misplaced priorities. 

 

The Sask Party’s recent budget has $5 million to subsidize beer 

retailers, but absolutely nothing for important local teachers’ 

benefits. That speaks volumes about their spending choices. 

Despite the minister’s rhetoric, the government actions are 

clear. They’re disrespecting teachers at the provincial 

bargaining table, and they’re disrespecting teachers at the local 

bargaining tables. Yet they’ve got millions to give to provincial 

beer retailers. It’s no wonder why a teacher in my constituency 

wrote a letter saying, “Actions speak louder than words.” 

 

To the minister: does she recognize that putting beer retailers 

ahead of teachers and children was short-sighted and reckless? 

When will this government make education a top priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the government trustee 

bargaining team has a spokesperson in the same manner that the 

STF bargaining team has a spokesperson. We have blamed no 

one here. We are certainly not blaming the school divisions. In 

the past for LINC agreements, Mr. Speaker, the school 

divisions had to find the funding within their budget. While 

we’re in transition, our government has funded the LINC 

agreements exactly what the increase is. We, when we have a 

new formula, will be going back to them finding the money for 

their LINC agreements within the budget as a whole. We will 

not directly fund the LINC agreements. It will be found within 

their budgets, and the school divisions will negotiate 

accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from his own city with the public school division, 

Ray Morrison had this to say. He said, if the new Sask Ed 

funding formula created the winners and losers, deferring for a 

year is probably a good decision. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Capacity of Health Care System 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today on the front 

page of the Leader-Post, the headline is, moms and babies 

being transferred out of the province due to capacity issues at 

Saskatchewan hospitals. The story says 78 moms and/or 

high-risk babies have been transferred out of the city since 

August. Last week and again this week, the minister said the 

mother baby unit is fully staffed and fully funded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: if the unit is fully funded and fully 

staffed, why are we sending 78 mothers and babies out of our 

hospital to other cities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I had mentioned over 

the last couple of days regarding the issue of mothers and 

fathers, expecting mothers and fathers in this province, their 

safety and the importance of the best quality of health care is 

paramount throughout the whole . . . all of the health regions, 



April 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7109 

Mr. Speaker. The neonatal intensive care unit, which is 

different than particularly the mother baby unit, but the neonatal 

intensive care unit has seen some capacity pressures, Mr. 

Speaker. We are working with the Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region on plans to address the increased demand of the 

neonatal intensive care unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last number of years, we have 

experienced a census of about 18 births or 18 babies accessing 

those services on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. That has increased 

up to about 23. The health region is quoted as saying that 

they’ve looked at this. It looks like it’s more than a blip. 

They’re going to have to do some more revamping, Mr. 

Speaker, and addressing some staff issues. As we move 

forward, Mr. Speaker, we’re working with the health regions to 

ensure that happens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Last year the health regions asked for a 7 per 

cent increase in funding and they were given half of that. They 

were told to find efficiencies, which is a nice way of saying cut 

staff and cut programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] has raised 

issues about staffing levels in the mother baby unit in two 

official processes. Sharon Garratt, executive director of women 

and children’s health with Regina Health Region says, “There 

was some flexibility in the space that was built. We need to 

look at the staffing resources as well.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: there is space at the unit but there 

needs to be more staff. When is the minister going to listen to 

the nurses who work in the unit, and now even the director, and 

increase the number of staff? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, they are two separate 

areas. The mother baby unit, which I said and the health region 

has said, has been fully staffed. And the neonatal intensive care 

unit for the facilities or the beds that are, the spots that are there 

have been staffed. They are looking at increasing the number of 

those spots, Mr. Speaker, and as a result we’ll be looking at 

increasing the staff. That’s what I said in the previous answer, 

Mr. Speaker. The member opposite obviously didn’t listen to 

that.  

 

But we are working with the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 

to increase the capacity because the census is running at about 

23 births a day, Mr. Speaker. We’re working with the 

Qu’Appelle Health Region to ensure that that staffing 

complement will be there. That staffing complement has a 

much better chance of being there, Mr. Speaker, since we’ve 

increased the number of nurses in this province by 850 in just 

three short years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we would be under the old NDP, Mr. Speaker, 

they would never have increased the number of nurses because 

they were too scared to set a target to increase the number of 

nurses. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I hope, Mr. Speaker, I hope the minister realizes 

now that he’s become a joke with his 16 years. People are 

laughing at him for the most part, not listening to it. 

 

It’s the minister, Mr. Speaker, that’s determining the capacity of 

the unit by failing to fund the health region properly, and 

families are paying the price. By sending mothers and their 

babies out of the province, the minister is separating them from 

family and support groups because the minister won’t pay for 

the family member’s travel expenses to go with the mother. 

And who’s paying for the mother and baby to come home? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: it’s his lack of funding that’s 

forcing mothers and babies out of the province and separating 

them from their families. What’s he doing to ensure that 

mothers have family members with them to support them if 

they are out of the province, or out of the city? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we are 

working with the health region. As I said, we want to ensure 

that we have the proper complement of staff to meet the 

increased needs that we’re seeing throughout the province. 

That’s what happens when you have a growing province, never 

experienced under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite may say that I’m a joke as 

the Minister of Health, but I can tell you there are other pundits 

that have been looking at what’s been happening in the health 

system. They don’t like me to quote Lewis Draper, Mr. 

Speaker, so let me quote someone else, Murray Mandryk. What 

did Murray Mandryk have to say about the health care system? 

Murray Mandryk had to say, this is what he had to say, “The 

NDP may have once owned the health care issue, but the Sask. 

Party is winning the battle over it everywhere.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that might be a joke to them, but it’s not a joke to 

the rest of the people in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should get current and 

read what’s happening today. All the minister has done is 

ignore the red flags that are being raised, and now he passes the 

costs on to the families. There is a problem at the mother baby 

unit and that’s the minister’s lack of attention and lack of 

action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 78 mothers or babies have been sent out of the 

hospital since August. On March 20th, a baby died in the unit. 

SUN has on two official occasions raised concerns about 

staffing levels. The director of the unit says there’s space but 

they need staff. The family of baby Cambria was told there 

needs to be more staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he finally listen, do his job, 



7110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 2011 

and immediately increase the funding so the staffing can be put 

in place in that unit and keep our mothers and babies here? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answers, this government has done a lot to increase the number 

of people working within the health care system. But not only 

have we increased the number of people working in the health 

care system, we are working on training more Saskatchewan 

people to be able to fill those demands well into the future. For 

example, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, we were down to less 

than 100 seats for nurses training, Mr. Speaker. By the end of 

our mandate, we’ll be at 700 training seats for nurses in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone a long ways to 

improving the health care system, and again some of the pundits 

would agree with that. Mr. Speaker, to quote Murray Mandryk, 

and I don’t think Murray’s outdated, not whatsoever, Mr. 

Speaker. Others may, but I don’t. Mr. Speaker: “The 

Saskatchewan Party is now seen to be as good or better at 

health care providers than the NDP,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may not believe everything that Murray says. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you when we’re out in rural 

Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan, they’re seeing the 

increase of nurses, Mr. Speaker. They’re seeing the increase of 

physicians, Mr. Speaker. This health care system is greatly 

improved over any year under the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

members, all the members in the House I’d like to introduce a 

good friend of mine and to many members in the House, Mr. 

Burl Adams. He lives in Kelvington. He’s a business person. He 

works for the North East Terminal. I know he’s very interested 

in politics and very helpful in politics. I welcome you to your 

legislature and ask all my colleagues to help me welcome Burl 

Adams to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Dewdney on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — I ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

stand today and introduce a guest behind the bar that’s well 

known to all members of this Assembly, a member who served 

in this Assembly for a number of years and who is currently the 

leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker — Mr. Rick Swenson. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would now like to adjourn the House to go to committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of the House in order to facilitate the work of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:22.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7101 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7101 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7101 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7101 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7101 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7110 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7110 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7101 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7102 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7102 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7102 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7102 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7103 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7103 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Prince Albert Youth Receives Terry Fox Award 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7103 

 Daffodil Days 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7103 

 Green Lake Remembers Leslie Sayese 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7104 

 Saskatoon Athlete Wins Double Gold 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7104 

 Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7104 

 Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Awards 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7104 

 National Wildlife Week 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Affordable Housing Issues 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 

 Funding of Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7107 

 Capacity of Health Care System 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 7108 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7108 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


