




















































Hansard: December 05, 2011


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 54 NO. 1B  MONDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2011, 2 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — John Nilson 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5 

 December 5, 2011 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 14:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 

and gentlemen, please remain standing for the arrival of the 

vice regal party. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

14:01.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 

 

The Legislative Assembly has elected me to the office of 

Speaker. 

 

If, in the performance of my duties, I should at any time fall 

into error I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 

the Assembly, whose servant I am. On behalf of the Assembly 

and its members, it is my duty to claim all their traditional 

rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 

speech in their debates, access to your person at all reasonable 

times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the 

most favourable consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that he freely 

confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her 

Majesty’s person and government. His Honour is confident that 

the Assembly’s proceedings will be conducted with wisdom 

and prudence and grants the Assembly’s claim to its traditional 

rights and privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 

have ready access to His Honour upon all reasonable occasions 

and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, 

will constantly receive from him the most favourable 

construction. 

 

[His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech as tabled.] 

 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, Honoured 

Guests, People of Saskatchewan: 

 

It is my pleasure to welcome you to the First Session of the 

Twenty-Seventh Legislature. 

THANK YOU 

My government has asked that I begin today with the following 

message to the people of Saskatchewan: 

Thank you. 

Thank you for renewing your trust in my government. 

It will work every day to be worthy of that trust. 

 

VISION 

A few short weeks ago, my government presented the people of 

Saskatchewan with a clear, concise and forward-looking vision 

for our province. 

Voters responded by providing the government with its second 

mandate. 

My government is humbled by the confidence Saskatchewan 

people have shown them, and vows to approach the coming 

four years with an attitude of humility and service.  

My government vows to keep Saskatchewan moving forward, 

to keep its commitments and to work to achieve the vision 

outlined in the recent election campaign. 

That vision includes:  

• a province of over 1.1 million people by 2015;  

• a province that is steadily eliminating its General 

Revenue Fund debt;  

• a place where young people get the best education and 

opportunities;  

• a place where seniors are treated with dignity and 

respect; and  

• a place where people with disabilities get the best care 

and support available in Canada.  

To quote briefly from my government’s vision for 

Saskatchewan: 

“Simply put, our vision is that Saskatchewan will be the best 

place in Canada—to live, to work, to start a business, to get 

an education, to raise a family and to build a life.” 

To that end, my government will take steps in this session to 

turn this vision into action:  

• Action to sustain growth and opportunity in our 

province;  

• Action to make life more affordable for Saskatchewan 

people;  

• Action to maintain a competitive tax and royalty regime 

in Saskatchewan;  

• Action to improve our quality of life; and  

• Action to ensure government remains responsible, 

responsive, trustworthy and accountable to the people of 

our province.  

GROWTH 

According to the most recent Conference Board of Canada 

report:  

“Saskatchewan’s economy is being fuelled by the 

continued development of the potash industry, and steady 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2011 

expansion in oil and gas extraction. Real gross domestic 

product (GDP) is expected to rise by a brisk 5.1 per cent 

in 2011, and Saskatchewan will have the fastest growing 

provincial economy”.  

Conference Board of Canada, November 25, 2011 

Through a continuing commitment to its Saskatchewan 

Advantage Growth Plan, my government will foster 

population growth and nation-leading economic performance. 

Key to this plan are continued debt reduction, balanced budgets, 

competitive taxes and the promotion of global trade. 

My government also will pursue stable natural resource 

royalties designed to encourage further investment.  

Also key to growth is continued investment in highways and 

transportation infrastructure. 

In its first term, my government spent $2.2 billion on improving 

highways; the largest investment of its kind in Saskatchewan 

history. 

Over 6,000 kilometres of highways have been improved. 

That commitment will be matched with a further $2.2 billion 

investment in the next four years. 

Improving digital and electronic infrastructure is essential to the 

new economy. 

Dropped cellphone calls are still a problem, despite an 

increased investment in SaskTel’s 4G network of $170 million 

in my government’s first term. 

In the current budget year, an additional $100 million will be 

allocated to keep up with growth in demand for connectivity.  

My government will also allocate an additional $75 million 

over the next three years for the next generation of wireless 

technologies. 

The Minister responsible has been instructed to make this 

SaskTel’s number one priority. 

In the last three years, my government invested $273 million on 

innovation.  

These investments are the catalyst that will fuel economic 

growth well into the future. 

Farm and ranch families are the backbone of our province. 

My government is proud to have introduced the three largest 

agricultural budgets in Saskatchewan history. 

When it comes to managing risk and recovering from disasters, 

farm families can continue to rely on my government for help, 

now and in the future. 

Sustained economic growth in Saskatchewan also depends on 

full participation by First Nations and Métis. 

This is why my government was honoured to sign an historic 

agreement in May, establishing a joint task force on improving 

education and employment outcomes. 

Through this task force, my government is committed to 

leading more First Nations and Métis young people to active 

participation in the work force. 

Since 2007, my government has introduced legislation to create 

a fairer labour environment, balancing the interests of workers 

and employers. 

My government will continue to ensure that the principles at the 

foundation of Saskatchewan’s labour environment are fairness, 

competitive salaries and benefits, economic growth and 

accountability by all stakeholders. 

While no new labour legislation will be introduced in this 

session, my government will continue to listen to the views of 

all stakeholders—unions, employees, employers and the 

public—as we work to achieve these objectives. 

AFFORDABILITY 

During the most recent Saskatchewan election, issues of 

affordability rightly came forward. 

Many ideas, some conflicting, were discussed and evaluated. 

This will be a government that continues to listen, continues to 

learn and continues to respond with action. 

My government will consider ideas from all sources, including 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

As Saskatchewan continues to grow, affordable housing has 

become a major issue. 

These pressures can be eased through partnerships involving 

governments, municipalities, builders and community-based 

organizations. 

My government will introduce legislation to extend notice 

periods for rent increases from six months to one year. 

This will apply to property owners who choose not to 

participate in the newly created tenant assistance initiative 

established by the Saskatchewan Rental Housing Industry 

Association. 

My government continues to make progress through the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Housing Plan. 

The plan is on track to meet our target of 4,600 new, entry-level 

housing units to be created over five years. 

My government will build on the Saskatchewan Advantage 

Housing Plan by exploring additional new-growth tax 

incentives to encourage construction of new, affordable rental 

housing. 

Starting January 1, 2012, improvements to the Secondary Suite 

Program will be implemented. 

These changes are designed to encourage greater participation 

in this program and increase the supply of affordable housing. 



December 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

A total of $2 million will be available for the development of 

approximately 70 to 100 secondary suites. 

My government also will introduce the Saskatchewan 

First-Time Homebuyers Tax Credit.  

Effective January 1, 2012, this new incentive will provide a 

$10,000 non-refundable income tax credit to all first-time 

homebuyers – creating savings of $1,100. 

This tax credit also will be available to people with disabilities 

looking to purchase a home that is more accessible. 

This First-Time Homebuyers Tax Credit is the next step in 

addressing housing affordability. 

It is a responsible and affordable incentive for those moving 

from renting to buying a home, resulting in more homeowners 

in Saskatchewan and freeing up more rental spaces for others. 

My government believes the best way to make life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan families is by ensuring they keep 

more of what they earn. 

Over the past four years, substantial tax relief has been 

provided to everyone: homeowners, small business owners, 

farmers, individuals and families. 

Moving forward, my government will continue to keep taxes 

low, thereby maintaining our competitive advantage over other 

jurisdictions. 

The first promise kept by my government in the days after this 

fall’s general election was a tax reduction to make life more 

affordable for families. 

Effective November 15, the Provincial Sales Tax exemption on 

children’s clothing was extended to children under 18, up from 

age 14. 

To further help families with the cost of children’s activities, 

my government will extend the Active Families Benefit to all 

children under 18. 

After decades of Saskatchewan being a net exporter of our 

young people, more and more young people are choosing to 

stay in the province. 

Four years ago, my government set out to establish the most 

aggressive youth recruitment and retention program in Canada.  

The Graduate Retention Program returns up to $20,000 in 

tuition for post-secondary graduates who stay and work in 

Saskatchewan.  

This program has been hugely successful – to date nearly 

50,000 Graduate Retention Program certificates have been 

delivered, paying out over $53 million. 

The Graduate Retention Program will remain in place for years 

to come. 

Record investments of over $2.8 billion have been dedicated to 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary system over the past four years. 

My government also recognizes that students and their families 

need some direct assistance to help with the costs of higher 

education. 

To that end, my government will introduce the Saskatchewan 

Advantage Scholarship during this session. 

Starting next year, every new Saskatchewan high school 

graduate will be eligible for a $2,000 credit toward 

post-secondary tuition - $500 per year for up to four years. 

Additionally, the new Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 

Education Savings will make it easier for parents to save for 

their children’s education. 

This new program will see the province match 10 per cent of 

contributions to a child’s Registered Education Savings Plan 

(RESP) account – to a maximum of $250 each year. 

This contribution will be in addition to the 20 per cent grant 

now provided by the federal government. 

These two measures put into action my government’s vision for 

a well-educated workforce. 

Saskatchewan is now the best place in Canada to save for our 

children’s education, the best place to receive an education and 

the best place to live and work after completing an education. 

Today in Saskatchewan, one in seven people is over the age of 

65. 

For far too long, our long-term care facilities for seniors were in 

poor shape. 

Today, my government renews its commitment to build 13 new 

long-term care facilities under a new funding formula. That 

formula will see 80 per cent of the cost of these new facilities 

covered by the provincial government, reducing the burden on 

communities. 

My government has helped low-income seniors by making 

significant improvements to the Seniors Income Plan during 

the past four years, more than doubling the maximum benefits 

available through the program. 

These changes have also doubled the number of seniors who 

are eligible for benefits. 

More seniors are also receiving additional health coverage 

through the program. 

My government will take the next step to provide even further 

assistance to seniors by increasing Seniors Income Plan benefits 

by over 40 per cent over the next four years. 

By 2015, Seniors Income Plan benefits will have been tripled 

compared to 2007. 

My government recognizes that many low-income seniors don’t 

receive any income beyond federal and provincial benefits. 

Therefore, my government will introduce a new Seniors 

Personal Care Home Benefit. 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2011 

This benefit will subsidize the difference between a senior’s 

monthly income and the cost of their personal care home space 

– up to a threshold of $1,800 in 2012, increasing to $2,000 by 

2015. 

That’s an annual benefit of over $3,000 in 2012, increasing to 

over $4,000 by 2015. 

QUALITY OF LIFE 

Saskatchewan people enjoy a sense of community and quality 

of life that is simply unrivalled anywhere in Canada. 

Our natural resources, our pristine environment, our people and 

our communities make Saskatchewan the best place in Canada 

to work, to live and to raise a family. But there is always more 

work to be done and my government will take action to 

continue improving Saskatchewan’s quality of life. 

It’s a commitment that begins with our children. 

The past four years have seen record investments in K-12 

education—both in capital and operations.  

More than 3,400 child care spaces and 115 new 

pre-kindergarten programs have been added. 

In the next four years, an additional 2,000 child care spaces will 

be created. 

An important part of my government’s vision is that if one has 

a disability, Saskatchewan should still be the best place to live. 

It should be a place where one can find the best services, the 

best supports, the most dignity and the most opportunities. 

Work toward this goal began in 2009, with the establishment of 

the Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability program. 

Today, this program helps about 3,000 Saskatchewan people 

living in residential care. 

During this session, my government will introduce significant 

expansions to this program. 

Direct benefits will be provided to up to 7,000 additional 

individuals living outside of the residential care system. 

Further, benefits will increase over the next four years by $100 

per month for those in residential care, $350 per month for a 

single person living outside of residential care and $400 per 

month for a couple. 

My government reaffirms its commitment to the Saskatchewan 

Children and Youth Agenda introduced in the last budget. 

This well-received initiative takes a cross-ministry approach in 

addressing common problems facing children and families at 

risk. 

Enhanced services are one component of the Children and 

Youth Agenda. 

My government will be providing an additional $4 million to 

improve services for individuals and families living with 

autism.  

We often think of Autism Spectrum Disorder as something that 

affects children only. 

It is important to remember that autism isn’t something one will 

outgrow. 

In addition to the work being done to enhance supports for 

children and their families, my government will work with 

community-based organizations to develop and implement 

better programs and services for adults with autism. 

Services such as job training and life skills development will 

ensure these adults can make meaningful contributions to a 

growing Saskatchewan. 

My government’s vision includes access to timely health care 

and that means significantly reducing surgical wait times. 

The Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative has been turning this 

vision into reality. 

There are roughly 19 per cent fewer patients waiting for surgery 

than one year ago. 

A total of 99 per cent of surgeries are completed within 18 

months, 96 per cent within 12 months and 87 per cent are 

completed within 6 months. 

My government will continue devoting attention and resources 

toward its stated goal that by 2014, no patient will have to wait 

longer than three months for surgery. 

As of today, we are three-quarters of the way to achieving that 

goal, as 76 per cent of surgeries are now completed within three 

months. 

Improvements to rural health care will also be at the vanguard 

of my government’s renewed agenda. 

Soon, up to $120,000 in student loans for new physicians and 

up to $20,000 in student loans for new nurses and nurse 

practitioners will be forgiven for those agreeing to practice for 

five years in rural and remote communities. 

A new 20-doctor rural locum pool will be established to 

provide relief for existing rural doctors. 

A total of 20 new nurse practitioner training seats will be added 

over the next four years - a 67 per cent increase from the 30 

training seats that exist today.  

The commitment to bring the Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society emergency medical helicopter service to Saskatchewan 

will soon be a reality. 

This service will provide added emergency coverage and 

complement existing road ambulance services in our province. 

My government will fulfill two commitments to improve the 

quality of life for people with diabetes. 

Long-acting insulin will be moved from Exceptional Drug 

Status to the full formulary.  



December 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

The Children’s Insulin Pump Program will be extended to 

people 25 years old and under, from the current cut-off of 17 

years of age. 

My government’s vision includes safer communities. 

Over the past four years, my government has turned this vision 

into action by hiring 120 more police officers as promised. 

It has also funded the Western Canadian Gang Database and 

created a Northern Drug and Gang Unit. 

Further meaningful steps will be taken to address the root 

causes of crime. 

My government will provide additional funding to the highly 

successful Prince Albert Community Mobilization 

Partnership, a first of its kind in all of Canada. 

This program places an emphasis on early intervention and 

prevention. 

My government will increase monitoring of individuals at 

high-risk to re-offend. 

Ten additional officers will be hired for this task. 

Additional prosecutors and support staff also will be hired. 

Saskatchewan’s provincial parks play a major role in 

conservation, in tourism and in providing economic benefits to 

nearby communities. 

Since 2007, park visits have increased by 10 per cent. 

Over $33 million have been invested in capital projects in our 

provincial parks over the past four years. 

This trend will continue with an investment of a further $10 

million in maintenance and upgrades to Saskatchewan parks.  

As more young families stay in Saskatchewan, there has been a 

resurgence in local minor sports programs. 

In many Saskatchewan communities, the local rink is the hub of 

activity in the winter months and a key to the community’s 

quality of life. 

To assist municipalities with the costs of operating local rinks, 

my government will provide a new Community Rinks 

Affordability Grant. 

It will provide $2,500 a year to help with the cost of operating 

roughly 750 municipally owned indoor ice surfaces in 

Saskatchewan. 

LEGISLATIVE AGENDA 

Many families have expressed concerns with the school year 

starting before the Labour Day long week-end in September. 

Further, a desire was expressed to achieve some measure of 

consistency in the school start date across the province. 

To address these concerns, my government will introduce 

legislation to standardize the start of the school year so that 

instruction will begin after the Labour Day long weekend 

across the province. 

Teachers and school board trustees will be fully consulted on 

the effective implementation of these changes. 

Current class time will be preserved just as it has been in school 

divisions that already have made this choice. 

During this session, my government will introduce legislation 

to:  

• strengthen the enforcement of maintenance orders;  

• increase penalties for those who fail to pay fines;  

• strengthen the ability of corrections officers to crack 

down on drug-related, gang-related and other illegal 

activity within our correctional institutions;  

• more clearly define the powers and responsibilities of the 

Children’s Advocate;  

• introduce degree granting legislation providing more 

opportunities for our students while protecting the 

tradition of excellence associated with Saskatchewan 

degrees;  

• streamline the business registration process across the 

three western provinces under the New West Partnership 

Trade Agreement; and  

• ensure that any future provincial election campaigns do 

not overlap with a federal election campaign. 

SASKATCHEWAN’S VISION FOR THE WORLD 

A few weeks ago, the United Nations announced that the 

world’s population had reached seven billion people. 

A short 12 to 14 years from now, there will be eight billion 

people on this planet. 

Most of this population growth will occur in the world’s 

poorest countries. 

Many of the world’s top analysts say we will require a second 

―green revolution‖ in order to keep per capita food production 

at current levels. 

To build on our natural advantages and to help feed the world, 

my government has offered its financial support for plans by 

the University of Saskatchewan to launch a Global Institute 

for Food Security. 

My government believes our province is ideally positioned to 

play a significant role in solving problems of global hunger. 

In a world longing for both food and energy security, my 

government believes Saskatchewan can provide the answers.  

FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY 

Four weeks ago, my government received a renewed mandate 

to keep Saskatchewan moving forward. 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2011 

Today, governments all over the world are facing the dire 

consequences of overspending, deficits and debt. 

So it is not surprising that the people of our great province, in 

their collective wisdom, provided my government a mandate 

that included a strong word of caution: 

Live within your means. 

Today, Saskatchewan has a tremendous advantage. 

Balanced budgets. Less debt. Declining interest payments. A 

growing economy. 

Saskatchewan people have told my government – make sure 

you keep our advantage. 

My government has heard this message. 

It will keep the budget balanced. 

It will keep the economy strong. 

It will live within its means; and 

It will keep Saskatchewan moving forward. 

Today, Saskatchewan is dealing with many new challenges—

the challenges of growth. 

In the coming months, my government will pursue new ways to 

ensure MLAs are seeking input from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding these challenges. 

ANNIVERSARIES IN 2012 

In 2012, we will celebrate Her Majesty’s Diamond Jubilee, as 

well as hold celebrations marking the 100th anniversary of the 

opening of this building. 

These events speak to the importance of our constitutional 

monarchy and our rich history.  

CONCLUSION 

Four weeks ago today, a very diverse group of 58 women and 

men from all parts of the province and all walks of life were 

given a lease on a seat in this Chamber. 

I ask that you remember every day that your seat in this place 

— hard-fought and well-earned as it might be - is on loan. 

It was purchased with the blood of our soldiers and the toil of 

our settlers. 

It is sustained with the efforts of women and men all over our 

great province. 

It is willed to you, in trust, by future generations. 

If you keep this in mind during all your deliberations, I know 

you will be worthy of the great responsibility you have been 

given. 

During this session, the Estimates for the New Year 

commencing April 1, 2012, will be submitted to you. 

The Public Accounts for the current year will be tabled. 

I now leave you to the business of the Session, knowing that 

you will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

May divine providence continue to guide this Assembly in all 

of its deliberations and to bless our province – the best province 

in the best country in the world. 

God Bless Saskatchewan. 

God Bless Canada. 

And God Save the Queen. 

 

The Speaker: — I would now like to invite Pastor Keith 

Johnson to the Table. 

 

I will begin with our traditional Assembly prayer. All please 

rise. 

 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious 

favour and further us with thy continual help, that in all our 

works, begun, continued, and ended in Thee, we may glorify 

thy holy name, and finally by Thy mercy attain everlasting life. 

Amen. 

 

Pastor Johnson: — Heavenly Father, we want to thank you for 

your goodness and greatness in our lives. 

 

You have done great things for us and we are confident that you 

have a continued plan for the prosperity and stability of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We are grateful for the liberties and the freedoms that are ours 

to enjoy as a nation and province. 

 

We are grateful that we can worship you freely; that we can 

share the gospel and train our children in righteousness and live 

in peace. 

 

We are thankful for our leaders and do not cease to pray for our 

Premier and the entire Legislative Assembly. We know the 

demands are constant and great upon their lives so we pray that 

your grace and peace will be upon them throughout every 

aspect of their administration. 

 

We pray that they are always aware they must have wisdom 

beyond their human resources and that integrity is more 

important to them in their leadership than any political agenda. 

 

May they be ministers for your good and a terror to evil. We 

pray they will humbly call on you for guidance that will not 

depend solely on their personal ability and understanding. May 

they walk worthy of you, fully pleasing and being fruitful in 

every good work. 

 

We pray that in these coming weeks, months, and years that 

you will do exceedingly abundantly above all we could ask or 

think in our blessed province. 

 

For your honour and glory we pray these things in the name of 

our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. Amen. 

 



December 5, 2011 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

The Speaker: — Thank you, Pastor Johnson. Please remain 

standing for the departure of Their Honours. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:30.] 

 

TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I wish to inform the 

Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 

received from the Chief Electoral Officer lists of names of such 

members as have been returned to serve in the twenty-seventh 

legislature. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a Bill 

respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Hon. Premier that 

the said Bill be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 

for this session will be Brett Wylie, Evan Holmes, Claire 

McLellan, Lambry Stamatinos, Breanna Goertzen, and Rikki 

Gusway. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

be taken into consideration on Tuesday, December 6, 

2011. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, December 6, 2011. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One final motion. 

I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 

 

I would like to thank all of the guests and members of the 

public for joining us today. 

 

I want to thank the Hon. J. Klebuc, Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan; the Hon. R.D. Laing, Chief Justice of the Court 

of Queen’s Bench; the Hon. C.A. Snell, Chief Justice of the 

Provincial Court; and members of the judiciary for your 

attendance today. 

 

I would also like to thank Pastor Keith Johnson from the 

Christian Centre Academy in Saskatoon for taking part in 

today’s ceremonies. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge the school groups. I’d like to 

introduce the school group that is with us today. In the east 

gallery we have grades 10 and 12 students from the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology. I would like to 

thank all of you along with your teachers for attending today’s 

ceremony. 

 

Welcome also to the W.S. Hawrylak Senior Choir. They are 

seated in the west gallery and I will be calling upon them later 

to sing for us for a few moments. 

 

I would like to thank the members of the following 

Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve force units for 

providing us with the guard of honour earlier this afternoon: 

Land Force Western Area Domestic Operations Detachment, 15 

Wing Moose Jaw, Royal Regina Rifles, Saskatchewan 

Dragoons, 734 Communications Squadron, 16 Service 

Battalion, 16 Field Ambulance, and Her Majesty’s CS Queen. 

 

As well I would like to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 

Canadian Artillery for the 15-gun salute, The Royal Canadian 

Artillery band, and The Royal Canadian Air Force Band 

trumpeter. 

 

At this time I would also like to recognize some of the 

Independent Officers that are in the Speaker’s gallery today. 

We have with us Mr. Kevin Fenwick, the Provincial 

Ombudsman; Mr. David Wilkie, Acting CEO [Chief Electoral 

Officer] of Chief Electoral office; Mr. Gary Dickson, the 

Privacy Commissioner; the Hon. Ron Barclay, Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner; as well as Mr. Bob Pringle, the child 

advocate. 

 

I would like to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the 

Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 2011 

immediately following the Chamber ceremonies. The tea will 

be in two locations — room 218 in the west wing, and the 

library reading room in the east wing. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

At this time I would like to invite the choir to sing. I would now 

welcome the W.S. Hawrylak Senior Choir, under the direction 

of Mrs. Sharon Meredith and Mrs. Brandy Melnechenko, and 

accompanied by Mrs. Danielle Maley. The choir recently 

performed at the Rotary Christmas Carol Festival, and they will 

sing for us their songs from that performance — ―La Loo La 

Low‖ and ―Mary, Mary.‖ 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, the W.S. Hawrylak Senior Choir. 

 

[The choir sang.] 

 

The Speaker: — On behalf of all present . . . On behalf of all 

present I would like to thank the choir for their very fine 

performance and for getting us into the mood for the coming 

season. 

 

One final announcement. I missed one of the Independent 

Officers, Ms. Bonnie Lysyk, the new Provincial Auditor. 

 

I would like to ask the members and guests to observe the 

following order when departing from the Chamber: the 

Speaker’s party, His Honour’s party, Premier and Provincial 

Secretary, Leader of the Opposition, judges of the Court of 

Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court, members of the 

cabinet and their spouses, other members of the Legislative 

Assembly and their spouses, guests. 

 

This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:49.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................5 

TABLING OF THE RETURN TO THE WRIT 

 The Speaker .................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Pro Forma Bill 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Pages 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

MOTIONS 

 Speech from the Throne 

  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 11 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


